              Circulation Element
                        of the
             Monrovia General Plan
                          Adopted
                    January 15, 2008
                  Ordinance No. 2008-01
                         Amended
                    November 6, 2012
                  Resolution No. 2012-02
Prepared by:
Edaw, Inc.
and
                       Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION TO THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT                           1
      PURPOSE OF THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT                             1
      RELATED GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS                                  1
      RECENT TRENDS IN LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMMUTING PATTERNS 2
      SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE ELEMENT                               3
II. CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES                           4
      TRAFFIC CONGESTION                                             4
      STREET CLASSIFICATION AND IMPROVEMENTS                         8
      ACCIDENT AND TRAFFIC SAFETY                                    10
      TRANSIT AND PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION                              11
      TRUCK ROUTES                                                   12
      PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE FACILITIES                              13
      HILLSIDE STREETS                                               14
      PARKING                                                        15
      REGIONAL PLANNING                                              16
III. THE CIRCULATION PLAN                                            18
      MASTER PLAN OF STREETS                                         18
      PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION PLAN                                     28
      TRUCK ROUTE PLAN                                               30
      BICYCLE FACILITIES PLAN                                        32
      PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES PLAN                                     34
      PARKING PLAN                                                   34
                                                   Monrovia Circulation Element
I. INTRODUCTION TO THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
The Circulation Element is one of seven mandated elements of a City’s General Plan
and is intended to guide the development of the City’s circulation system in a
manner compatible with the General Plan’s Land Use Element. Because of the
importance of a well planned circulation system, the State of California has
mandated the adoption of a Citywide Circulation Element since 1955.
The anticipated level of future development in Monrovia, as identified in the
planned amendments to the Land Use Element, will generate increased levels of
traffic and place additional demands on the City’s circulation system. To help meet
the demands and achieve balanced growth, the City of Monrovia has adopted
specific goals and policies that serve as the basis for the Circulation Element.
PURPOSE OF THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
The intent of the Circulation Element is to provide the City a circulation system that
is safe, sensible, and provides efficient movement of people and goods throughout
Monrovia. The current State mandate for a Circulation Element states that the
General Plan shall include:
“…a circulation element consisting of the general location and extent of existing and
proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, any military
airports and ports, and other local public utilities and facilities, all correlated with
the land use element of the plan.”
To satisfy these objectives, portions of the circulation system that require
improvements due to anticipated land uses in Monrovia are identified. In an effort
to alleviate traffic congestion and improve mobility, street improvements, travel
demand management strategies and additional transit opportunities have been
identified. The corresponding goals and policies have been adopted to ensure that
all components of the circulation system will satisfy the transportation needs of the
City of Monrovia.
RELATED GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
The Circulation and Land Use Elements are two interrelated elements of the General
Plan. The type and intensity of land developed will cause impacts to circulation
patterns in Monrovia, while the ability of circulation facilities to accommodate future
traffic volumes will be a factor in determining the most beneficial type of land uses.
Land uses and policies of the Circulation Element also have a direct relationship
with the housing, open-space, noise and safety elements.
                                                                     Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            1

RECENT TRENDS IN LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMMUTING
PATTERNS
According to the 2000 Census, the majority of Monrovia’s employed adults
commute to work outside of the City and travel by single-occupancy private
automobile. Just over 18 percent (18.1%) of the City’s working residents (16 years
of age and older) are employed in Monrovia. This represents a decrease from the
1990 Census, which showed that 20.5 % of working residents were employed in the
City.
As shown in Table I-1, almost 76% of Monrovia’s working residents commuted
alone in 2000, an increase of about 2% since 1990. A corresponding decrease in
the percentage of residents traveling to work by carpool or public transit occurred
during that decade. The portion of people employed at home increased by one-third
between 1990 and 2000, to 2.8% of all workers, while the portion of those who
walked to work rose slightly (to 3.4%) and the portion of bicycle commuters
remained constant (0.9%). When compared with similar statistics for Los Angeles
County as a whole, more workers in Monrovia drove alone or walked to work and
fewer carpooled or took transit.
 TABLE I-1 MODE SPLIT FOR RESIDENTS' COMMUTE TRIPS (%) MONROVIA
                       & LOS ANGELES COUNTY, 1990 & 2000
    Means of                   City of Monrovia                  Los Angeles County
    Journey
    to Work              1990         2000     Change        1990         2000        Change
    Drove alone          74.1         75.7         1.6       70.1         70.4           0.3
    Carpooled            15.2         13.6        -1.6       15.5         15.1          -0.4
    Public Transit        3.3          2.9        -0.4        6.4          6.6           0.2
    Motorcycle            0.4          0.2        -0.2        0.5          0.2          -0.3
    Bicycle               0.9          0.9         0.0        0.6          0.6           0.0
    Walked                3.0          3.4         0.4        3.3          2.9          -0.4
    Other means           0.9          0.6        -0.3        0.8          0.8           0.0
    Worked at
                          2.1          2.8         0.7        2.7          3.5           0.8
    home
    Note: Percentages may not total to 100.0% due to rounding. Sources: U.S. Census Bureau,
    Census 2000 SF3 and 1990 Census of Population and Housing
The heaviest traffic flows through the City are in the east-west direction, with a
larger volume of traffic heading towards the employment centers to the west,
including Pasadena, Burbank and Los Angeles, in the morning and then returning
eastbound through the City of Monrovia in the evening. Based on data derived from
the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) regional travel demand
forecasting model, it is estimated that approximately one-third of the total traffic
                                                                         Monrovia Circulation Element
                                                2

during the weekday peak periods on major east-west arterial surface streets is not
local traffic, but is instead through traffic (trips not beginning or ending within the
City). This traffic either originates in the areas immediately outside the City or is
diverted from the Foothill Freeway (I-210) due to peak period congestion there.
In 2002, when the Foothill Freeway was extended from San Dimas to Fontana (from
east of SR57 to east of I-15), traffic volume on that freeway increased noticeably
and, with worsening congestion on the freeway, Monrovia and other Foothill
communities experienced an increase in spillover traffic on local arterial streets. In
July 2007, the final four-mile extension of the Foothill Freeway from Fontana to San
Bernardino (I-215) was completed. This new roadway link, combined with
continuing development throughout the greater region, is expected to result in
additional traffic through Monrovia, both on the Foothill Freeway and on surface
streets. The City will monitor changes in traffic patterns that occur.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE ELEMENT
This element includes goals and policies regarding transportation facilities in the
City and an implementation plan. The goals and policies are presented in nine
sections, each of which addresses major components and aspects of the circulation
system. Each section contains summary information on the existing and future
conditions of the system, relevant plans and programs that influence the circulation
in Monrovia, and the goal and policy statements corresponding to each component.
Following these sections, noteworthy characteristics of each component of the
system are discussed and displayed in the associated figures. Detailed information
pertaining to existing traffic conditions in the City are documented in the
environmental impact report (EIR) prepared for this update to the Circulation
Element and amendments to the Land Use Element.
                                                                    Monrovia Circulation Element
                                              3
II. CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
The Circulation Element is based on a set of circulation-related goals that reflect
and are designed to support the citywide objectives of the General Plan. The goals
acknowledge the economic, social, and environmental conditions in the City and
surrounding regions, and the anticipated needs of the community. The circulation
goals and policies are discussed in the following sections: 1) Traffic Congestion; 2)
Street Classification and Improvements; 3) Accident and Traffic Safety; 4) Transit
and Public Transportation; 5) Truck Routes; 6) Bicycle Routes and Pedestrian
Facilities; 7) Hillside Streets; 8) Parking; and 9) Regional Planning.
TRAFFIC CONGESTION
The goals and policies to address traffic congestion problems are based on specific
issues related to overall increases in traffic demand and the inadequacy of the
existing street system to accommodate peak period traffic flows. The issues
identified in relation to traffic congestion fall into the following categories: existing
truck routes, circulation in the downtown area, the need for signal coordination,
additional demands on the system generated by new development, accommodation
of the planned light rail line and compliance with the Los Angeles County
Congestion Management Program.
GOAL 1: Minimize traffic congestion on arterial and collector streets during peak
hours in order to ensure a safe and efficient movement of people and goods within
the City.
Policy 1:1: Regulate the intensity of land use to keep traffic on any arterial in
balance with roadway capacity.
Policy 1:2: Limit direct private property access to arterials, where dual access is
possible, to minimize interference with through traffic.
Policy 1:3: Locate new industrial and commercial developments and their access
points in such a way that traffic does not impact local residential streets and alleys
for access to the development and its parking.
Policy 1:4: Design each arterial with sufficient capacity to accommodate anticipated
traffic levels based on the intensity of existing and planned land use. Investigate
and analyze revisions to the “grid” street network in the Station Square Transit
Village area south of I-210 as a method to improve street capacity and signal
operations.
Policy 1:5: Implement traffic signal coordination on City arterial streets to the
maximum extent practical, and integrate signal coordination efforts with those of
adjacent jurisdictions.
                                                                     Monrovia Circulation Element
                                              4

Policy 1:6: Develop and implement intersection capacity improvements where
feasible and justified by existing or projected traffic demands. Opportunities to
improve intersection operations throughout the City are expected to arise as future
development occurs, including the area around the planned light rail station.
Policy 1:7: Design and employ traffic control measures, including signalization,
limiting access, limiting on-street parking during peak periods, constructing turn
lanes, and modifying lane striping and signage to ensure City streets and roads
function as needed. One specific location identified for potential re-striping
improvements is the eastbound segment of Huntington Drive beneath the I-210
freeway, where the roadway narrows from three through lanes to two.
Policy 1:8: Compile a comprehensive prioritized program of transportation
improvements to provide for the transportation network described in the updated
Circulation Element and use the Capital Improvement Program process to
implement the identified street improvements. The City should consider conducting
a nexus study to establish a basis for implementing a traffic impact fee program for
new development in the City. This program would require new development to
provide a fair-share contribution to a pool of funds to be used for future
transportation system improvements.
Policy 1:9: Improve intersection and street sections wherever possible to maintain
an acceptable level of service for peak traffic flows. With the recognition that the
City is largely built out and that major physical improvements to the circulation
system will be limited to certain areas, establish level of service (LOS) D as the
minimum standard to be maintained, except at locations where LOS F conditions
currently exist. When reviewing impacts at locations where existing development
constrains the ability to widen or otherwise improve roadways to achieve the
desired LOS, consider improvements to pedestrian and transit facilities as
acceptable traffic mitigation measures. The City has determined that a project
would have a significant traffic impact under California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) at an intersection if the conditions in Table II-1 were found. For the purpose
of applying these significance criteria, the V/C ratio shall be reported using the
Intersection Capacity Utilization (ICU) methodology. LOS at two-way stop-
controlled intersections shall be based on the Highway Capacity Manual (HCM)
methodology and the incremental change in volume-to-capacity (V/C) ratio
calculated by analyzing such intersections with the ICU methodology assuming a
two-phase signal.
                                                                   Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            5
       TABLE II-1 SIGNIFICANT IMPACT CRITERIA FOR INTERSECTIONS
                Intersection Level of Service      Project-Related
                under Existing Conditions          Increase in V/C
                                A                           0.06
                                B                           0.05
                                C                           0.04
                                D                           0.03
                                E                           0.02
                                F                           0.01
Policy 1:10: For daily traffic, the desired levels of service differ according to the
functional classification of the street: LOS D on primary arterials (V/C < 0.90), mid-
D on secondary arterials (V/C < 0.85), LOS C on collector streets (V/C < 0.80) and
LOS A on local streets (V/C < 0.60). The City has determined that a project would
have a significant traffic impact under CEQA on a street if the conditions in Table II-
2 are met.
Policy 1:11: Prepare and adopt a formal set of traffic study guidelines to identify
the methodologies used to assess potential traffic impacts of new development
proposals. These guidelines should include the thresholds of significance described
in Policies 1:9 and 1:10, specific criteria to determine whether or not a detailed
traffic impact study is needed and a
                                                                    Monrovia Circulation Element
                                             6
     TABLE II-2 SIGNIFICANT IMPACT CRITERIA FOR STREET SEGMENTS
Traffic Growth over Total
                                             Required Mitigation Measures
Projected Future Daily Volume
0.0 -2.4% Daily Traffic Growth *             Staff review and Conditions
                                             Initial study required if existing count > 2,000
2.5% -4.9% Daily Traffic Growth
                                             VPD Soft mitigation required
*
                                             Initial study required Soft mitigation required
5.0% -7.4% Daily Traffic Growth              Physical mitigation may be required
*
                                             Initial study required Soft mitigation required
                                             Physical mitigation may be required Project
>7.5% Daily Traffic Growth *                 alternative may be considered
* The incremental increases shown would be considered to be significant if the street segment
under consideration were projected to operate worse than its desired level of service under “Future
with Project” conditions, based on the functional classification of the street segment: LOS D on
primary arterials (V/C < 0.90), mid-D on secondary arterials (V/C < 0.85), LOS C on collector
streets (V/C < 0.80) and LOS A on local streets (V/C < 0.60).
description of the process for preparing and reviewing any traffic impact studies
that may be required.
Policy 1:12: Promote ridesharing through publicity and provision of information to
the public
Policy 1:13: Encourage employers to reduce vehicular trips by offering employees
incentives such as reduced-rate transit passes, preferentially-located parking for
carpool and vanpool vehicles, and flexible work hours.
Policy 1:14: Encourage school officials to establish rules and incentives so that
students do not use their own vehicles for school transportation.
Policy 1:15: Support the efforts of the Los Angeles County Metropolitan
Transportation Authority (Metro) to establish a regional traffic impact fee for new
development.
                                                                                 Monrovia Circulation Element
                                                    7

STREET CLASSIFICATION AND IMPROVEMENTS
A number of issues have been reviewed to develop goals and policies related to
street classification and improvements. These issues include: reclassification of
certain street system to better reflect their functions within the overall street
network, damage to pavement from heavy vehicles, the need for signalization of
intersections, improvement of streets and intersections, low-cost street
improvements and maintenance, the need for reflective beads and striping,
roadway connection and extensions, and roadway widening.
GOAL 2: Provide a system of streets and alleys that meets the needs of current
and future residents, local and commuter traffic demands and ensures the safe and
efficient movement of vehicles, people and goods throughout the City. Improve
streets and alleys to their full design standards.
Policy 2:1: Develop an effective street classification system that serves the various
traffic needs in the area, including primary arterials, secondary arterials, collector
streets, commercial streets, local/residential streets and alleys. Modify the
functional classification and design of selected streets, including:
Downgrade Myrtle between Maple Avenue and Foothill Boulevard from a Primary
Arterial Street to a Collector Street.
Upgrade California Avenue to a Secondary Arterial between Duarte Road (currently
a Local Street) and Huntington Drive.
Widen Myrtle Avenue between Evergreen Avenue and Duarte Road to full Primary
Arterial Standards (120’ right of way).
 Consider constructing a new east-west street south of Pomona Avenue (tentatively
to be named Center Street) to Collector Street standards between Magnolia Avenue
and Shamrock Avenue. Consider realigning or vacating portions of Pomona Avenue
and Railroad Avenue in this area as the redevelopment plans precede.
Retain designation of Duarte Road as a Secondary Arterial Street and pursue
opportunities to widen to full Secondary Arterial standards, including coordinating
with the Metro Gold Line Foothill Construction Authority to obtain additional right-
of-way between Myrtle Avenue and California Avenue.
Reclassify Royal Oaks Drive between Shamrock Avenue and the eastern City limits
to a Collector Street (currently a local street).
Upgrade and widen Central Avenue and Evergreen Avenue between Mayflower
Avenue and the eastern City limits to Collector Streets (currently Local Streets).
Consider reconfiguring Evergreen Avenue to two-way operation between Magnolia
                                                                  Monrovia Circulation Element
                                             8

Avenue and the end of the eastbound I-210 freeway off-ramp, consistent with the
segment of Evergreen Avenue west of Magnolia Avenue, to reduce weaving conflicts
that occur just east of this location.
Huntington Drive is currently a Primary Arterial Street with a 100-foot right-of-way
configured for four through lanes, with raised median islands and turn lanes at
most intersections. As future demand dictates, the City should consider
reconfiguring the existing right-of-way to allow for six through lanes to provide
additional capacity during peak periods and throughout the day.
Policy 2:2: All street improvements should be designed with sufficient capacity to
accommodate anticipated traffic volumes based on the intensity of existing and
planned land use.
Policy 2:3: Design and employ traffic control measures to ensure that City streets
and roads function safely and efficiently.
Policy 2:4: Provide for safe operations of traffic by adhering to state and national
standards and uniform practices.
Policy 2:5: Coordinate street system improvements and signalization with regional
transportation efforts. While recognizing the limitations imposed by existing
physical constraints, consideration should be given to the potential reconfiguration
of the I-210 Myrtle Avenue interchanges as a single-point urban interchange
(SPUI).
Policy 2:6: Discourage through traffic from using local collector and residential
streets.
Policy 2:7: Seek to maintain at least LOS E during peak hours at intersections,
except at locations where LOS F currently exists.
Policy 2:8: Regulate the intensity and stages of development so that traffic on any
arterial remains in balance with roadway capacity.
Policy 2:9: As new development or redevelopment occurs, limit driveway and alley
access onto arterial streets wherever possible to enhance the quality of traffic flow.
Policy 2:10: Consider locating bus turn-outs where appropriate along heavily-
traveled arterials or where the lack of a turn-out would be detrimental to traffic
flow.
Policy 2:11: Continue the roadway maintenance program to inspect and repair
roadway pavement and street lighting periodically.
Policy 2:12: Improve skewed and offset intersections, wherever possible.
                                                                  Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            9
Policy 2:13: Require future dedication for widening of streets and alleys as new
development occurs. Prepare and maintain a master map of right-of-way
dedications to be pursued as new development proposals are considered. Establish
a maintenance program for utilities in alleys (e.g., lighting), access and upgrading
of existing alleys.
ACCIDENT AND TRAFFIC SAFETY
These goals and policies address specific issues related to existing concerns for
traffic safety on City streets. The issues include: safety along Foothill Boulevard,
speed limit violations and accidents, unsafe movements at some locations, need for
a policy on speed bumps and speed control in residential areas
GOAL 3: Reduce the number of street accidents and maintain adequate traffic
safety in the entire circulation system.
Policy 3:1: Pursue the “3 E’s” (engineering, education, and enforcement) approach
to improving traffic safety in the City. Engineering strategies typically consist of
physical measures to control speeds or improve safety. Education strategies provide
drivers, pedestrians, and cyclists with information on the most appropriate ways to
share the roads. Enforcement strategies include observance of speed limits, traffic
signals and stop signs and other violations, such as failing to yield to pedestrians.
Policy 3:2: Provide for safe operations of rail service, motorized traffic, pedestrians,
bicycles and other modes by adhering to state and national standards and uniform
practices.
Policy 3:3: Develop and implement safe and efficient designs to minimize the
impact of at-grade arterial railroad crossings. These efforts should be coordinated
with the planning for the Metro Gold Line Foothill Extension light rail project, which
will affect every grade crossing in the City.
Policy 3:4: Continue the traffic accident monitoring program. Develop an annual
traffic safety review of traffic collision data to identify any particular “hot spots” for
automobiles, bicycles, and pedestrians and develop appropriate countermeasures
as appropriate.
Policy 3:5: Continue the activities of the Traffic Safety Committee.
Policy 3:6: Provide continuity to the sidewalk system, including wheelchair ramps,
when new development occurs, to minimize pedestrian/vehicle conflicts.
Policy 3:7: Expand bicycle routes where opportunities arise and demand warrants
to minimize conflicts between cyclists and motorists.
                                                                     Monrovia Circulation Element
                                              10

Policy 3:8: Expand crosswalk safety monitoring system in school zones. Coordinate
efforts with the Monrovia Unified School District and the Monrovia Police
Department.
Policy 3:9: In response to resident complaints, prepare studies to establish the
need for speed bumps and other traffic calming devices in residential areas. Prepare
neighborhood traffic protection plans as appropriate.
TRANSIT AND PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
These goals and policies address the need for a better transit system in view of
regional and corridor transportation improvement plans. The issues include: need
for more transit facilities to serve the captive riders, encouraging multi-family
residential developments near transit routes, renovation of the historic railroad
depot, development of a light rail line, need for more north-south transit services,
additional park and ride lots and enhancements to the fixed-route transit loop
connecting the downtown area with other areas of the City.
GOAL 4: Support the use of the public transportation, including light rail transit, to
provide mobility to all City residents and encourage use of public transportation as
an alternative to automobile travel.
Policy 4:1: Comply with the requirements of Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
to ensure accessibility of elderly and disabled persons to public transportation.
Continue to support Access Services, which provides ADA-compliant Para transit
services (dial-a-ride service) in the City.
Policy 4:2: Continue to engage Foothill Transit, Metro, and the Metro Gold Line
Construction Authority to coordinate connections to the planned light rail line
running through Monrovia between Montclair and Los Angeles.
Policy 4:3: Continue to coordinate with Metro and Foothill Transit to identify
improvements to local and express bus service to Monrovia. Coordinate with these
agencies to develop common standards for transit stops in the City, including
seating, lighting, shelters and signage. Identify funding sources to implement the
improvements determined to be necessary.
Policy 4:4: Continue to provide local fixed-route transit service (the Monrovia
Trolley) established in 2002. Prepare a study to evaluate potential revisions to
existing routes and the development of new routes of the City-operated public
transit system, including service to the planned light rail station. Identify and
pursue available external funding opportunities for any improvements that may be
identified.
Policy 4:5: Require new development along arterial streets to provide transit
facilities, such as bus shelters and turn-outs designed to established standards and
specifications, where deemed necessary.
                                                                   Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            11
Policy 4:6: Encourage employers to reduce vehicular trips through carpooling and
vanpooling and by offering employees incentives such as reduced-rate transit
passes
Policy 4:7: Plan for the provision of a mixed-use “Transportation Center” with a mix
of uses including those that provide services for the commuter such as a park-and-
ride facility to serve regional freeways (high occupancy vehicle lanes) and bus and
light rail services.
 Policy 4:8: Recognize privately-operated transportation services (taxis, vans,
buses and limousines) as an integral part of the City’s public transportation system
Policy 4:9: Investigate new opportunities to further finance demand-responsive
transit service
Policy 4:10: Coordinate the location of future transit routes with high-demand
areas. Encourage development of mixed-use Planned Development projects (e.g.,
joint parking structures) surrounding the light rail transit station.
Policy 4:11: Provide adequate transportation and coordination between park-and-
ride lots and the planned light rail station. Develop special design guidelines for
providing adequate pedestrian access to the planned light rail station.
Policy 4:12: Consider amending the City’s parking ordinances to establish a
reduction in parking requirements for new developments within a defined distance
from the planned light rail station.
TRUCK ROUTES
Existing truck routes within the City have generated numerous concerns related to
noise and public safety. Several issues have been identified to develop goals and
policies addressing these concerns. The issues include: noise and safety concerns of
the residents of Foothill Boulevard, Mountain Avenue, and Myrtle Avenue; the need
to provide for adequate north-south truck circulation; and designating streets for
truck routes
GOAL 5: Ensure a truck circulation pattern through the City to provide efficient
transportation of commodities while maintaining safety and harmony in its
residential neighborhoods.
Policy 5:1: Limit designated truck routes for commercial trucks to minimize their
impact on local traffic and neighborhoods. Coordinate with adjacent jurisdictions
where possible to reduce the volume of truck traffic traveling through the City.
Revise the existing network of designated truck routes in the City, as appropriate,
with consideration of the effect any changes may have on alternate routes.
                                                                   Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            12

Policy 5:2: Maintain truck routes to appropriate design standards to accommodate
truck volumes safely.
Policy 5:3: Minimize noise impacts to sensitive land uses (residential areas, schools,
hospital, etc.) with the development of barriers (e.g., sound walls) and other
physical separations between these uses and noise-generating traffic corridors.
Policy 5:4: As appropriate, require new development to provide adequately sized
on-site truck loading areas to minimize interference with nearby traffic circulation
Policy 5:5: Install appropriate signage to denote truck routes clearly. Analyze the
performance of existing truck routes.
Policy 5:6: Enforce truck regulations to improve safety. As appropriate and as
necessary, work with specific businesses and adjacent jurisdictions to address
complaints.
PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE FACILITIES
Every traveler is a pedestrian at some point in each trip, and the walking
environment is one of the most fundamental public places. Short trips can be made
entirely on foot and the provision of adequate pedestrian facilities supports this
mode of transportation. The City’s pedestrian network consists of sidewalks,
crosswalks and, in the hillside area, trails. The City also has an existing network of
on-street bicycle lanes and bicycle routes (Class II and Class III bicycle facilities).
There are concerns related to the condition and continuity of pedestrian facilities in
the City. There are also concerns regarding bike access between Monrovia and
neighboring communities. Specific issues include: need for improved mountain bike
access, incorporation of the Clamshell Hiking/Bike Trail into the General Plan,
striping for bike lanes on City streets, sidewalk system, bike parking and bike trail
along the Sawpit Wash.
GOAL 6: Protect and encourage non-motorized transportation such as bicycle and
pedestrian travel.
Policy 6:1: Provide for the safety of pedestrians and bicycles by adhering to state
and national standards and uniform practices.
Policy 6:2: Develop a Citywide Pedestrian Master Plan and a Bicycle Master Plan.
These may include preparing Geographic Information System-based inventories of
existing pedestrian and bicycle facilities within the City and at its perimeter
(including all handicapped-accessible ramps, marked crosswalks, paved sidewalks
and bicycle facilities) and key activity generators and locations (such as schools,
retail districts, parks, public buildings, downtown, higher density areas, and transit
corridors), identifying existing gaps or other deficiencies, developing and prioritizing
necessary improvements, and identifying funding sources to implement those
improvements.
                                                                   Monrovia Circulation Element
                                             13

Policy 6:3: Maintain existing pedestrian facilities (sidewalks and trails) and
encourage new development to provide pedestrian routes to adjacent
developments. Respond in a timely manner to citizen requests regarding
maintenance concerns on all public pedestrian facilities.
Policy 6:4: Continue to improve the accessibility of pedestrian facilities to the
elderly and disabled, through such measures as construction of wheelchair ramps.
Policy 6:5: Encourage the provision of an accessible and secure area for bicycle
storage at all new and existing developments.
Policy 6:6: Encourage provision of bicycle racks or storage facilities at public
gathering places.
Policy 6:7: Maintain established bicycle facilities within the City according to
established design standards. Review the signage on the existing bikeways and
install additional signage as appropriate. Respond in a timely manner to citizen
requests regarding maintenance concerns on all bicycle facilities.
Policy 6:8: Require new developments to provide adequate pedestrian paths on
adjacent streets, including wheelchair ramps, and through the development
projects, where determined to be appropriate.
Policy 6:9: Continue installation of facilities accessible for disabled persons and link
public facilities and commercial areas to residential neighborhoods. The use of
audible warning devices at intersections along these routes should be considered.
Policy 6:10: Periodically review the established Safe Routes to School programs in
cooperation with the Monrovia Unified School District. These programs educate
students, parents and other residents on the benefits of walking and bicycling for
school travel. Consider partnering with school officials to seek available State
funding to develop and implement programs to promote bicycle safety education
and the benefits of bicycle transportation.
HILLSIDE STREETS
The characteristic steep grades, curvature and rural traffic of hillside streets north
of Hillcrest Boulevard have raised several concerns. Goals and policies have been
developed to address these issues. Specific issues are: new developments in the
hillside area, hillside standards and specifications for circulation and street
improvements, lateral circulation within the hillside area, and interconnection
between the hillside area and other specific plan areas
GOAL 7: Develop and maintain a safe and efficient system of hillside streets and
bike trails for movement of vehicles, people and goods.
                                                                    Monrovia Circulation Element
                                             14
Policy 7:1: Strictly follow hillside guidelines for new developments in hillside areas
and design hillside streets to Hillside standards and specifications for circulation and
street development.
Policy 7:2: Improve and maintain existing pedestrian trails along Sawpit Wash and
Santa Anita Wash.
Policy 7:3: Provide adequate lateral circulation within hillside developments so that
access can be obtained from more than one street.
Policy 7:4: Improve existing fire breaks and fire roads for better emergency access.
Policy 7:5: Encourage formation of assessment districts to coordinate new hillside
developments and for the maintenance of new private streets. Require homeowners
associations to maintain new private streets properly through conditions, covenants
and other mechanisms.
Policy 7:6: Develop standards for adequate trail access including accommodations
for parking at trailheads.
PARKING
Parking issues relate to the availability and control of parking spaces near activity
centers and other land uses along the City streets. These issues reflect concerns
regarding the use of parking facilities within the business areas as well as in the
residential and recreational areas. The issues that have prompted development of
specific parking goals and policies include: inadequate parking in the downtown
area, adverse parking impacts from multi-family development, need for additional
parking studies, illegal alley parking, the need for a parking assessment district,
inadequate school parking, and the need to review existing parking standards.
GOAL 8: Provide an adequate supply of convenient parking for all developments in
the City, in a manner consistent with the goals of managing transportation demand
and providing efficient arterial traffic flows.
Policy 8:1: Review zoning code parking requirements and revise as necessary so
that standards conform to actual parking demands.
Policy 8:2: Require all new developments to provide off-street parking in
compliance with the City’s Zoning Code and the requirements of the ADA.
Policy 8:3: Encourage employers to include parking provisions in transportation
demand management (TDM) plans, such as preferentially-located parking for
carpools.
Policy 8:4: Consider the development of parking facilities through such methods as
alley vacation and lot consolidation.
                                                                  Monrovia Circulation Element
                                             15

Policy 8:5: Establish public parking lot maintenance assessment districts to provide
for pavement repairs, sweeping and lighting.
Policy 8:6: Establish parking assessment districts and/or develop a mechanism to
allow for cooperative covenanted parking agreements to develop and maintain
joint-use parking lots in areas where existing on-site parking is determined
inadequate.
Policy 8:7: Consider developing a mechanism to establish preferential parking
districts for residents in areas where excessive spillover parking from nearby non-
residential uses has been documented.
Policy 8:8: Implement parking management activity programs specified by the
Southern California Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD), including Rule 1504
“Cash-Out Program for Non-Owned Employer Parking.”
REGIONAL PLANNING
Planning for the development of transportation facilities in Monrovia necessarily
occurs in the context of the surrounding region. Regional transportation planning in
Los Angeles County is conducted primarily by two agencies.
SCAG is the designated Metropolitan Planning Organization for a six-county
planning area and is responsible for preparing the Regional Transportation Plan, a
blueprint for regional transportation investments also linked to achieving the air
quality standards developed or administered by SCAQMD.
Metro operates the primary system of public transit within the County and is
responsible for preparing the Long Range Transportation Plan (LRTP) and
Congestion Management Plan (CMP) for Los Angeles County. The LRTP provides a
vision for addressing the transportation needs of the County, and projects included
in the LRTP receive priority in future funding and construction.
The CMP is a state-mandated program that links land use, transportation, and air
quality decisions within the County and requires that local jurisdictions monitor and
report development activity annually and implement a TDM ordinance. The only
CMP facility in Monrovia is the Foothill Freeway; none of the streets in the City are a
part of the designated CMP arterial monitoring network.
The California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) is the state agency with
jurisdiction over the regional freeway system, including the Foothill Freeway (I-
210). Any improvements to the freeway ramp intersections in Monrovia must be
developed in consultation with and approved by Caltrans.
                                                                 Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            16

Jurisdictions immediately adjacent to Monrovia include the Cities of Arcadia,
Bradbury, Duarte and Irwindale and the County of Los Angeles, each of which
conducts land use and transportation planning for the areas they control.
GOAL 9: Support the development of a network of regional roadway facilities that
ensures the safe and efficient movement of people and goods from within the City
to areas outside its boundaries, and that accommodates regional travel demands
and maintains air quality standards.
Policy 9:1: Establish appropriate circulation systems between the planned light rail
station and major activity centers of the City to provide efficient passenger
transportation service.
Policy 9:2: Coordinate street system improvements and signalization with regional
transportation efforts. Continue to coordinate with staff of Los Angeles County and
nearby jurisdictions to implement the planned Intelligent Transportation Systems
improvements to traffic signal systems on Huntington Drive and Myrtle Avenue.
Consider expanding these types of improvements to Duarte Road, Foothill
Boulevard and Mountain Avenue.
Policy 9:3: Provide adequate terminal facilities (parking, bike racks, security, etc.)
for inter-city and regional travel for the users of both the public and private
transportation modes.
Policy 9:4: Continue to support the regional light rail and bus system to provide
inter-city service to major employment centers, and connection to regional
transportation transfer points.
Policy 9:6: Require that proposals for major new developments (as defined in the
City’s TDM ordinance) include submission of a TDM plan to the City, including
monitoring and enforcement provisions. Also, require that a regional impact
assessment be included in traffic impact reports for all new major development
projects.
Policy 9:7: Coordinate the development of arterial streets with the Los Angeles
County Master Plan of Highways to assure that arterial streets will be compatible
with those of neighboring jurisdictions.
                                                                   Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            17

III. THE CIRCULATION PLAN
This section of the Circulation Element specifies the policies, standards and
specifications for various transportation facilities. These standards and
specifications apply to planned facilities as well as improvements to existing
facilities. The plan is based on an evaluation of potential circulation impacts due to
proposed zoning of Monrovia as specified in the Land Use Element of the General
Plan. The following components of the Circulation Plan have been developed to
minimize potential circulation impacts and maintain quality of life in Monrovia
MASTER PLAN OF STREETS
Monrovia is one of the oldest cities in Los Angeles County. Within 13.5 square miles
of incorporated area, the City is primarily residential in character with strip
commercial and light industrial activities along the arterial streets. Retail activities
are concentrated in the Central Business District and on Huntington Drive. Monrovia
has developed over the years to become a dynamic urban community with
increasing opportunities for economic growth and prosperity. The City is part of
cooperative efforts to plan and implement various regional transportation
improvement plans. Most noteworthy of these plans is the planned light rail line
that promises to promote economic growth, new employment opportunities,
increased values, increased revenues and additional transportation options for the
residents of Monrovia.
The northern portion of Monrovia is in the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains
where urban development is limited by topography. Although there is a substantial
residential development north of Foothill Boulevard, the majority of development is
south of Foothill Boulevard. Redevelopment projects continue to be planned at key
locations to meet the growing needs of citizens.
Because of topographic limitations on new growth and the fact that Monrovia is a
built-out city, the possibilities of roadway expansion within the City are generally
limited. An exception to this is the area around the future light rail station, where a
major redevelopment project is planned.
In addition, improvements to the existing roadway system are possible through
pavement resurfacing, modifying traffic movement patterns, restriping to provide
turn lanes, closing certain streets to prevent through travel, prohibiting left turns at
some intersections and installing computerized signal control systems along major
arterials.
For the purpose of analysis and evaluation of roadway needs, a roadway
classification system has been established. Table III-1 shows typical cross-section
elements and standards used for classification of streets. Figure III-1 shows a
typical cross-sectional profile for each type of street
                                                                   Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            18
TABLE III-1 CITY OF MONROVIA ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION STANDARDS
                              Classification Criteria
Roadway       Right
                                                                  Desired
Classificatio of    Curb to   No. Of                  No. of
                                            Direction             Level         ADT
n             Way   Curb      Through                 Parking
                                            Separator             of            Volumes
              Widt  Width     Lanes                   Lanes
                                                                  Service
              h
Primary       100’-                         Raised                              30,000 –
                    70’ – 92’ 4-6                     0–2         D
Arterial      120’                          Median                              50, 000
                                            Two-Way
Secondary     80’ –                                                             20.000 –
                    60’ – 76’ 4-5           Left-Turn 0–2         Mid-D
Arterial      96’                                                               30.000
                                            Lane
                                            Double
Collector     60’ –                                                             5,000 –
                    40’ – 64’ 2-4           Yellow    0–2         C
Street        84’                                                               20,000
                                            Lines
Local         40’ –                                                             1,000 –
                    24’ – 40’ 1-2           None      1–2         A
Street        56’                                                               5,000
                    20’ – 28’
Hillside      24’ –                                                             3,000 –
                    Minimu    1-2           None      1–2         A
Street        32’                                                               8,000
                    m
                    16’ – 20’
Emergency     16’ –
                    Minimu    1             None      0           -             -
Access        20’
                    m
                                                            Monrovia Circulation Element
                                        19

   Monrovia Circulation Element
20
Roadways in an urban area are classified according to their function and
development standards. Generally, an urban road circulation system (excluding
freeways) consists of four different types of roadway facilities:
1. Primary Arterial Street
2. Secondary Arterial Street
3. Collector Street
4. Local Street (including alleys, hillside streets, commercial streets, private streets,
and emergency access roads)
The following is a brief description of the functional and design characteristics of
various types of urban streets.
Primary Arterial Street
This type of roadway is designed to provide for major traffic flows of urban through
traffic, as well as to serve adjacent land uses. Traffic is derived from secondary
arterial and collector streets via signalized intersections and from local streets and
driveways for properties directly abutting the street. These streets provide regional
access to and from adjacent cities and freeways. Huntington Drive and a portion of
Myrtle Avenue are the two Primary Arterial streets in Monrovia
Directional traffic is generally separated by a raised center median. Each direction
of travel accommodates two to three through travel lanes plus exclusive turn lanes
at major intersections. Signalized intersections are generally controlled by a
coordinated signal progression system. Roadway width (curb-to-curb, including
median) varies from 70 to 84 feet, while right-of-way width varies from 100 to 120
feet. On-street parking may or may not be allowed depending on number of
through lanes provided in each direction. For a primary arterial street, the average
daily traffic (ADT) capacity may range from approximately 30,000 vehicles to
50,000 vehicles per day. Primary arterials are also characterized by speed limits of
35 to 40 miles per hour (mph)
Secondary Arterial Street
Secondary arterial streets serve as important links between primary arterial streets
and collector streets. During the peak hours, these streets provide alternative
routes to parallel primary arterials. Secondary arterials supplement the primary
arterials to provide regional access. Directional traffic movements are typically
separated by median stripes of a two-way left-turn lane. Each direction is typically
striped for two travel lanes plus an exclusive left-turn lane at major intersections.
On-street parking is permitted wherever possible. The pavement width of secondary
arterials varies from 60 to 76 feet and the right-of-way width varies from 80 to 96
feet. The speed limit varies from 35 to 40 mph. The ADT capacity of secondary
arterials varies from 20,000 to 30,000 vehicles per day. Foothill Boulevard, Duarte
Road and Mountain Avenue are examples of secondary arterial streets in Monrovia.
                                                                   Monrovia Circulation Element
                                             21
Collector Street
Collector streets are partially controlled thoroughfares that collect traffic from local
streets and feed primary and secondary arterial streets via controlled intersections.
These streets do not have a continuous raised center median. They usually have
two travel lanes in each direction plus an on-street parking lane. A separate left-
turn lane may or may not be provided at major intersections. The pavement width
varies from 40 to 64 feet while the right-of-way width varies from 60 to 84 feet.
Speed limits on collector streets vary from 25 to 35 mph. The ADT capacity of
collector streets ranges from 5,000 to 20,000 vehicles per day. Examples of
collector streets in Monrovia are Hillcrest Boulevard and Fifth Avenue. Because
Royal Oaks Drive currently carries a sufficient vehicle volume to be considered a
collector street, it has been reclassified as such; due to physical constraints there,
however, it may not be possible to widen this facility to full collector street
standards possible in the foreseeable future.
Local Street
Local streets collect traffic directly from residential and industrial driveways. These
streets accommodate traffic in both directions. Generally, travel lanes are not
striped. Speed limits are not necessarily posted but are presumed to be 25 mph or
less. Specific circumstances, such as schools, playgrounds, parks, etc., along these
streets may warrant a lower speed limit. The pavement width varies from 24 to 40
feet with parking permitted along one or both sides of roadway. The right-of-way
width varies from 40 to 56 feet. The ADT capacity of local streets is up to 5,000
vehicles per day. Palm Avenue is an example of a local street in Monrovia.
Alley
Alleys provide for accessibility and service to each individual land use. They are
characterized by a narrow right-of-way and range in width from 16 to 20 feet in
residential areas and up to 30 feet in industrial areas. In Monrovia there are a
number of alleys in both residential and industrial areas. The majorities of
residential alleys are 16 feet wide and are in the older central section of the City
serving multiple-zoned areas. However, there has been a considerable debate in
recent years regarding maintenance and improvement of these alleys. The master
plan of the street system in Monrovia should include alleys. Consideration should be
given to maintaining utilities in alleys, alley access to streets, upgrading of alleys
and future dedication for widening alleys as new development occurs.
Hillside Street
Hillside streets are characterized by steep grades, curvature and rural residential
traffic. In defining the capacity of a hillside street, the effects of gradient must be
considered grades as high as 15 percent may be allowed in certain sections of the
roadway (subject to the Fire Department’s approval). Assuming an average grade
of 10 percent, the capacity of the roadway should be reduced by a minimum of 5
percent. For example, the capacity of a local hillside street with two travel lanes is
estimated to be 95 percent of the capacity of a typical local street. The hillside
street system in Monrovia consists of a number of private streets, preexisting
private ways, and common driveways. The Hillside Standards and Policies
developed by the City should be followed in maintaining and improving these
                                                                     Monrovia Circulation Element
                                              22

streets wherever applicable. The design standards should be strictly maintained for
new hillside streets as new development occurs.
Commercial Street
Commercial streets must be designed for accommodating truck traffic. Therefore,
no travel lane or turning lane on an commercial street should be narrower than 12
feet. The parking lanes may be provided on either or both sides of the street. The
width of a parking lane should be at least nine feet.
Figure III-2 shows the existing functional classification of the streets (i.e., the
primary arterials, secondary arterials, collectors and local streets) of Monrovia. As
part of this update to the Circulation Element, the modifications listed below are
proposed and the resulting system is shown in Figure III-3.
Downgrade Myrtle between Foothill Boulevard and Maple Avenue from a Primary
Arterial Street to a Collector Street.
Upgrade California Avenue to a Secondary Arterial between Duarte Road (currently
a Local Street) and Huntington Drive.
Construct a new east-west street south of Pomona Avenue (tentatively to be named
Center Street) to Collector Street standards between Magnolia Avenue and
Shamrock Avenue. Consider realigning or vacating portions of Pomona Avenue,
Railroad Avenue and other local streets in this area as the redevelopment plans
precede.
Reclassify Royal Oaks Drive between Shamrock Avenue and the eastern City limit to
a Collector Street (currently a Local Street).
Upgrade and widen Central Avenue and Evergreen Avenue between Mayflower
Avenue and the eastern City limits to Collector Streets (currently Local Streets).
One of the criteria used in classifying urban streets is the maximum desirable ADT
volumes on the street. This maximum ADT volume is referred to as the capacity of
the street. It is implied that the ADT volume on a street should remain at or below
this capacity level. The capacity of an urban street is a function of the maximum
traffic handling capacity of its intersection with cross streets. The Highway Capacity
Manual specifies the capacity of an intersection as 1,800 vehicles per hour of green
time per lane. Assuming that approximately 50% of every hour is available as
green time per street at an intersection, the street capacity is approximately 900
vehicles per hour per lane. This capacity of the street is expected to be fully utilized
by traffic demand during the peak hour of an average day. The American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) publication, “A
Policy on Geometric Design of Highways
and Streets” specifies that the design peak hour volume may be represented as
10% of ADT volumes. Therefore, the ADT capacity of a street is estimated to be
9,000 vehicles per day per lane.
                                                                   Monrovia Circulation Element
                                             23

 The City has established specific LOS criteria to identify the maximum desirable
daily level of traffic volume on different types of roadways. Level of service is a
qualitative measure used to describe the condition of traffic flow at an intersection
and ranges from excellent conditions at LOS A to overloaded conditions at LOS F.
The AASHTO publication recommends various LOS volumes for local collector and
arterial streets. For the City of Monrovia, the following LOS designation is deemed
suitable:
                  Type of Street            Maximum Desirable Daily LOS & V/C
          Primary Arterial:                LOS D (V/C < 0.90)
          Secondary Arterial:              LOS Mid-D (V/C < 0.85)
          Collector Street:                LOS C (V/C < 0.80)
          Local Street:                    LOS A(V/C< 0.60)
The City utilizes the ICU methodology to determine the intersection V/C ratio at
signalized intersections. The corresponding LOS is based on the given turning
movements and intersection characteristics, an assumed capacity of 1,600 vehicles
per hour per lane (vphpl), and a clearance interval of 0.05 (yellow plus all red). The
City is currently improving the signal control systems on key arterials to improve
operations, and in the future the assumed capacity will increase to 1,700 vphpl. At
intersections with LOS definitions for signalized intersections are listed in Table III 2
The City utilizes the Stop-Controlled methodologies from the HCM to determine the
average vehicle control delay (in seconds) for the stop-controlled intersections. The
all-way stop-controlled methodology calculates the average vehicle control delay for
all intersection approaches. The two-way stop-controlled methodology relates
intersection LOS to the delay experienced by the most constrained approach to the
intersection, rather than to the intersection as a whole. LOS definitions for the stop-
controlled intersections are provided in Table III-3.
                                                                  Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            24
   Monrovia Circulation Element
25
         TABLE III-2 LEVEL OF SERVICE DEFINITIONS FOR SIGNALIZED
                                          INTERSECTIONS
The quality of traffic service provided by an urban street is evaluated based on traffic operational
conditions at its intersection with cross streets. Six levels of service are used as qualitative measures
of the operational conditions at an intersection. The LOS are given letter designations from A to F,
with LOS A representing the best conditions and LOS F the worst. The LOS at signalized intersections
is defined in terms of the volume to capacity (V/C) ratio
LOS                            Traffic Operational Characteristics
A                              EXCELLENT. No Vehicle waits longer than one cycle and no
                               approach phase is fully used
B                              VERY GOOD. An occasional approach phase is fully utilized;
                               many drivers begin to feel somewhat restricted within
                               groups of vehicles
C                              GOOD. Occasionally drivers may have to wait through more
                               than one red light; backups may develop behind turning
                               vehicles.
D                              FAIR. Delays may be substantial during portions of the rush
                               hours, but enough lower volume periods occur to permit
                               clearing of developing lines, preventing excessive backups.
E                              POOR.      Represents         the     most     vehicles       intersection
                               approaches can accommodate; may be long lines of waiting
                               vehicles through several signal cycles.
F                              FAILURE. Backups from nearby locations or on cross streets
                               may restrict or prevent movement of vehicles out of the
                               intersection      approaches.          Tremendous         delays        with
                               continuously increasing queue lengths.
                                                                                Monrovia Circulation Element
                                                     26
TABLE III-3 LEVEL OF SERVICE DEFINITIONS FOR STOP-CONTROLLED
                                   INTERSECTIONS
             The level of service at stop-controlled intersections is defined by the
                               average control delay per vehicle.
                                           Average Total Delay (seconds
                      LOS
                                                        per vehicle)
                        A                                  < 10.0
                        B                           > 10.0 and < 15.0
                        C                           > 15.0 and < 25.0
                        D                           > 25.0 and < 35.0
                        E                           > 35.0 and < 50.0
                        F                                  > 50.0
                                                                               Monrovia Circulation Element
                                               27
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION PLAN
Public transportation in Monrovia is provided by Metro, Foothill Transit and by the
City of Monrovia (the Monrovia Trolley) and, on the eastern boundary of the City,
by the City of Duarte. These agencies currently operate 10 bus lines in Monrovia
throughout the day. Figure III-4 presents the routes of the different transit lines
that serve the City. Dial-a-ride par transit service operated by Access Services is
also available to the public for local transportation. Regional public transportation
will be significantly improved with the completion of the proposed light-rail transit
line connecting Monrovia with the City of Los Angeles and other cities in the region.
The City should coordinate planning for improvements to the Monrovia Trolley
routes with Metro and Foothill Transit as those agencies continue to plan for
changes to the existing transit network to provide the most effective service for the
public, both on an ongoing basis and in conjunction with planning for the future
light rail station. All public transportation facilities must fully comply with the
requirements of the ADA.
                                                                      Monrovia Circulation Element
                                              28
   Monrovia Circulation Element
29
TRUCK ROUTE PLAN
Currently, there are five east-west streets and two north-south streets designated
as truck routes within the City of Monrovia, depicted in Figure III-5. Although the
existing use of Foothill Boulevard as part of a truck route has raised safety concerns
in the past, maintaining its use is considered vital for commercial truck circulation
within the City. The City is coordinating with adjacent jurisdictions to address
concerns about the use of Myrtle Avenue by commercial trucks, particularly the
segment between Evergreen Avenue and Duarte Road. Data for this segment of
Myrtle Avenue suggests that it does not experience an exceptionally high level of
truck traffic at this time, but the City may periodically monitor conditions and
should continue to explore alternative strategies that may reduce the volume of
trucks there.
The City will continue to enforce existing ordinances relating to the use of City
streets by heavy vehicles. As appropriate, studies may be undertaken and specific
safety measures developed to mitigate safety or quality or life concerns expressed
residents. Future alterations may be made to the existing network of designated
truck routes to protect residents while maintaining a reasonably extensive network
for commercial through trucks. Because deleting street segments from the City’s
network of truck routes would alter established traffic patterns and divert these
vehicles to other streets, within or outside the City, the implications of such an
action should be carefully considered before implementation.
                                                                  Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            30

   Monrovia Circulation Element
31
BICYCLE FACILITIES PLAN
In recognition of the potential for bicycles to be used for recreation, exercise and
personal transportation, the City coordinated with Metro in the 1990s in the
development of a sub regional bikeway master plan for the area. The existing
bicycle facilities in Monrovia are consistent with that plan (Class II and Class III
bikeways) and are shown in Figure III-6. In 2006 Metro, in consultation with local
jurisdictions, prepared the Metro Bicycle Transportation Strategic Plan, which
established a framework for future bicycle planning within the County.
Chapter 1000 of the Highway Design Manual (“Bikeway Planning and Design,”
Caltrans, June 26, 2006) discusses three different types of bikeways. Class I
Bikeways (bike paths) provide “a completely separated right of way for the
exclusive use of bicycles and pedestrians with cross flow by motorists minimized.”
Bike paths can be considered to serve corridors not served by streets and
highways. Typical examples are within parks, campuses, along rivers, canals, utility
rights-of-way, within planned developments, etc. This type of bikeway must have
an exclusive right-of-way. Motorized bicycles (mopeds) and all motor vehicles
should be prohibited from bike paths. While no Class I bikeways (bike paths) have
been established in the City, the hillside trail system is used by mountain bike
riders as well as pedestrians and equestrians.
Class II Bikeways (bike lanes) provide “a striped lane for one-way bike travel on a
street or highway.” Bike lanes have been established on several of the City’s
streets, including portions of Colorado Boulevard and Olive Avenue.
Class III Bikeways (bike routes) “provide for shared use with pedestrian or motor
vehicle traffic” and provide connectivity with other bikeways or to designate
preferred routes through high-demand corridors. Bike routes have been established
within the City on portions of Magnolia Avenue, Shamrock Avenue and Greystone
Avenue. These routes are designated for bicycles with posted bike route signs.
In addition to these three types of bikeways, cyclists may travel on any streets
except freeways where they are specifically prohibited. Most bicycle travel occurs
on such shared roadways due to the extent of the system and cyclists, as well as
motorists, must comply with the rules of the road.
Future expansion of this network is currently planned on Magnolia Avenue and
Shamrock Avenue south of Lemon Avenue and on Duarte Road, as shown in Figure
III-6. A new Citywide Bicycle Master Plan should be prepared to identify
opportunities to expand the existing network of bicycle facilities further. This plan
should identify and prioritize bikeway improvements in the City and identify funding
sources for implementation. The development of this plan should be coordinated
with the development of a Citywide Pedestrian Master Plan, which is discussed in
the next section.
                                                                  Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            32

   Monrovia Circulation Element
33
PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES PLAN
Pedestrian facilities include sidewalks, pedestrian street crossings, and walkways
(e.g., pedestrian malls). These facilities also include pedestrian trails in hilly areas
(with or without mounted hand rails), waiting shelters at bus stops, curb-cut ramps
(including wheel-chair ramps), and push-button devices and pedestrian crossing
indicators at signalized intersections. Trails are an integral part of the hillside area
of Monrovia. Although these trails are jointly used for equestrian travel, hiking and
mountain biking, they serve pedestrian needs as well. Development of an
integrated regional trail network system should be considered under the Hillside
Specific Plan.
For a safe and efficient circulation system, the City should maintain all existing
pedestrian facilities and encourage new developments to provide pedestrian routes
to adjacent developments. The City will continue to install and maintain facilities
that comply with the requirements of the ADA. As determined to be necessary and
appropriate, lighting systems should also be provided to facilitate safe and secure
use of these facilities at night.
To promote pedestrian trips, the City should develop a Citywide Pedestrian Master
Plan. This may include preparing a Geographic Information System-based inventory
of existing pedestrian facilities within the City (including all handicapped-accessible
ramps, marked crosswalks, and paved sidewalks) and key activity generators and
locations (such as schools, retail districts, parks, public buildings, downtown, higher
density areas, and transit corridors), identifying existing gaps or other deficiencies,
developing and prioritizing necessary improvements, and identifying funding
sources to implement those improvements.
PARKING PLAN
Adequate parking facilities and their efficient use are essential to maintaining a
smooth and balanced circulation system. Management of parking facilities in the
downtown business district is an important issue for the continued economic growth
of the community. In order to maintain an adequate supply of convenient parking
facilities, the City should periodically review zoning code parking requirements and
revise the code as necessary. All parking facilities should comply with ADA
requirements to provide adequate access for handicapped and disabled persons. All
new developments are required to provide adequate off-street parking in
compliance with zoning codes. The City should periodically review the adequacy of
its standards for off-street parking. In the downtown business district or other
areas where the on-site parking supplies are determined inadequate for existing
uses, the City should consider establishing a parking assessment district or
developing a mechanism to allow for cooperative covenanted parking agreements
to develop and maintain joint use parking lots. Detailed parking studies should be
conducted for the downtown area as necessary to evaluate the need for parking
improvements.
                                                                    Monrovia Circulation Element
                                             34
The City should continue require that proposals for major new developments (as
defined in the City’s TDM ordinance) include the submission of a TDM plan to the
City, potentially including the designation of preferentially-located parking for
carpool vehicles and implementation of the “Cash-Out Program for Non-Owned
Employer Parking” as defined in SCAQMD Rule 1504. The City, in cooperation with
regional agencies, has developed a park-and-ride lot north of the planned light rail
station. With the planned introduction of light rail service to the City, an expanded
park-and-ride facility would be located south of the station. The City should
continue to coordinate with the Metro Gold Line Construction Authority as planning
for the light rail project and its supporting parking facilities proceeds.
                                                                    Monrovia Circulation Element
                                            35

Ci tyofMonr   ovi a
2014-
    2021Hous
           ingEl
               ement
2014-2021 Housing Element of the City of Monrovia
                                Adopted February 4, 2014
                                              Resolution No. 2014-04
                                                             City Council
                                                   Mary Ann Lutz, Mayor
                                           Becky Shevlin, Mayor Pro Tem
                                                              Tom Adams
                                                    Alexander Blackburn
                                                              Larry Spicer
                                                   Planning Commission
                                                  Carlos Parrague, Chair
                                               Anne McIntosh, Vice-Chair
                                                              Scott Austin
                                                          William Beebe
                                                       Robert McClellan
                                                            Karen Suarez
                                                            Erica Thomas
                                                                 City Staff
                    Steve Sizemore, Director of Community Development
                         Craig Jimenez, AICP, Planning Division Manager
                                   Brian O'Connor, Department Assistant
                                                               Consultant
                                           Karen Warner Associates, Inc.
                              CITY OF MONROVIA
                      2014-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION TO THE HOUSING ELEMENT                 1
HOUSING GOALS AND POLICIES                          5
      Preserving Housing and Neighborhood Assets    5
      Ensuring Diversity in the Housing Stock       6
      Providing Housing Affordable to Monrovians    6
      Removing Governmental Constraints             7
      Equal Housing Opportunities and Special Needs 8
      Environmental Sustainability                  8
HOUSING PROGRAMS                                    10
      Preserving Housing and Neighborhood Assets    10
      Ensuring Diversity in the Housing Stock       14
      Providing Housing Affordable to Monrovians    17
      Removing Governmental Constraints             19
      Equal Housing Opportunities and Special Needs 21
      Environmental Sustainability                  22
APPENDICES
      A. HOUSING ELEMENT BACKGROUND REPORT
      B. PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Introduction to the Housing Element
A. Background
All cities and counties in California are required to have a General Plan that documents
the jurisdiction’s long range plan or vision for the community. There are seven required
components or elements in the General Plan, one of which is the Housing Element. The
purpose of the Housing Element is to achieve an adequate supply of safe, affordable
housing for all economic segments of the community, including individuals with special
housing needs.
This Housing Element is the comprehensive statement by the City of Monrovia of its
current and future housing needs and contains the City’s goals, policies and programs
related to housing issues, including preserving and improving existing housing and
encouraging the development of housing opportunities for all Monrovians. Of the
mandated General Plan Elements, the Housing Element is the only one that is required
to be updated on a specific schedule. In order to address a community’s changing
housing needs, Housing Elements are to be updated every five to eight years. The
Housing Element is also subject to review by the State Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD).
Monrovia’s Housing Element was originally adopted in 1976. Subsequent Elements were
adopted in 1981, 1993 and 2003 with Monrovia's most recent Housing Element covering
the period 2008-2014. Pursuant to the update cycle for jurisdictions within the Southern
California Association of Governments (SCAG) region, this Housing Element update
covers the 8 year, 2014-2021 planning period.
Monrovia's 2014-2021 Housing Element identifies strategies and programs that focus on:
                            Preserving Housing and Neighborhood Assets
                            Ensuring Housing Diversity
                            Providing Housing Affordable to Monrovians
                            Removing Governmental Constraints
                            Equal Housing Opportunities and Special Needs
                            Environmental Sustainability
2014-2021 Housing Element                           PAGE 1
                         Sustainability, Energy Efficiency and Healthy Community

B. Organization of the Housing Element
The City of Monrovia 2014-2021 Housing Element consists of two components: 1) the
Housing Element document; and 2) the Housing Element Background Report.
     The Housing Element document presents Monrovia's Housing Plan for the 2014-
         2021 planning period - its goals, policies and implementation programs relative
         to the maintenance, preservation, improvement and development of housing
         for all economic segments of the community.
     The Housing Element Background Report includes all the detailed background
         information and analysis required under State Housing Element law, and provides
         the foundation for development of Monrovia's eight year Housing Plan.
C.       Public Participation
Section 65583(c)(8) of the Government Code requires that, “The local government to
make a diligent effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments of the
community in the development of the housing element, and the program shall describe
this effort.” Opportunities for community stakeholders to provide input on housing issues
and recommend strategies are critical to the development of appropriate and
effective programs to address the City’s housing needs. Monrovia solicited input from
the public throughout the housing element process: during development of the draft
element; during public review of the draft element; and during the adoption process.
The City solicited public input during development of the draft element through
distribution of a Housing Needs Survey to City residents. The survey was made available
on the City’s website and at public counters at City Hall, the library and Community
Center. Additionally, significant outreach through the city's various electronic media
and social networking sites made the survey available to Monrovians. The survey was
posted on the City’s website during October and November, with 123 completed
surveys received. The following summarizes some of the primary input received from
the housing needs survey, with the complete survey results included in Appendix B:
        Nearly half of respondents indicated the housing they live in was in need of some
         level of physical improvements: minor repairs (34%), modest rehabilitation
         improvements (9%), or major upgrades (5%).
        Senior housing was identified by 37% of respondents as needed in Monrovia, with
         workforce housing (34%) and housing for young families (33%) also identified by
         approximately one-third of respondents as a housing need in the community.
        Among single-family homeowners, 37% indicated they would potentially be
         interested in having either an attached or detached second unit on their
2014-2021 Housing Element                   PAGE 2

         property.      Respondents indicated they envisioned using the second unit as
         follows: to house a family member (67%); to provide rental income (49%); and to
         house a caregiver (32%).
        A variety of write-in comments were provided, including the need for more
         affordable housing options, particularly for families, seniors and workforce; the
         need for improved maintenance of rental housing; concerns about parking spill-
         over from multi-family onto streets; and strong desire to maintain Monrovia's small
         town feel.
The results of the Housing Needs Survey have been shared with the City’s decision-
makers, and have been reflected within the Element’s Housing Plan.
Monrovia conducted a public study session on October 3, 2013 before the Planning
Commission. The purpose of the special study session was two-fold: to provide the
Planning Commission an overview of the purpose of the Housing Element and the
regulations and process leading to adoption and to allow the Commission and the
public at large to provide input on the City’s housing needs and other issues that would
be pertinent to the development of the Element. Notification of the workshop was
provided in the local newspaper and posted on the City’s website and at public
counters throughout the City.           Direct notification was also provided to local
stakeholders including: non-profit housing providers; service agencies representing
special needs and lower income populations; and business organizations and realtors.
A copy of the meeting notification and distribution list is included in the Appendix to the
Element.
Upon completion of the draft Housing Element, the City circulates a Notice of
Availability to a variety of interested organizations. The Notice defines a 60 day review
and comment period, and identifies locations for review of the draft document,
including the local library, the Monrovia Senior Center, City Hall, and the Planning
Division. In addition, the draft Housing Element is placed on the City’s website. The draft
is also sent to the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) for
review and comment.
Public hearings are held on the Housing Element before both the Planning Commission
and City Council. Notification is published in the local newspaper in advance of each
hearing, and direct notices are mailed to interested groups and individuals. Video
broadcasts of City Council meetings are available on the City’s website, allowing
greater access to individuals unable to attend in person.
D. Relationship to the General Plan
State law requires each element of the General Plan to be internally consistent with all
other elements of the General Plan. The Housing Element must contain a statement of
the “means by which consistency will be achieved with other general plan elements
and community goals.” (Gov’t Code §65583(c)(7))
2014-2021 Housing Element                     PAGE 3

In 2007, an EIR was completed for the update of the Land Use Element and adoption of
a new Circulation Element. Part of the review in the EIR was to determine consistency
with the rest of the General Plan. The EIR concluded that those elements were
consistent with the General Plan. As part of the review of the completion of this
Element, the City reviewed each of the other elements of the General Plan to ensure
that there was internal consistency. This update is consistent with and will help
implement the policies of the updated Land Use Element and Circulation Element,
specifically with the incorporation of the increased densities and mixed-use
development encouraged in the Land Use Element.
Compliance with the policies of any of the other elements will not impede the City’s
ability to accommodate its regional housing allocation, achieve the goals and policies
of the Housing Element, or restrict the City’s ability to implement the programs included
in the Housing Element. Similarly, implementation of the Housing Element does not
conflict with the policies of the rest of the General Plan or their implementation
measures.
The City concludes that this Housing Element is internally consistent with the General
Plan of Monrovia.
The City will ensure continued consistency between the Housing Element and the other
General Plan elements so that policies introduced in one element are consistent with
other elements. Whenever any element of the General Plan is amended in the future,
the Housing Element will be reviewed and modified, if necessary, to ensure continued
consistency between elements.
2014-2021 Housing Element                   PAGE 4

Housing Goals and Policies
The goals and policies of the Housing Element are intended to guide the City in making
decisions related to housing related issues and to educate the public in understanding
the general direction of Monrovia's housing policies.
PRESERVING HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOODS ASSETS
  GOAL 1
  Preserve and improve the quality of existing housing and neighborhoods in Monrovia.
         Policy 1.1 Neighborhood Character
         Preserve the character, scale and               quality of  established residential
         neighborhoods.
         Policy 1.2 Housing Design Principles
         Ensure that new housing is well-designed and compatible with the neighborhood
         context in which it is located.
         Policy 1.3 Property and Housing Conditions
         Support the long-term maintenance and improvement of existing housing
         through code enforcement and housing rehabilitation programs.
         Policy 1.4 Historic Preservation
         Identify and preserve important examples of historic or architecturally significant
         residences.
         Policy 1.5 Adaptive Reuse
         Support strategies for the adaptive reuse of residential, commercial, industrial
         and institutional structures to provide for a range of housing types.
         Policy 1.6 Neighborhood Involvement
         Encourage resident involvement in identifying and addressing maintenance of
         housing in their neighborhoods.
         Policy 1.7 Protection of Existing Affordable Housing
         Work with property owners, tenants, and non-profit purchasers to protect the
         affordability of income-restricted housing for low and moderate income
         households.
2014-2021 Housing Element                      PAGE 5
ENSURING DIVERSITY IN THE HOUSING STOCK
  GOAL 2
  Provide adequate housing sites to facilitate the provision of a range of housing types
  to meet community needs.
         Policy 2.1 Variety of Housing Choices
         Provide site opportunities for development of housing that responds to diverse
         community needs in terms of housing types, cost and location, emphasizing
         locations near services and transit that promote walkability.
         Policy 2.2 Residential Mixed Use
         Encourage and facilitate the development of mixed use and high density
         residential development in specified areas (e.g. Station Square, Old Town
         Extension).
         Policy 2.3 Ownership and Rental Housing Balance
         Encourage the development of residential projects to maintain a balance of
         ownership and rental opportunities and to provide a variety in dwelling unit type
         and size.
         Policy 2.4 Site Assistance
         Maintain an up-to-date inventory of suitable residential sites. Assist private
         nonprofit housing developers in identifying and consolidating suitable sites for
         developing housing for low income households and other special needs groups.
         Policy 2.5 Secondary Dwelling Units
         Continue to support the provision of second units in all residential districts as a
         means of dispersing small, affordable units throughout the community.
PROVIDING HOUSING AFFORDABLE TO MONROVIANS
   GOAL 3
   Enhance housing affordability so that modest income households can remain an
   integral part of the Monrovia community.
         Policy 3.1 Affordable Housing Incentives
         Facilitate the development of affordable housing through regulatory incentives
         and concessions, and/or financial assistance. Proactively seek out new models
         and approaches in the provision of affordable housing.
         Policy 3.2 Financial Resources
         Pursue expanded financial resources to support in the production of affordable
         housing for Monrovia's lower income workforce and special needs populations.
2014-2021 Housing Element                     PAGE 6
         Policy 3.3 Public/Private Partnerships
         Explore collaborative partnerships with nonprofit organizations, developers, the
         business community and governmental agencies in the provision of affordable
         housing.
         Policy 3.4 Homeownership Assistance
         Encourage the provision of financial assistance to low and moderate income
         first-time homebuyers through County and State programs.
         Policy 3.5 Rental Assistance
         Support and publicize available rental assistance programs for lower income
         and special needs households.
         Policy 3.6 Housing Dispersion
         Continue to require that housing for low- and moderate-income households not
         be concentrated in any single portion of the city.
REMOVE GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
GOAL 4.0
Reduce governmental constraints on the maintenance, improvement and development
of housing while maintaining community character.
         Policy 4.1 Regulatory Incentives for Affordable Housing
         Support the use of density bonuses and other incentives, such as fee
         deferrals/waivers and parking reductions, to offset the costs of affordable
         housing while ensuring that potential impacts are addressed.
         Policy 4.2 Flexible Development Standards
         Provide flexibility in development standards to accommodate new models and
         approaches to providing housing, such as transit-oriented development, mixed
         use, co-housing and live/work housing.
         Policy 4.3 Development Review
         Explore continued improvements to the entitlement process to streamline and
         coordinate the processing of development permits, design review and
         environmental clearance. Provide for priority and expedited treatment in
         planning processing for affordable housing.
         Policy 4.4 Zoning for Special Needs
         Revise the Zoning Ordinance to define and establish parameters for transitional
         and supportive housing, emergency shelters, and single room occupancy uses
         (SROs) consistent with State law.
2014-2021 Housing Element                     PAGE 7
EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES AND SPECIAL NEEDS
GOAL 5.0
Promote equal housing opportunities for all residents, including Monrovia's special
needs populations, so that residents can reside in the housing of their choice.
         Policy 5.1 Fair Housing
         Seek to ensure that individuals and families pursuing housing in Monrovia do not
         experience discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, marital status,
         disability, age, sex, familial status, national origin, sexual preference, source of
         income or other arbitrary factors, consistent with the Fair Housing Act.
         Policy 5.2 Housing Options for Seniors
         Support development and maintenance of affordable senior rental and
         ownership housing and supportive services to facilitate maximum independence
         and the ability of seniors to remain in their homes and/or in the community.
         Policy 5.3 Housing for Persons with Disabilities
         Address the special housing needs of persons with disabilities through provision of
         supportive housing, homeowner accessibility grants, zoning for group housing,
         and reasonable accommodation procedures.
         Policy 5.4 Homeless Housing and Services
         Work cooperatively with the San Gabriel Valley COG and other applicable
         agencies to provide a continuum of care for the homeless, including emergency
         shelter, transitional housing, supportive housing and permanent affordable
         housing.
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
GOAL 6.0
Promote a healthy and sustainable Monrovia through support of existing and new
housing which minimizes reliance on natural resources and automobile use.
         Policy 6.1 Smart Growth
         Preserve open space, watersheds and environmental habitats, while
         accommodating new growth in compact forms in a manner that de-emphasizes
         the automobile, allowing residents to use their cars less or not at all.
         Policy 6.2 Green Building
         Implement Monrovia’s Green Building Program to ensure new development is
         energy and water efficient, and consider establishing incentives to achieve
         energy efficiencies higher than those required by the Ordinance.
2014-2021 Housing Element                       PAGE 8

         Policy 6.3 Energy Efficiency and Alternative Energy Sources
         Promote modifications to increase energy efficiency and the use of alternative
         energy sources such as solar energy, cogeneration, and non-fossil fuels.
         Policy 6.4 Healthy Community.
         Promote healthy living and physical activity through decisions in the location, site
         planning and design of housing and mixed use development.
         Policy 6.5 Transportation Alternatives and Walkability
         Incorporate transit and other transportation alternatives including walking and
         bicycling into the design of new development, particularly in areas within a half
         mile of designated transit stops.
         Policy 6.6 Jobs/Housing Balance
         Encourage a closer link between housing and jobs in the community, including
         housing opportunities affordable to Monrovia’s modest income workforce.
2014-2021 Housing Element                     PAGE 9

Housing Programs
The goals and policies contained in the Housing Element address Monrovia's identified housing
needs, and are implemented through a series of housing programs primarily offered through the
Community Development Department. Housing programs define the specific actions the City
will undertake to achieve the stated goals and policies, and are organized around the City’s six
housing goals.
The City’s Housing Element programs encompass existing programs; programs revised in
response to the review of program accomplishments; and several new programs added to
address unmet housing needs. The Housing Program Summary Table 1 located at the end of this
section specifies the following for each program: program goal; 2014-2021 objectives; funding
sources; agency responsible for implementation; and time frame.
PRESERVING HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD ASSETS
1. Monrovia Area Partnership (MAP) - Neighborhood Improvement Grants
The Monrovia Area Partnership, formed in 2006, is a comprehensive approach to combating
blight and crime; preserving the existing housing stock; and empowering neighborhoods by
fostering citizen activism, volunteerism and community pride. The program focuses on the areas
within lower-income census tracts that have the highest instances of crime and blight (refer to
Figure 8 in the Housing Element Background Report).
The MAP program offers services ranging from home improvement grants and public
infrastructure upgrades, to chain-link replacement and paint and tool assistance to income
eligible homeowners. Under the former Monrovia Redevelopment Agency, $10,000 grants were
awarded for exterior home improvements, with supplemental grants of $2,500 to remove
deteriorated chain link fences, and $5,000 to remediate hazards such as toxic mold and lead-
based paint.
Grant recipients are required to participate in a Code Education Class, consistent with MAP
goals to effect permanent change and increase quality of life in Monrovia neighborhoods
through partnership and education. Classes are taught by a code enforcement officer in
English and Spanish, and focus on familiarizing residents with common code violations, programs
and resources. Participants are also asked to become a Point of Contact for their neighborhood
and encouraged to participate in a volunteer project in their neighborhood, such as Make a
Difference Day to help clean up neighborhoods by painting houses and removing trash and
debris.
Between 2006-2010, 61 MAP grants were provided to low and moderate income households.
With the elimination of Redevelopment funding, the program was put on hold, but is being re-
initiated in 2013/14 on a more modest scale.
         2014-2021 Objective: Seek to achieve 10 MAP projects annually, for a total of 80 projects
         during the planning period. Advertise the availability of MAP Neighborhood
         Improvement Grants on the City’s website, and through flyers available at City Hall.
2014-2021 Housing Element                      PAGE 10

2. Monrovia Area Partnership (MAP) - Education and Outreach
MAP has become more than a program. It is an innovative philosophy that transcends
departmental barriers and coordinates public/private resources to provide services with
widespread community support. It has become an effective tool for identifying, understanding
and addressing community needs. A key part of MAP's success involves its extensive community
education and outreach, including the MAP Leadership Academy and Annual Neighborhood
Conference.
         The MAP Neighborhood Leadership Academy is a series of seven classes offered on an
         annual basis with the goal of educating, empowering and motivating residents to
         engage in their neighborhoods and community. Classes include:
               MAP, Monrovia & You – The Role of a Leader
               Connecting in the Community
               Local Government
               Public Health & Safety
               Tools and Resources
               Public Speaking & Facilitation Training
               Putting Theory into Practice
         Graduates become part of a network of leaders who are a resource and serve the
         community in various ways through volunteerism, as well as on boards and commissions.
         Quarterly MAP Neighborhood Leader meetings are held each year that serve as
         continuing educational workshops, community updates, and information contributed by
         Neighborhood Leaders.
         The Annual MAP Neighborhood Conference offers a variety of informative workshops,
         with emphasis on education, networking, empowerment and civic engagement. The
         2013 Conference held at Monrovia High School had approximately 250 attendees, and
         included 23 workshops (3 offered in Spanish) and over 30 information booths. Housing-
         related topics addressed at the workshop included:
              Broken Window, Rebuilding Neighborhood Pride: Build and maintain neighborhood
              pride and community satisfaction by learning how to prevent issues even before
              they start and how to intervene when problems do arise.
              Housing Rights Workshop: This workshop explores basic tenant & landlord rights and
              responsibilities such as rent increases, evictions, repairs and more. Additionally, learn
              about Fair Housing and Housing Discrimination Laws.
              When Living Alone is Not Enough: Living alone as a senior can lead to isolation,
              depression and illness. Learn about the many choices and resources available in
              the area to help seniors live longer and healthier.
              Homebuyer Workshop: All you need to know about financing and refinancing your
              home.
         2014-2021 Objective: Continue to foster civic engagement through the annual MAP
         Leadership Academy, and offer ongoing MAP trainings on a quarterly basis. Sponsor an
         annual MAP Neighborhood Conference, including workshops on housing-related issues.
2014-2021 Housing Element                          PAGE 11

3. Code Enforcement/Neighborhood Preservation Program
Monrovia’s Code Enforcement program focuses on bringing substandard housing units into
compliance with City codes, remove or rehabilitate units that pose threats to the health and
safety of its residents, and prevent deterioration of the City’s housing stock. The program
provides for systematic inspections to complaints citywide.
Additionally, the program takes a holistic approach to code enforcement by focusing not only
on problems with individual properties, but also looks at neighborhoods and the community as a
whole. Due to the current workload and staffing levels, cases are generally opened based on
citizen complaints, however, a Code Enforcement Officer may also initiate an investigation.
The program strives to educate the owners about property maintenance as well as to correct
code violations. Property owners are also given information about the City’s available
assistance programs for property rehabilitation. The Code Enforcement Services Section works
closely with the Building and Planning Divisions providing a multi-disciplinary approach to solving
problems.
In addition to the programs listed in the Housing Element, Neighborhood Preservation also
includes the following initiatives that directly improve neighborhoods:
      Operation Clean Sweep includes the Shopping Cart Retrieval Program and removal of
         junk and debris left in the public right-of-way.
      Inoperable Vehicle Abatement Program provides notification to registered owners of
         violations and eventual abatement if not corrected.
      Community Pride & Resource Program (CPR) serves as a bridge between at-risk
         seniors/families by the identification of needs and the appropriate resources.
      Neighborhood Strategy Team (NST) involves the Police, Public Works, and the Community
         Development Departments to indentify and target blocks in the City that need
         improvements, ensuring that existing housing stock is maintained.
      Code Education Program (CoEd) allows staff to blanket targeted areas with code
         education flyers and offer classes to address blight and nuisance trends. This proactive
         program allows residents to correct issues before the City has to send a Notice of
         Violation. CoEd programs are offered in English and Spanish.
         2014-2021 Objective: Continue to provide a multi-faceted Code Enforcement program
         to improve substandard housing and preserve the quality of Monrovia's older residential
         neighborhoods. Inform households with code violations of available rehabilitation
         assistance to correct code deficiencies.
4. CDBG Handyworker Grant Program
This program offers $7,500 grants to lower income owner-occupied households to complete
minor home improvements, addressing code violations and eliminating substandard housing.
The City is constrained in the number of Handyworker grants it is able to provide, but will
continue to offer the program as long as CDBG funds are available. The program is marketed
through MAP and CoEd Programs.
         2014-2021 Objective: Seek to provide 4 Handworker grants annually, for assistance to
         32 lower income households during the planning period.       Market the program through
         MAP and CoEd Programs.
2014-2021 Housing Element                          PAGE 12

5. Make a Difference Day
The Volunteer Center and City of Monrovia assist low-income households in need with home
repairs and maintenance by coordinating volunteers who provide free labor and donated
materials. Typically, one project each year can be classified as rehabilitation. This program is
oriented to a special needs segment of the population (especially seniors and people with
disabilities) that is often not reached by conventional programs.
         2014-2021 Objective: Continue to coordinate with the Volunteer Center in sponsoring
         Make A Difference Day every October. Identify qualifying properties through Code
         Enforcement efforts.
6. Multi-family Design Guidelines
Establishing a clear set of design guidelines can improve the overall quality of development,
enhance neighborhood compatibility on small infill sites, and help to facilitate the planning
review process. As a means of providing better up-front direction to the development
community regarding the desired character of multi-family residential development in Monrovia,
the City will develop an illustrative set of Multi-Family Design Guidelines. In addition to building
and site design elements, the Multi-Family Design Guidelines will also integrate
recommendations for sustainable site planning and green building design to minimize reliance
on natural resources and encourage alternative modes of transportation. The establishment of
Multi-Family Design Guidelines, in conjunction with Program 19 to eliminate the current CUP
requirement for small projects, will help to address potential development constraints associated
with the City's multi-family processing procedures.
         2014-2021 Objectives: By the end of 2015, develop and adopt Multi-Family Design
         Guidelines which address development compatibility and promote sustainable site
         design and building practices, and serve to facilitate development review processing.
7. Historic Landmark/Mills Act Contracts
To preserve historic homes, the City of Monrovia assists homeowners in establishing Mills Act
Contracts so that homeowners can receive up to a 70 percent property tax reduction. This tax
break allows homeowners to invest more in the restoration and preservation of the home. There
are presently 128 locally designated landmarks and 118 Mills Act contracts in the City, with
approximately 30% of contracts in lower income Census Tracts.
Property owners of Historic Landmarks are also eligible for other incentives including reduction in
building permit fees, use of the state Historical Building Code, and relief from certain
development standards in the Zoning Ordinance. Additionally, the City has adopted incentives
to encourage the retention of older structures that contribute to the character of Monrovia’s
neighborhoods. Since many older homes tend to be smaller in size, they also tend to be more
affordable. This is especially true for rental properties. These incentives are primarily targeted to
underutilized multi-family zoned properties to encourage additional units to be constructed
while maintaining period homes.
         2014-2021 Objective: Continue to administer and market the Mills Act Program:
          Inform property owners of potentially eligible properties at the counter.
          Update handouts every two years.
          Conduct annual outreach meetings with the local preservation group (MOHPG).
          Continue to use City website for distribution of materials and education.
2014-2021 Housing Element                         PAGE 13

8. Adaptive Reuse
The conversion and reuse of outdated buildings can provide the opportunity for new residential
uses within a community. As a housing strategy, adaptive reuse can introduce housing into non-
residential areas, restore buildings to a useful purpose, and provide live/work space at a
reasonable cost. Monrovia encourages the adaptive reuse of historic structures, allowing uses
not otherwise allowed through the base zone as well as allowing for increased residential
densities.
         2014-2021 Objective: Utilize adaptive reuse as a tool to expand housing opportunities
         and enhance the economic usefulness of outmoded buildings.
9. Preservation of Affordable (At-Risk) Housing Units
Monrovia contains two projects, totaling 37 rent restricted units, considered at-risk of conversion
to market rate during the 2013-2023 period. Affordability in these projects is tied to annual
Section 8 contract renewals by HUD – Mayflower Arms (28 units) and 525 E Walnut Avenue (9
units). As presented in the Housing Element Needs Assessment, preservation of these projects
through transfer of ownership to a non-profit or provision of rent subsidies is more cost effective
than replacing affordable units through new construction. The following are strategies the City
will undertake to preserve its 37 units of at-risk rental housing:
        Monitor At-Risk Units: Contact property owners within at least one year of the
         affordability expiration date to discuss the City's desire to preserve as affordable housing.
        Economic Analyses: Where property owners express an interest in preservation, conduct
         an economic analyses to determine the present-value cost of buying-down rents.
        Explore Funding Sources/Program Options: As necessary, contract with the California
         Housing Partnership Corporation to explore outside funding sources and program options
         for preservation.
        Negotiate with Property Owners: Present options to owners for a one-time rent buy-
         down, rehabilitation assistance and/or mortgage refinance in exchange for long-term
         use restrictions.
        Tenant Education: Property owners are required to give a twelve-month notice of their
         intent to opt out of low income use restrictions. The City will work with tenants, and as
         necessary contact specialists like the California Housing Partnership to provide education
         regarding tenant rights and conversion procedures.
         2014-2021 Objective: Contact property owners of at-risk projects to initiate preservation
         discussions. Based on the outcome of these discussions, the City will: 1) identify
         preservation incentives; 2) work with priority purchasers; and 3) coordinate technical
         assistance and education to affected tenants. While the City no longer has local funds
         for preservation, outside financial resources may include HOME, CDBG, and State
         preservation funds to incentivize owners to maintain affordable rents, or in the case of
         transfer of ownership to a non-profit, assistance in property acquisition and rehabilitation.
ENSURING HOUSING DIVERSITY
10.      Land Use Element and Sites Inventory
Monrovia updated its Land Use and Circulation Elements in 2008, substantially increasing
allowable densities and encouraging mixed-use development in areas that previously did not
permit residential use. The residential sites analysis demonstrates the availability for development
2014-2021 Housing Element                           PAGE 14

of approximately 3,100 units during the 2014-2021 Housing Element time frame, including over
2,800 medium- and high-density (30+ du/acre) mixed use units.
This residential development potential is more than adequate to address the City’s share of
regional housing needs, identified as 389 new dwelling units. As part of this Housing Element
update, City staff updated the parcel-specific vacant and underutilized sites inventory that will
continue to be used to assist developers in the identification of potential sites.
In order to encourage the assembly of smaller existing parcels into larger sites that can be more
efficiently developed as a mixed-use project, the City will continue to consider the provision of
incentives, including parking reductions, increased parcel coverage, reduction in open space
requirements, fast-track processing, and City participation in infrastructure.
          2014-2021 Objective: Continue to provide appropriate land use designations to address
          Monrovia's share of regional housing needs, and provide incentives for consolidation of
          smaller parcels for development. Maintain an inventory of potential residential and
          mixed-use sites to provide to developers in conjunction with information on available
          development incentives for development of affordable units.
11. Station Square Transit Village
The 80 acre Station Square Transit Village provides significant additional capacity for high density
residential and mixed use development surrounding the new Metro Gold Line Station. Monrovia's
General Plan identifies the opportunity for a true transit-oriented, high-density development in
this area, with renovation of the historic Santa Fe depot to "serve as the centerpiece of a transit
center surrounded by a mix of retail, office, residential, hotel, and open space uses." The
planned multi-modal transit facility will provide linkages to amenities within Monrovia as well as
surrounding communities.
The Station Square Transit Village Planned Development area (PD-Station Square Transit Village)
has been purposely designed to allow maximum flexibility in the intensity and location of
development in response to market conditions. The Transit Village provides for a range of
housing types, with a minimum of 1,400 units up to 3,600 units within the PD area, and no density
cap on individual parcels. Units can be built as stand-alone product or as part of a horizontally
or vertically integrated mixed-use development above non-residential uses. In addition to the
flexibility afforded by the PD guidelines, both in development standards and entitlements, the
City is in the process of constructing substantial public infrastructure improvements, investing $25
million in streets, sidewalks and utilities. Combined with the opening of the Gold Line station in
2016, these components will serve as a significant stimulus to development.
          2014-2021 Objective: Continue to provide zoning and development standards to
          facilitate residential and mixed-use development within the Station Square Transit
          Village, including incentives for the inclusion of affordable units (refer to Program 14).
          Finalize planning entitlements for the first residential development project in 2014, and
          complete public infrastructure improvements in 2016.
12. Second Units
A second unit, or "granny flat", is an attached or detached dwelling unit which provides
complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons on the same parcel as the
primary single-family dwelling. Second units offer several benefits. First, they typically rent for less
than apartments of comparable size, and can offer affordable rental options for seniors, college
students and single persons. Second, the primary homeowner receives supplementary income
2014-2021 Housing Element                         PAGE 15

by renting out their second unit, which can help many modest income and elderly homeowners
remain in or afford their homes.
Pursuant to current State law, Monrovia provides for second units through a ministerial, non-
discretionary process. Chapter 17.44.160 of the Municipal Code permits attached and
detached second units in Monrovia's single and multi-family residential zones, subject to the
development standards of the underlying zone. One additional off-street garage parking space
is required for the second unit.
While Monrovia continues to process second unit applications, with 13 permits issued during the
last 2006-2013 RHNA planning period, the level of activity has been fairly modest. Considering
the benefits second units can offer an aging population in particular, the City will undertake the
following actions to encourage and facilitate the provision of second units:
        Re-evaluate current second unit standards, including requirement for garage parking,
         prohibition of exterior stairs for attached second units, and restrictions on second unit
         above a detached garage. Consider allowance for reduced setbacks and deviations
         from other standards through an administrative remedy process.
        Develop an educational brochure on second units, and discuss with development
         applicants opportunities to integrate second units in project design.
         2014-2021 Objective: By the end of 2015, re-evaluate the City’s current second unit
         standards and amend the Zoning Code to better facilitate the provision of second units
         for seniors, caregivers, and other modest income households. Develop an educational
         brochure and make information available on the City’s website, at the City Hall public
         counter, and at the Community Center. Encourage residential developers to integrate
         into project design as a form of multi-generational housing.
13. Lot Consolidation Incentives
Monrovia's multi-family neighborhoods are characterized by small lots, generally less than 10,000
square feet in size. Small parcels result in some level of difficulty in achieving housing
developments of a sufficient scale to render the inclusion of affordable housing units feasible,
including access to State and Federal affordable housing resources. The potential consolidation
of adjacent suitable sites, without increasing existing residential densities, would provide the
opportunity to create more viable affordable housing developments.
As shown in the Housing Element Sites Analysis, many of the individual commercially-zoned
parcels identified as suitable for residential and mixed use development are located adjacent
to each other, and a handful share the same ownership. These parcels have potential for
assembly into larger sites, enhancing the feasibility of achieving affordable units based on
economies of scale, advantages in design, and in some cases, the ability to achieve an
increase in the number of units.
As a means of facilitating the consolidation of parcels located within a quarter-mile of transit,
the City will offer the following incentives:
      Guide property owners through the lot consolidation application process, and waive the
         fee for this particular entitlement.
      Assist property owners in identifying and applying for financial resources for projects
         which incorporate affordable units.
      Utilize the proposed Multi-Family Design Guidelines as a means to identify other tools to
         encourage lot consolidation where appropriate and consistent with the immediate
         neighborhood.
2014-2021 Housing Element                         PAGE 16

Any proposed project on consolidated sites would still need to undergo all other required review
procedures, including the appropriate level of environmental review. As part of the City’s new
Multi-Family Design Guidelines, the City will establish a set of criteria to ensure that site
consolidation does not result in developments that are out of scale with the immediate
neighborhood.
         2014-2021 Objective: Adopt lot consolidation incentives by the end of 2015 and
         establish Multi-Family Design Guidelines to ensure compatibility of development.
PROVIDING HOUSING AFFORDABLE TO MONROVIANS
14. Affordable Housing Development Assistance
The City can play an important role in facilitating the provision of quality, affordable and mixed-
income housing in the community through provision of regulatory incentives, land write-downs,
and direct financial assistance. The following are among the types of incentives the City can
offer:
              Reduction or deferral of development fees;
              Flexible development standards and parking reductions;
              Density bonuses;
              City support in affordable housing funding applications; and
              Financial and land write-down assistance, as available, through the former MRA
               Housing Asset Fund or General Funds.
As a means of specifically encouraging the provision of housing affordable to extremely low
income (ELI - <30% AMI) households, the City will waive 100% of Planning Department
entitlement application processing fees for projects with a minimum ten percent ELI units, or not
less than one unit.
Within one year of Element adoption, the City will develop an Affordable Housing Brochure and
downloadable web page handout which describes the various resources and incentives
available to support affordable housing in the community; the Brochure will be updated on at
least a biennial basis. In order to specifically encourage and facilitate the development of
higher density, affordable housing within the Station Square Transit Village Planned
Development, the City will amend the PD to identify specific development standard incentives
for affordable units, including but not limited to reduced parking and unit sizes.
         2014-2021 Objective: Provide regulatory incentives and available financial assistance for
         the development of affordable and mixed-income housing, with particular
         consideration to projects that include ELI units. Provide information on incentives during
         individual dealings with property owners, and through creation and dissemination of an
         Affordable Housing brochure. By the end of 2014, update the Code to specify the
         waiver of 100% of application processing fees for projects with a minimum 10% ELI units.
         Amend PD12 (Station Square) in 2014 to establish specific development incentives for the
         inclusion of affordable units.
2014-2021 Housing Element                        PAGE 17

15. Homeownership Assistance
As a participating city in Los Angeles County’s CDBG Urban County program, first-time
homebuyers in Monrovia have access to several homebuyer assistance programs offered
through the Los Angeles County Community Development Commission (CDC). These include:
        Homeownership Assistance Program (HOP). This program offers deferred payment, 0%
         interest loans (up to $60,000) for downpayment and/or closing cost assistance for low
         income (80% AMI) first-time homebuyers. The HOP Program is available for existing, new
         construction, approved short sales and real estate owned (REO) properties. Monrovia is a
         participating jurisdiction in the HOP program, and has for-sale housing stock which falls
         within the sales price maximums. This program can be used in conjunction with the
         Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC), or the Southern California Home Financing Authority
         (SCHFA) Program. Borrowers must complete an 8-hour homebuyer education seminar
         from an approved HUD counseling agency.
        Southern California Home Financing Authority (SCHFA) Mortgage Revenue Bond Program.
         SCHFA is a joint powers authority between Los Angeles and Orange Counties to create
         first-time homebuyer programs for low- to moderate-income households. The single-
         family mortgage revenue bond program offered by SCHFA provides 30 year, below-
         market fixed rate mortgage loans and a grant for downpayment and closing costs
         assistance. Eligibility includes maximum household incomes of approximately $100,000,
         and sales price limits of approximately $670,000. While the LA CDC administers the
         program, applicants work directly with participating lenders.
        Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC). The MCC program provides an annual federal
         income tax credit of up to 15 percent of the mortgage interest paid for first-time
         homebuyers. The program helps first-time homebuyers qualify for a loan by allowing the
         lender to reduce the housing expense ratio by the amount of the tax savings.
In addition to these programs offered directly to qualifying first-time homebuyers, the City has
access to several competitive grant programs offered through the State Department of Housing
and Community Development (HCD) it can use for homebuyer assistance, including the BEGIN
(Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods) and CalHome programs.
         2014-2021 Objective: Develop a first-time homebuyer brochure identifying programs
         available through the County and State, and contact information for participating
         lenders. Apply to the State for homebuyer assistance in conjunction with any future City
         assisted workforce housing development.
16. Section 8 Rental Assistance
This program provides rental subsidies to very low income households, including families, seniors
and the disabled. The Section 8 program offers a voucher that pays the difference between the
current fair market rent (FMR) as established by HUD and what a tenant can afford to pay (i.e.
30% of household income). The voucher allows a tenant to choose housing that costs above
the payment standard, providing the tenant pays the extra cost. This program assists extremely
low and very low income households. Monrovia participates in the Section 8 Program through a
cooperative agreement with the Baldwin Park Housing Authority (BPHA) to administer Monrovia’s
Section 8 Program. Neighborhood Services staff is trained to provide information and provide
referrals to BPHA.
         2014-2021 Objective: Continue to participate in the Section 8 program administered by
         BPHA. Provide information and a link on the City's website, and refer eligible residents to
         the BPHA.
2014-2021 Housing Element                        PAGE 18

REMOVING GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
17. Zoning Text Amendments for Special Needs Housing
As part of the Governmental Constraints analysis for the Housing Element update and pursuant
to requirements under SB 2 (Government Code sections 65582, 65583 and 65589.5), several
revisions to the Monrovia Zoning Code have been identified as appropriate to better facilitate
the provision of a variety of housing types for special needs populations. These Code revisions
include:
     Creating a “community care facility” use category and definition; list community care
         facilities with 6 or fewer occupants as permitted in all residential zone districts and care
         facilities with 7 or more occupants as conditionally permitted in multi-family zone districts.
     Adding a definition of “family” that accommodates different household types and
         unrelated persons living together.
     Adding transitional housing and supportive housing to the Zoning Ordinance’s definition
         section which shall be considered a residential use of property and shall be subject only
         to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same
         zone.
     Adding single room occupancy (SRO) facilities within the Zoning Ordinance’s definition
         section, and conditionally allow within specified commercial zoning districts;
     Identify emergency shelters as a by-right, permitted use in the M (Manufacturing) zone
         district subject to the same development and management standards as other uses
         permitted in the M zone. Develop written, objective standards to regulate the following,
         as permitted under SB 2:
               The maximum number of beds or persons permitted to be served nightly;
               Off-street parking;
               The size and location of exterior/interior onsite waiting and client intake areas;
               The provision of onsite management;
               The proximity of other emergency shelters;
               The length of stay;
               Lighting;
               Security during hours that the emergency shelter is in operation.
         2014-2021 Objective: Amend the Zoning Ordinance by January 2014 to comply with
         State requirements under SB 2. Complete other identified Zoning Code amendments for
         special needs housing in calendar year 2014.
18. Update Residential Parking Standards and Minimum Unit Sizes
While Monrovia's development standards are aimed at ensuring the quality of development,
certain standards may have the effect of constraining the provision of certain housing types. For
example, the City’s minimum unit size and parking requirements may serve as a disincentive to
the construction of smaller units for Monrovia's workforce. While the Development Review
Committee can approve modifications to these standards on a case-by-case basis, and the
City has used to specific plan process to approve two recent projects with reduced parking and
unit sizes, this process should be made more effective by adopting appropriate refinements to
these standards and codifying in the Zoning Ordinance. The City will undertake a review and
update of its minimum unit sizes and parking standards, including evaluation of the following to
enhance parking efficiencies and sustainability:
          Reduced parking requirements for studio and one bedroom units;
          Reduced parking requirements in proximity to transit;
          Inclusion of bicycle parking requirements in parking standards; and
          Establishment of shared parking guidelines for mixed-use projects.
2014-2021 Housing Element                         PAGE 19

         Program Objectives: By the end of 2014, evaluate and establish modified unit size
         thresholds and parking standards in the Zoning Ordinance to facilitate specific types of
         housing such as:
              Studio and one bedroom units
              Multi-family and mixed use developments within commercial areas
              Housing in proximity to transit (1/4 mile)
19. Infill and Affordable Housing Incentives in Multi-Family Zones
As a means of better facilitating the multi-family infill envisioned under the General Plan within
areas designated High Density Residential, while at the same time incentivizing the provision of
affordable units, the City will amend its RH (Residential High Density) zone to allow for residential
by-right (without a CUP) in exchange for the incorporation of affordable units.                More
specifically, rental projects which provide a minimum of 25 percent lower income affordable
units, and ownership projects which provide a minimum of 25 percent moderate income
affordable units, will be entitled through the site plan and design review process. Small infill
projects (fewer than 10 units) will be permitted by-right without the affordability requirement.
         2014-2021 Objective: Initiate text amendments to the RH zoning designation to eliminate
         the CUP requirement for small multi-family infill projects and projects which incorporate a
         minimum of 25 percent affordable units.
20. Density Bonus
Pursuant to current state density bonus law (Gov’t Code section 65915), applicants of residential
projects of five or more units may apply for a density bonus and additional incentive(s) if the
project provides for one of the following:
        10 percent of the total units for lower income households; or
        5 percent of the total units for very low income households; or
        A senior citizen housing development or mobilehome park that limits residency based on
         age requirements for housing for older persons; or
        10 percent of the total units in a condominium for moderate income households.
The amount of density bonus varies according to the amount by which the percentage of
affordable housing units exceeds the established minimum percentage, but generally ranges
from 20-35 percent above the specified General Plan density. In addition to the density bonus,
eligible projects may receive 1-3 additional development incentives, depending on the
proportion of affordable units and level of income targeting. The following development
incentives may be requested:
        Reduced site development standards or design requirements.
        Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing project.
        Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the City that
         would result in identifiable cost reductions.
In addition to development incentives, applicants are also eligible to utilize the State’s
alternative parking ratio (inclusive of handicapped and guest spaces) of 1 space for 0-1
bedroom units, 2 spaces for 2-3 bedroom units, and 2.5 spaces for 4+ bedrooms.
         2014-2021 Objective: Update the City's density bonus provisions for consistency with
         current State requirements. Provide information on density bonus incentives during
         individual dealings with development applicants, and through creation and
         dissemination of an Affordable Housing brochure.
2014-2021 Housing Element                          PAGE 20

EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES AND SPECIAL NEEDS
21. Fair Housing Program
The Housing Rights Center (HRC) is the designated provider of fair housing and tenant-landlord
information for Monrovia. HRC provides fair housing investigation and coordinates referral
services to assist individuals who may have been the victims of discrimination. Many of the
people who contact HRC have basic questions about landlord and tenant rights and
responsibilities; HRC’s housing counselors provide clients with comprehensive information to help
resolve tenant/landlord issues. HRC conducts extensive fair housing education and outreach
throughout the San Gabriel Valley.
         2014-2021 Objective: Continue to promote fair housing practices, and refer fair housing
         complaints to Housing Rights Center. As a means of furthering fair housing education
         and outreach in the local community, the City will advertise the fair housing program
         through placement of fair housing services brochures at the public counter, at City Hall,
         and on the City’s website. Continue to promote fair housing awareness through the MAP
         program.
22. Reasonable Accommodation
Pursuant to Senate Bill 520, jurisdictions are required to analyze constraints to the development,
maintenance, and improvement of housing for persons with disabilities, including persons with
developmental disabilities, and take measures to remove constraints. As part of this Housing
Element, Monrovia has conducted a review of zoning, building codes, and permit processing
procedures and has not identified any institutional barriers to the provision of accessible housing.
Nonetheless, the City has not yet adopted written procedures for requesting a reasonable
accommodation, and is in the process of doing so to further encourage and facilitate the
provision of housing for persons with disabilities. "Reasonable Accommodation Procedures for
Disabled Persons" will be added to the Municipal Code to provide a mechanism through which
the City can grant reasonable adjustments to its zoning and land use regulations to provide
disabled persons equal opportunities to use and enjoy housing.
         2014-2021 Objective: Adopt and implement a reasonable accommodation procedure;
         inform and educate the public on the availability of the reasonable accommodation
         procedure through the dissemination of information on the City’s website and at the
         Community Development Department’s public counter.
23. Housing Opportunities for Persons Living with Disabilities
The San Gabriel Valley/Pomona Regional Center (SGPRC) is among 21 regional centers
operated by the State Department of Developmental Services to provide services and support
for adults and children with developmental disabilities. The SGPRC currently provides services to
286 developmentally disabled residents within the Monrovia zip code.
The Regional Center reports that 60 percent of their adult clients with developmental disabilities
live with their parents, and as these parents age and become more frail, their adult disabled
children will require alternative housing options. The Regional Center has identified several
community-based housing types appropriate for persons living with a developmental disability,
including: licensed community care facilities and group homes; supervised apartment settings
with support services; and for persons able to live more independently, rent subsidized,
affordable housing. The City will coordinate with the SGPRC to implement an outreach program
informing Monrovia families of housing and services available for persons with developmental
disabilities, including making information available on the City’s website.
2014-2021 Housing Element                        PAGE 21

Monrovia supports the provision of housing for its disabled population, including persons with
developmental disabilities, through several means, including:
               By-right zoning for licensed community care facilities (6 or fewer residents) in all
                residential zones, and provisions for larger care facilities (7 or more residents) in all
                multi-family residential zones, subject to a conditional use permit.
               Treatment of supportive and transitional housing as a residential use of property,
                subject only to those restrictions and processing requirements that apply to other
                residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
               Procedures for an individual with a disability to request a reasonable
                accommodation from zoning and building standards.
               Programs to facilitate affordable housing, including Density Bonuses and Affordable
                Housing Development Assistance.
         2014-2021 Objective: Continue to support a variety of housing types to help address the
         diverse needs of persons living with disabilities, and work with the SGPRC to publicize
         information on available resources for housing and services. Evaluate the use of State
         and Federal funds available for supportive housing and services in future affordable
         housing developments.
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
24. Sustainable Development and Green Programs
                                                 In 2007, the Monrovia Green Team was created to
                                                 develop an environmental policy to guide the City in
                                                 taking actions to improve or reduce negative
                                                 impacts on the environment.         The City Council
                                                 adopted the Monrovia Environmental Accords which
                                                 consist of 21 action items. One of the projects that
resulted from the Accords is the creation of the Green Building Program, which is being
implemented through adoption of the California Green Building Code within Monrovia's
Municipal Code.
Additionally, the City completed the Energy Action Plan (EAP) through a partnership with the
San Gabriel Valley Council of Governments, which includes strategies for reducing residential
energy consumption (i.e., education, energy efficiency improvements, etc.). Monrovia has
hosted multiple events to educate residents on energy efficiency, including a Sustainability Expo
which offered workshops pertaining to green building, energy efficiency and solar power, and
the annual MAP conference which includes a booth and conference sessions promoting
sustainability programs for residents.
The City recently became a participating jurisdiction in the California Home Energy Renovation
Opportunity (HERO) financing program. HERO allows property owners to fund small renewable
energy or energy efficiency improvements through a Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE)
program and repay the loans as an item on the owner's property tax bill.
         2014-2021 Objective: Provide outreach and education to developers, architects and
         residents on green building and ways to incorporate sustainability in project design and
         existing structures. Advertise the availability of the HERO program to residents.
2014-2021 Housing Element                           PAGE 22

                                        Table 1: Housing Program Summary
Program              Program Goal         2014-2021             Funding    Responsible  Time Frame
                                          Objectives            Source     Entity
Preserving Housing and Neighborhood Assets
1. MAP               Provide financial Seek to achieve 10       Housing    Community    2014-2021
Neighborhood         assistance for       MAP projects          Bond       Development
Improvement          home repairs to      annually. Advertise   Revenues   Department -
Grants               low and              MAP Grants on the                Neighborhood
                     moderate             City’s website, and              Services
                     income               through flyers at                Section
                     households.          City Hall.
2. MAP               Foster civic         Conduct annual        Housing    Community    Leadership
Education and        engagement to        Leadership            Bond       Development  Academy and
Outreach             enhance the          Academy, and          Revenues,  Department - MAP
                     overall quality of quarterly MAP           General    Neighborhood Conference -
                     life in Monrovia.    trainings. Sponsor    Fund       Services     annually. MAP
                                          annual MAP                       Section      trainings -
                                          Conference.                                   quarterly.
3. Code              Ensure the           Continue to bring     CDBG       Community    2014-2021
Enforcement/         properties           properties into                  Development
Neighborhood         remain in            compliance;                      Department -
Preservation         compliance with provide information                   Code
                     City codes.          on available                     Enforcement,
                                          rehabilitation                   Neighborhood
                                          assistance.                      Services
                                                                           Sections
4. CDBG              Provide financial    Seek to achieve 4     CDBG       Community    2014-2021
Handyworker          assistance for       handyworker grants               Development
Grants               home repairs to      annually. Market                 Department -
                     lower income         program through                  Neighborhood
                     households.          MAP and CoEd                     Services
                                          programs.                        Section
5. Make a            Assist special       Continue to           Volunteer  Volunteer    Annually in
Difference Day       needs                coordinate with       Center,    Center,      October
                     populations in       Volunteer Center      Donations  Community
                     home                 on annual project.    from local Development
                     rehabilitation       Identify properties   businesses Department -
                     needs.               through code                     Code
                                          enforcement.                     Enforcement
                                                                           Section
6. Multi-family      Ensure future        Develop design        General    Community    Develop
Design               development          guidelines which      Fund       Development  guidelines in
Guidelines           projects remain      address                          Department - 2015.
                     compatible with      compatibility and                Planning
                     character and        sustainable site                 Division
                     setting of           design and building
                     Monrovia.            practices.
7. Historic          Preserve and         Continue to           General    Community    2014-2021
Landmark/Mills       maintain historic    administer and        Fund       Development
Act Contracts        buildings in         market the Mills Act             Department -
                     Monrovia.            Program.                         Planning
                                                                           Division
8. Adaptive          Restore the          Utilize adaptive      General    Community    2014-2021
Reuse                economic             reuse as a toll to    Fund       Development
                     usefulness of        expand housing                   Department -
                     historic buildings.  opportunities.                   Planning
                                                                           Division
2014-2021 Housing Element                              PAGE 23

                                        Table 1: Housing Program Summary
Program              Program Goal         2014-2021              Funding    Responsible  Time Frame
                                          Objectives             Source     Entity
9. Preservation      Maintain             Monitor at-risk        Section 8; Community    Contact at-risk
of Affordable        affordable           properties; as         HOME;      Development  property
(At-Risk) Rental     housing rental       necessary, pursue      and other  Department   owners within
Housing              stock.               alternative funding    State and               one year of
                                          for rent subsidies     Federal                 potential
                                          and provide tenant     funds                   expiration.
                                          education.
Ensuring Housing Diversity
10. Land Use         Provide sufficient   Maintain current       General    Community    2014-2021
Element and          sites for housing    inventory of sites,    Fund       Development
Sites Inventory      to meet RHNA         and provide to                    Department -
                     for all income       developers along                  Planning
                     levels.              with information on               Division
                                          incentives.
11. Station          Provide              Facilitate residential Former     Community    Entitle the first
Square Transit       expanded sites       and mixed use          RDA        Development  residential
Village              for mixed use        development in the     Housing    Department - project in
                     and high density     Station Square         Asset      Planning     2014, and
                     residential          Transit Village,       Fund;      Division     complete
                     development          including incentives   other                   infrastructure
                     near transit.        for the inclusion of   outside                 improvements
                                          affordable units.      sources                 in 2016.
12. Second Units     Provide              Re-evaluate City's     General    Community    Review/revise
                     expanded             second unit            Fund       Development  standards in
                     housing options      standards and                     Department - 2015.
                     for modest           revise as                         Planning
                     income               appropriate.                      Division
                     households,          Develop and
                     including seniors,   disseminate
                     caregivers, and      educational
                     students.            information on
                                          second units.
13. Lot              Facilitate           Develop and adopt      General    Community    Adopt
Consolidation        residential infill   lot consolidation      Fund       Development  incentives in
Incentives           on small parcels.    incentives                        Department - 2015.
                                                                            Planning
                                                                            Division
Providing Housing Affordable to Monrovians
14. Affordable       Facilitate           Provide regulatory     Former     Community    In 2014,
Housing              development of       and financial          RDA        Development  complete the
Development          affordable           incentives for         Housing    Department - Affordable
Assistance           housing by           affordable housing,    Asset      Planning     Housing
                     providing            and develop            Fund,      Division     Brochure;
                     incentives for       Affordable Housing     General                 amend the
                     developers.          brochure. Waive        Funds;                  Code for ELI
                                          Planning Dept.         other                   units; and
                                          application fees for   outside                 amend PD12
                                          projects with min      sources.                with incentives
                                          10% ELI units. units.                          for affordable
                                          Incentivize                                    units. Update
                                          affordable units in                            Brochure at
                                          Station Square.                                least
                                                                                         biennially.
2014-2021 Housing Element                               PAGE 24
                                          Table 1: Housing Program Summary
Program              Program Goal           2014-2021               Funding   Responsible  Time Frame
                                            Objectives              Source    Entity
15. Homebuyer        Assist first-time      Develop brochure        General   Community    Develop and
Assistance           homebuyers in          identifying             Fund;     Development  disseminate
                     Monrovia               available               State and Department;  brochures in
                                            homebuyer               County    LA County    2014. Apply to
                                            programs. Apply to funds          CDC; State   State as
                                            State in conjunction              HCD          workforce
                                            with future City                               projects are
                                            assisted workforce                             proposed.
                                            housing.
16. Section 8        Provide                Continue to offer       HUD       Community    Add
Rental               assistance to          tenants information     Section 8 Development  information to
Assistance           very low income regarding Section 8, funds               Department;  City website in
                     households             including providing               LA County    2014.
                     through Section        a link on the city's              CDC
                     8 Rental               website.
                     Assistance.
Remove Governmental Constraints
17. Zoning Text      Maintain                Adopt zoning text      General   Community    Adopt SB 2
Amendments for consistency with             amendments to           Fund      Development  related
Special Needs        State law by           specify provisions                Department - amendments
Housing              adopting               for a variety of                  Planning     by Jan 2014,
                     provisions for a       special needs                     Division     with the
                     variety of special housing, including                                 balance of
                     needs housing.         requirements under                             code
                                            SB 2.                                          amendments
                                                                                           by the end of
                                                                                           2014.
18. Update           Address parking        Evaluate and            General   Community    By end of
Residential          and unit size          establish modified      Fund      Development  2014.
Parking              constraints to         unit size thresholds              Department -
Standards and        multi-family           and parking                       Planning
Unit Sizes           development.           standards in the                  Division
                                            Zoning Ordinance
                                            to facilitate specific
                                            types of housing.
19. Affordable       Facilitate small       Amend the RH zone       General   Community    Amend the
Housing and          multi-family infill,   to eliminate CUP        Fund      Development  Code in 2015.
Infill Incentives    including mixed        requirements for                  Department -
in Multi-Zones       income projects,       infill projects with              Planning
                     within areas           <10 units, and                    Division
                     designated High        projects with min.
                     Density under          25% affordable
                     the General            units.
                     Plan.
20. Density          Provide density        Update Monrovia's       General   Community    By the end of
Bonus                bonus and other        density bonus           Fund      Development  2014.
                     incentives for         ordinance.                        Department -
                     the production         Incorporate within                Planning
                     of affordable          Affordable Housing                Division
                     housing.               brochure, and
                                            disseminate to
                                            development
                                            community.
2014-2021 Housing Element                                   PAGE 25
                                       Table 1: Housing Program Summary
Program              Program Goal        2014-2021             Funding   Responsible    Time Frame
                                         Objectives            Source    Entity
Equal Housing Opportunities and Special Needs
21. Fair Housing      Promote fair       Refer fair housing    General   Community      2014-2021
Program               housing            complaints to the     Fund      Development
                      practices and      Housing Rights                  Department;
                      prevent housing Center.                            Los Angeles
                      discrimination.    Disseminate fair                County CDC;
                                         housing information.            Housing Rights
                                                                         Center;
22. Reasonable        Facilitate the     Adopt and             General   Community      Adopt
Accommodation         development        implement             Fund      Development    procedures in
                      and                reasonable                      Department -   early 2014.
                      improvement of     accommodation                   Planning
                      housing for        procedures;                     Division
                      persons with       disseminate
                      disabilities.      information on the
                                         City's website and
                                         at the public
                                         counter.
23. Housing           Support a          Coordinate with       Low       Community      Publicize
Opportunities for     range of           SGPRC to publicize    Income    Development    resources in
Persons Living        housing options    info on resources for Housing   Department -   2014. Pursue
with Disabilities     for persons with   housing and           Tax       Planning and   funding in
                      developmental      services. Pursue      Credits;  Neighborhood   conjunction
                      disabilities.      State and Federal     other     Services       with
                                         funds available for   State and Divisions      affordable
                                         supportive housing    Federal                  projects.
                                         and services in       funds.
                                         future affordable
                                         housing projects.
Environmental Sustainability
24. Sustainable      Encourage           Provide outreach      General   Community      Begin
Development          energy and          and education to      Fund      Development    advertising
and Green            natural resource    developers and                  Department     HERO program
Programs             conservation        residents on green                             in 2014.
                     and reduce          building and ways
                     greenhouse          to incorporate
                     gases.              sustainability in
                                         project design and
                                         existing structures.
                                         Advertise the
                                         availability of HERO
                                         program to
                                         residents.
2014-2021 Housing Element                              PAGE 26
Summary of Quantified Objectives
The following Table 2 summarizes Monrovia's quantified objectives for the 2014-2021 Housing
Element planning period. The objectives include the City's new construction objectives to meet
its 2014-2021 RHNA; rehabilitation objectives to be implemented through MAP and Handyworker
grants; and conservation objectives to preserve assisted rental housing at-risk of conversion to
market rates.
                                  Table 2: Quantified Objectives 2014-2021
             Income Groups             New Construction        Rehabilitation         Conservation
       Extremely Low                           50                     --                   --
       Very Low                                51                     28                   29
       Low                                     61                     56                   --
       Moderate                                65                     28                   --
       Above Moderate                         162                     --                   --
       TOTAL                                  389                    112                   29
       New Construction: Goal reflects 2014-2021RHNA. Of Monrovia's allocation for 101 very low
       income units, half is allocated to extremely low and half to very low income households.
       Rehabilitation: Goal reflects 10 MAP grants and 4 CDBG Handyworker grants annually, for a
       total of 112 grants over the 8 year planning period. The income distribution is based on an
       estimated 25% of grants benefitting very low income households, 50% benefitting low income
       households, and 25% benefitting households earning moderate incomes.
       Conservation: Goal reflects continued renewal and preservation of existing Section 8 contracts
       in Mayflower Arms and at 525 E. Walnut.
2014-2021 Housing Element                             PAGE 27
            APPENDIX A
HOUSING ELEMENT BACKGROUND REPORT
                                    APPENDIX A:
                   HOUSING ELEMENT BACKGROUND REPORT
                                   Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION TO BACKGROUND REPORT                                         A-1
I. HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT                                               A-2
         A. Population Characteristics                                    A-4
         B. Household Characteristics                                     A-6
         C. Employment Characteristics                                    A-15
         D. Persons With Special Needs                                    A-17
         E. Existing Housing Stock                                        A- 25
         F. Housing Costs And Affordability                               A- 32
         G. Affordable Housing Inventory                                  A-38
         H. Regional Housing Needs                                        A-41
II. HOUSING RESOURCES                                                     A-43
         A. Sites to Accommodate the 2006-2014 RHNA                       A-43
         B. Sites to Accommodate the 2014-2021 RHNA                       A-47
         C. Financial Resources                                           A-54
         D. Administrative Resources                                      A-58
         E. Opportunities for Energy Conservation                         A-59
III. POTENTIAL HOUSING CONSTRAINTS                                        A-62
         A. Governmental Constraints                                      A-62
         B. Non-Governmental Constraints                                  A-78
IV. EVALUATION OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS UNDER EXISTING HOUSING ELEMENT          A-81
BACKGROUND REPORT ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Sites Inventory
Attachment 2 - Monrovia Environmental Accords
Attachment 3 - Planned Development Zones That Permit Residential
                                                                   Housing Element
Appendix A                               A-i                     Background Report
                                                    List of Tables
TABLE                                                                                                                           PAGE
HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
1       Monrovia Population Growth ................................................................................A-4
2       Population Trends - Regional .................................................................................A-4
3       SCAG Population Projections ................................................................................A-4
4       Age Distribution........................................................................................................A-5
5       Racial and Ethnic Composition .............................................................................A-5
6       Household Characteristics .....................................................................................A-6
7       State Income Categories .......................................................................................A-8
8       Household Income Distribution ..............................................................................A-8
9       Poverty Status .........................................................................................................A-10
10      LA County Wages for Select Occupations .......................................................A-11
11      Overcrowded Households ...................................................................................A-12
12      Housing Overpayment..........................................................................................A-14
13      SCAG Employment Projections ...........................................................................A-15
14      Primary Jobs by Industry Sector ...........................................................................A-15
15      Commuting Patterns .............................................................................................A-16
16      Special Needs Populations ..................................................................................A-17
17      Developmentally Disabled Residents Served by Regional Center ................A-21
18      LAHSA Homeless Count ........................................................................................A-23
19      Housing Units by Type............................................................................................A-25
20      Housing Tenure.......................................................................................................A-26
21      Vacancy Rate........................................................................................................A-26
22      Age of Housing Stock ............................................................................................A-28
23      Median Value/Rent...............................................................................................A-32
24      Single-Family Homes and Condominium Sales 2012 ........................................A-32
25      Home and Condominium Sales Prices 2012/2013 ............................................A-33
26      Monrovia Rent Survey ...........................................................................................A-35
27      LA County Maximum Affordable Housing Cost ................................................A-36
28      Maximum Affordable Rents .................................................................................A-37
29      Inventory of Assisted Rental Housing ..................................................................A-38
30      Regional Housing Needs Assessment ................................................................A-41
HOUSING RESOURCES
31      Unaccommodated Housing Need Analysis ......................................................A-44
32      Residential Unit Built and Occupied ...................................................................A-45
33      Residential Projects with Entitlements .................................................................A-48
34      Vacant and Underutilized Sites Inventory ..........................................................A-49
35      Comparison of Regional Growth Need and Residential Sites ........................A-52
36      Financial Resources Available for Housing Activities........................................A-55
HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
37      General Plan Residential Land Use Designations..............................................A-62
38      Residential Development Standards ..................................................................A-64
                                                                                                                         Housing Element
Appendix A                                                  A-ii                                                     Background Report
39      Housing Types by Residential Zone Category ...................................................A-66
40      Approval Timelines ................................................................................................A-72
41      Planning/Entitlement Fees ....................................................................................A-73
42      Development Fees ................................................................................................A-74
43      Summary of Development Fees – Prototypical Project ...................................A-75
44      Status of Home Purchase Loans ..........................................................................A-79
EVALUATION OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS
45      Review of Accomplishments ...............................................................................A-82
46      Summary of Quantified Objectives ....................................................................A-87
                                              List of Figures
FIGURE                                                                                                                     PAGE
1       Census Block Groups...............................................................................................A-3
2       Households with Children .......................................................................................A-7
3       Low Income Census Tracts .....................................................................................A-9
4       Renter Overcrowding ...........................................................................................A-13
5       Senior Homeowners Living Alone ........................................................................A-19
6       Renter Households .................................................................................................A-27
7       Age of Housing Stock ............................................................................................A-29
8       MAP Neighborhoods .............................................................................................A-31
                                                                                                                    Housing Element
Appendix A                                             A-iii                                                    Background Report

INTRODUCTION TO BACKGROUND REPORT
The City of Monrovia 2014-2021 Housing Element consists of two components: 1) the
Housing Element document; and 2) the Housing Element Background Report.
    The Housing Element document presents Monrovia's Housing Plan for the 2014-
        2021 planning period - its goals, policies and implementation programs relative
        to the maintenance, preservation, improvement and development of housing
        for all economic segments of the community.
    The Housing Element Background Report includes all the detailed background
        information and analysis required under State Housing Element law, and provides
        the foundation for development of Monrovia's eight year Housing Plan.
Monrovia's Housing Element Background Report includes the following four chapters:
              1.  Housing Needs Assessment
              2.  Housing Resources
              3.  Potential Housing Constraints
              4.  Evaluation of Accomplishments under Existing Housing Element
In preparing the Housing Element Background Report, and the Housing Needs
Assessment in particular, data is compiled from a variety of sources. The following
identifies the primary sources of information utilized, with the specific source referenced
beneath each data table in the Report.
    Demographic and housing data is derived from the 2010 Census, American
        Community Survey, and the Southern California Association of Governments’
        (SCAG) Existing Housing Needs Statement;
    SCAG’s 2008-2035 Regional Transportation Plan/ Sustainable Communities
        Strategy Growth Forecast provides population and employment projections;
    Household income data by type of household is derived from                            the
        Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) prepared by HUD;
    2012/2013 housing market information is obtained through internet rent surveys,
        and DataQuick sales transactions;
    SCAG’s 2014-2021 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) provides
        information on projected housing needs; and
    Lending patterns for home purchase and home improvement loans are provided
        through the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) database.
                                                                                Housing Element
Appendix A                                  A-1                               Background Report

I.      HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The Housing Needs Assessment serves as the foundation for Monrovia’s Housing
Element. Its purpose is to provide a comprehensive assessment of the community’s
existing housing needs, and to evaluate household and demographic trends impacting
those needs. The results of the Needs Assessment will provide direct input into creation
of an effective housing strategy for Monrovia’s Housing Element update.
The Monrovia Housing Needs Assessment is comprised of the following sections, as
required under State Housing Element law:
                A. Population Characteristics
                B. Household Characteristics
                C. Employment Characteristics
                D. Persons with Special Needs
                E. Existing Housing Stock
                F. Housing costs and Affordability
                G. Affordable Housing Inventory
                H. Future Housing Needs (RHNA)
Much of the demographic and household data in the Needs Assessment is derived
from the 2010 US Census and the 2007-2011 American Community Survey, and the
Southern California Association of Governments’ (SCAG) Existing Needs Statement.
Current housing market data is compiled from a variety of sources, including DataQuick
sales transactions and internet rental listings. The City provided information on the
inventory of affordable housing in Monrovia, and the California Housing Partnership
Corporation assisted in evaluating assisted units at risk of conversion to market rates.
Finally, the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) provided future
projections of population, employment and regional housing needs.
A variety of housing needs maps are provided based on census tract data; Figure 1
depicts the 2010 census block group boundaries for Monrovia.
                                                                            Housing Element
Appendix A                                 A-2                            Background Report

   Figure 1.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City of Monrovia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2010 CENSUS BLOCK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GROUPS
                                                      Angeles                    N ati onal                  F or est
                                                                                                                                                                   4303012
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Angeles         N ati onal     F or est
                                             4303013
                                                                                                                                           4303014
                                                                 4303011
                                                                            VD
                                                                          BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DUARTE
                                                                     T
                                                            R   ES
                                                  HI    LLC
                                                                     4303023
                                                                                                           4303022
                                                                                                                                                                                       BRADBURY
                                                                                                                        S HAMR OCK AVE
                                   4303025
                4303021
                                                                                       MYRTLE AVE
                                                                                                    FOOTH IL L BLV D
         5TH
                     4310014             4310011                           4310013                          4310012
         AV E
                                                                                                                                          4310022
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Monrovia City Limit
                                         MAYFLOW ER
                                                                                                                        Recre ation
                                                                                                                          Park
§
¦
¨210                                                                                                                                                                                                           4310012       Census Block Group
               4309013
                                         AVE                                4311003                                                            4310021
                                                                                                      HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                           HUNTING TO N DR                              Rancho Duarte
                              4309012 4309011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Golf Cour se
                                                                                       MYRTLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                               DUARTE
                                                                4311004                                            4311001                      MOUN TAIN
                 4309021
                                                                                                                                                AVE
                                                                                            4311002                                                                          DUARTE            RD
                      TE RD
               DUAR
                                               4313002                                                                  4312001                                                                                                                §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               210
                                                                         4311005
                                           MAYFLOW ER
          5TH
          AV E
                                                                                                S. Monrovia
                                           AVE
                                                                                                Island CDP                                                                                          §
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¨605
                                                                                   MYRTLE AVE
                EL CAM INO REA L AV E
   ARCADIA                                                                                                                                                  IRWINDALE                                           Santa Fe Flood Control Basin
                               4314001                                                                 4312004
                                                                                                                                               DR
                                                                                                                                         OAK
                              Mayflower                                                                                L IV E
                               Village
                                                                                                                                                                                                    AR
                                                                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                                                 ver
                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                                                                                               rie
                                                                                                                                                                                                      W
                DR
         OAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                         H
  L IV E
                                                                                                                                                                         ab                                W
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Y
                                                      4314003
                                                                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ARROW   H WY
                                                                                                                                                                        Sa
  North
El Monte
   CDP
                                        K R
                                            D                                                                                                                                                                    BALDWIN PARK
                                   PEC
Source: 2010 Census                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sources: USGS, ESRI,    TANA, AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DIVERSA CONSU LTING 090213

A. Population Characteristics
Population Trends
Monrovia is a built-out community                 Table 1: Monrovia Population Growth 1980-2013
and has not experienced significant                                                  Numerical        Percent
                                                   Year           Population          Change         Change
population growth since the 1980s,
                                                   1980              31,291
a decade during which the City
grew by 14.3 percent and added                     1990              35,761             4,470          14.3%
nearly 4,500 new residents. During                 2000              36,929             1,168           3.3%
the 1990s, Monrovia’s population                   2010              36,590             -339           -0.9%
increased by 3.3 percent, followed                 2013              36,943              353            1.0%
by a 0.9 percent drop in population Source: 1980- 2010 Census; 2013 Dept of Finance Report E-1
during the 2000s.              The State
Department of Finance estimates the City’s 2013 population at 36,943, offsetting the loss
of the prior decade and bringing Monrovia’s population back up to 2000 levels.
Table 2 compares population growth trends in Monrovia with the region as measured
under the past three decennial censuses. As indicated, Monrovia has been growing at
a slower rate than the surrounding Upper San Gabriel Valley subregion, which in turn is
experiencing far more limited population growth than Los Angeles County as a whole.
                            Table 2: Regional Population Trends 1990-2010
                                                                         Change                 Change
 Jurisdiction               1990          2000          2010           (1990-2000)            (2000-2010)
                                                                   Number      Percent    Number      Percent
 Los Angeles County      8,863,164     9,519,338     9,818,605     812,601       8.5%     299,267      3.1%
 Upper San Gabriel
                          299,775       320,969       323,899       21,194       6.6%      2,930       0.9%
 Valley CCD *
 Monrovia                  35,761        36,929        35,590        1,168       3.3%       -339       -0.9%
 Source: 1990, 2000, and 2010 Census
 * Arcadia, Bradbury, Duarte, El Monte, Monrovia, Sierra Madre, South El Monte, and adjacent Co. islands
In terms of future growth trends, the
                                                           Table 3: SCAG Population Projections
Southern California Association of
Governments (SCAG) forecasts that                                         2008          2020           2035
Monrovia’s population growth will                Monrovia                36,300        37,700         39,400
continue to be well below the County                 % change                           3.9%           4.5%
as a whole. By the year 2035,
                                                 LA County             9,778,000     10,404,000    11,353,000
Monrovia’s population is projected to
                                                     % change                           6.4%           9.1%
grow to 39,400, a modest increase in
                                                 Source: SCAG 2012-2035 Regional Transportation Plan/
approximately 3,000 residents above
                                                 Sustainable Communities Strategy
2008 levels.
                                                                                                Housing Element
Appendix A                                         A-4                                       Background Report

Age of Population
Table 4 displays the City’s age distribution in 1990 and 2010, and compares this with the
County. The most significant change in Monrovia’s age profile occurred in the young
adult (25-44 years) and middle age (45-64 years) groups. The proportion and number of
young adults declined significantly over the past two decades, from 37 to 29 percent
and dropping by nearly 2,500 residents. Conversely, the City’s middle age population
increased by over 4,400 residents and now comprises 28 percent of the population.
Factors contributing to this shift in the age structure include an aging in place of young
adults into the middle age bracket, and the limited number of new young adults and
families moving into the community due in part to high housing costs. The aging of
Monrovia’s population is borne out by an increase in the median age from 31.0 years in
1990 to 37.9 years in 2010, well above the County’s median age of 34.8 years.
                                   Table 4: Age Distribution 1990-2010
                                                 1990                              2010
              Age Group                 Persons        Percent    Persons       Percent    LA County %
   Preschool (< 5 years)                  3,183           9%        2,374          7%           7%
   School Age (5-17 years)                5,972           17%       6,140          17%         17%
   College Age (18-24 years)              3,934           11%       3,084          8%          11%
   Young Adults (25-44 years)            13,231           37%      10,733          29%         30%
   Middle Age (45-64 years)               5,579           15%      10,018          28%         24%
   Early Seniors (65-74 years)            2,125           6%        2,256          6%           6%
   Mature Seniors (75+ years)             1,737           5%        1,985          5%           5%
   TOTAL                                 35,761          100%      36,590         100%        100%
              Median Age                      31.0 years                37.9 years          34.8 years
   Source: 1990, 2010 Census
Race and Ethnicity
Monrovia’s population has continued to diversify over the past 20 years, becoming
more similar to the County as a whole. Most notably is the increase in the Hispanic
population (28% to 38%) and a decrease of the non-Hispanic White population (57% to
41%). Monrovia’s increase in residents (from 4% to 11%) identifying as Asian/Pacific
Islander is consistent the growing Asian population throughout the San Gabriel Valley.
                            Table 5: Racial and Ethnic Composition 1990-2010
                                             Monrovia                   Los Angeles County
        Racial/Ethnic Group
                                      1990              2010            1990            2010
    Non-Hispanic White                57%               41%             41%             28%
    Hispanic                          28%               38%             38%             48%
    African American                  10%                6%             10%              8%
    Asian/Pacific Islander             4%               11%             10%             14%
    American Indian                   <1%               <1%             <1%             <1%
    Other Race                        <1%                3%             <1%              2%
    Source: 1990, 2010 Census
                                                                                           Housing Element
Appendix A                                          A-5                                 Background Report

B. Household Characteristics
Household type, size and income level are all factors that affect the type of housing
needed by residents. This section discusses the various household characteristics that
affect housing needs in Monrovia.
Household Type
The Census defines a household as all persons living in a housing unit as their usual
place of residence. Families are a subset of households. They include persons living
together who are related by blood, marriage, or adoption. A single person living alone
is also a household. “Other” households are unrelated people residing in the same
dwelling unit. Group quarters, such as dormitories or convalescent homes are not
considered households.
As illustrated in Table 6, the 2010 Census documents that Monrovia was home to 13,762
households, an increase of over 500 households since 1990. The City had an average
household size of 2.65 persons and an average family size of 3.24 persons, reflecting a
slight shift from 1990 levels. The City’s average household size is slightly less than the Los
Angeles County average household size of 2.98.
Families continue to comprise the majority of the households in Monrovia, and have
remained relatively similar in proportion from 66 to 67 percent over the past two
decades, just slightly lower than the 68 percent families Countywide. Families without
children evidenced the largest change, comprising of 37 percent of households in 2010
compared to 34 percent in 1990, an increase of over 400 families without children. In
contrast, single person households remained steady at 26 percent of households over
the two decades. The decline in families with children, combined with the decline in
young adults and increasing middle age and senior populations, suggests that
Monrovia’s households are aging in place.
Figure 2 on the following page depicts the location of households with children in
Monrovia, and illustrates the greatest concentrations (35-44%) are generally located in
the neighborhoods south of Colorado Blvd. surrounding the central core of the City.
                            Table 6: Household Characteristics 1990-2010
                                           1990                            2010
   Household Type                                                                      LA County
                                 Households      Percent    Households     Percent
                                                                                           %
   Families                          8,753         66%          9,146        67%          68%
       With children                 4,277        (32%)         4,181       (30%)        (33%)
       With no children              4,502        (34%)         4,965       (37%)        (35%)
   Singles                           3,416         26%          3,649        26%          24%
   Other non-families                1,073          8%           967          7%           8%
   Total Households                 13,242        100%         13,762       100%         100%
   Average Household Size                  2.68                       2.65                2.98
   Average Family Size                     3.23                       3.24                3.58
    Source: 1990, 2010 Census
                                                                                     Housing Element
Appendix A                                      A-6                                Background Report

   Figure 2.                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City of Monrovia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HOUSEHOLDS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WITH CHILDREN
                                                                                                     VD
                                                                                                   BL
                                                                                                                      MYRTLE AVE
                                                                                               T
                                                                                          ES
                                                                                 L   CR
                                                                             HIL
                                                            MAYFLOW ER                                                                                                                                                          BRADBURY
                                                            AVE
                                                                                                                                                     FOOTH IL L BLV D
                   FOOTH IL L BLV D
                                                                                                                                                                          S HAMR OCK AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MOUN TAIN
                                                                                                          Lib ra ry
        5TH                                                                                                Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AVE
        AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                           Recre ation
                                                                                                                                                                                             Park
                                        Olive Aven ue
                                            Park
 §
 ¦
 ¨210
                                      HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                                          S HAMR OCK AVE
                                                                                                                          MYRTLE AVE                                                                     MOUN TAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Duarte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DUARTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sports P ark
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¨  210
                                                                                                                                       DUARTE   RD
                        TE RD
                 DUAR
                                                                MAYFLOW ER
          5TH
          AV E                                                  AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PERCENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HOUSEHOLDS
                                                                                                                                                                               AV E                                    WITH CHILDREN
                                                                                                                                                                         TA IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            None
                                                                                                                                         S. Monrovia
                                                                                                                                         Island CDP
                                                                                                                                                                        UN                                                  0.1 - 24.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25.0 - 29.9
                                                                                                                  MYRTLE AVE
                   EL CAM INO REA L AV E                                                                                                                                MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30.0 - 34.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35.0 - 43.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IRWINDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Citywide = 30.0%
  ARCADIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L IV E
                                        Mayflower
                                         Village
                                                                                                                                          NOTE: "None" reflects block groups having no households with
                                                                                                                                          children, as well as block groups having an insufficient or unknown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¨  605
                                                                                                                                          number of such households to accurately calculate a percentage.
                                                              DR
                                                      OAK
                                             L IV E
Source: 2010 Census, Table P19.                                                                                                                                                                                                               DIVERSA CONSU LTING 091013 lR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ab
                                                                               4314003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sa

Household Income
The State and Federal government classify household income into several groupings
based upon the relationship to the County (area) median income (AMI), adjusted for
household size. The State of California utilizes the income groups presented in Table 7,
and are used throughout the Housing Element.
                                   Table 7: State Income Categories
                                % County Area                 2013 L.A. County Income Limits
     Income Category            Median Income          1 person          2 person        3 person
                                     (AMI)            household         household       household
     Extremely Low                0-30% AMI            $17,950           $20,500         $23,050
     Very Low                     0-50% AMI            $29.900           $34,200         $38,450
     Low                         51-80% AMI            $47,850           $54,650         $61,500
     Moderate                    81-120% AMI           $54,450           $62,200         $70,000
     Above Moderate               120%+ AMI           >$54,450          >$62,200        >$70,000
     Source: California Dept of Housing and Community Development, 2013 Income Limits.
Table 8 presents the distribution of household income in Monrovia by income category.
At 50 percent, above-moderate income households (>120% AMI) comprise the majority
of households in the City. In contrast, over 4,500 households in Monrovia earn lower
incomes (<80% AMI). While relatively limited in number (10% of households), extremely
low-income (ELI) households (<30% AMI) have significant housing needs. According to
Census Data compiled by HUD, 23 percent of the City’s ELI households are homeowners
(322 households), with 51 percent of these ELI homeowners spending more than half
their income towards housing, placing them at risk of being unable to maintain, or
potentially losing their homes. Among the City’s estimated 1,057 ELI renter households,
two-thirds spend more than half their incomes on rent.
                             Table 8: Household Income Distribution 2010
                   Income Level                     Households            Percent (%)
                   Extremely Low Income                 1,379                 10%
                   Very Low Income                      1,429                 10%
                   Low Income                           1,750                 13%
                   Moderate Income                      2,410                 17%
                   Above Moderate Income                6,899                 50%
                   TOTAL                               13,867                100%
                   Source: SCAG Existing Housing Needs Statement, July 2011
The federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) defines an area of
low income concentration as a census tract or block group where 51 percent or more
of the residents earn 80 percent or less of the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) area
median income (AMI). Figure 3 depicts HUD-designated low income census block
groups in Monrovia, also referred to as “CDBG qualified areas”.
                                                                                             Housing Element
Appendix A                                        A-8                                    Background Report

   Figure 3.                                                                                                                                                                                                        City of Monrovia
                                                                                                                                                                                                              LOW INCOME CENSUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                BLOCK GROUPS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (<80% AMI)
                                                                                                     VD
                                                                                                   BL
                                                                                                               MYRTLE AVE
                                                                                               T
                                                                                          ES
                                                                                 L   CR
                                                                             HIL
                                                            MAYFLOW ER                                                                                                                                                   BRADBURY
                                                            AVE
                                                                                                                                              FOOTH IL L BLV D
                   FOOTH IL L BLV D
        5TH
                          4310014                               4310011                                   4310013                             4310012
        AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                    Recre ation
                                                                                                                                                                                      Park
                                        Olive Aven ue
                                            Park
 §
 ¦
 ¨210
                                                                                                                                                                   S HAMR OCK AVE
                                      HUNTING TO N DR            4309011
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                   MYRTLE AVE                                                                     MOUN TAIN                                                             DUARTE
                                                                                                                                                           4311001                                                                                   Duarte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sports P ark
                                                                                                                                                                                                  AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¨  210
                                                                                                                                4311002
                                                                                                                                DUARTE   RD
                        TE RD
                 DUAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Low Income Area
                                                                MAYFLOW ER                                                                                                                                                 (<80% AMI)
          5TH
          AV E                                                  AVE
                                                                                                                                                                      AV E
                                                                                                                                                                  TA IN
                                                                                                                                  S. Monrovia                    UN
                                                                                                                                  Island CDP
                                                                                                            MYRTLE AVE
                   EL CAM INO REA L AV E                                                                                                                         MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                               IRWINDALE
  ARCADIA                                                                                                  4312004
                                                                             4314001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L IV E
                                        Mayflower
                                         Village
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¨  605
                                                              DR
                                                      OAK
                                             L IV E
Source: HUD Low and Moderate Income Summary Data.                                                                                                                                                                                      DIVERSA CONSU LTING 091113 lR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ab
                                                                               4314003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sa

Poverty
The poverty level is an income level below which a person or household is officially
considered to lack adequate subsistence and to be living in poverty. The federal
government publishes national poverty thresholds that define the minimum income
level necessary to obtain the necessities of life. For example, the 2012 U.S. poverty
threshold for a family of four was $23,050. As indicated in Table 9, the level of poverty in
Monrovia has declined significantly between 2000 and 2010 for all groups evaluated,
and to a greater extent than the decline in poverty Countywide. For example, 9.6
percent of individuals in Monrovia were living in poverty in 2010, compared to 13.1
percent in 2000. As a group, female-headed households with children are most
impacted by poverty, with 21.7 percent of this group living in poverty in Monrovia, and
35.8 percent Countywide.
                                   Table 9: Poverty Status 2000-2010
                                                 2000                          2010
                                                             LA                             LA
                                      Persons/                       Persons/
     Groups in Poverty                          Percent    County             Percent     County
                                      Families                       Families
                                                              %                              %
     Individuals                       4,797      13.1%     17.9%     3,497     9.6%       16.3%
       Children (under 18)             1,842      18.6%     24.6%      994     11.7%       23.1%
     Families                           886        9.7%     14.4%      665      7.3%       13.0%
       Female-Headed w/ Children        439       31.0%     37.0%      245     21.7%       35.8%
    Source: 2000 Census; 2007-2011 American Community Survey
Workforce Income levels
Many of the workers who make up Monrovia’s workforce earn modest incomes, making
it challenging to afford to live in the City. Table 10 presents a sampling of occupations
in Los Angeles County that fall within very-low, low and moderate-income thresholds
(based on a single worker household). The analysis of housing costs and affordability
presented later in this section compares current market rents and sales prices in
Monrovia with the amount that households of different income levels can afford to pay
for housing. This analysis illustrates that very low-income occupations, such as retail
sales workers, nursing aides, and preschool teachers and teacher assistants cannot
afford market rents in Monrovia. While rent levels are within the level affordable to
moderate and even most low-income occupations, the current availability of rental
units in Monrovia is limited.
                                                                                      Housing Element
Appendix A                                       A-10                               Background Report

                    Table 10: Los Angeles County Wages for Select Occupations 2012
                                                                                      Max. Monthly
Very Low Income                                           Hourly         Annual
                                                                                       Affordable
(< $33,750 - 2 person household)                           Wage         Income
                                                                                      Housing Cost
Waiters/Waitresses                                        $10.41        $21,645            $541
Child Care Workers                                        $12.11        $25,187            $630
Retail Salespersons                                       $12.66        $26,335            $658
Nursing Aides, Orderlies, and Attendants                  $12.88        $26,808            $670
Security Guards                                           $13.24        $27,541            $689
Hairdressers and Cosmetologists                           $13.39        $27,849            $696
Teacher Assistants                                            --        $30,229            $756
Emergency Medical Technicians and Paramedics              $14.77        $30,732            $768
Preschool Teachers                                        $15.26         31,736            $793
                                                                                      Max. Monthly
Low Income                                                Hourly         Annual
                                                                                       Affordable
($33,750 -$54,000 - 2 person household)                    Wage         Income
                                                                                      Housing Cost
Transit Bus Drivers                                       $18.66        $38,811            $970
Bookkeeping, Accounting. and Auditing Clerks              $19.42        $40,378           $1,009
Tax Preparers                                             $20.53        $42,704           $1,067
Retail Sales Manager                                      $21.98        $45,714           $1,142
Real Estate Sales Agent                                   $22.32        $46,422           $1,161
Licensed Practical and Vocational Nurses                  $24.22        $50,390           $1,260
Executive Secretaries and Administrative Assistants       $25.38        $52,798           $1,320
Child, Family, and School Social Workers                  $25.80        $53,677           $1,342
Carpenters                                                $25.97        $54,021           $1,350
                                                                                      Max. Monthly
Moderate Income                                           Hourly         Annual
                                                                                       Affordable
($54,000 - $62,200 - 2 person household)                   Wage         Income
                                                                                      Housing Cost
Food Service Managers                                     $24.59        $51,148           $1,279
Architectural and Civil Drafters                          $26.32        $54,733           $1,368
Computer Support Specialists                              $26.38        $54,859           $1,371
Postal Mail Carriers                                      $26.51        $55,156           $1,379
Insurance Appraisers                                      $26.62        $55,377           $1,384
Paralegals and Legal Assistants                           $28.99        $60,312           $1,508
Graphic Designers                                         $29.04        $60,404           $1,510
Source: 2012 California Occupational Employment Statistics – L A County; 2012 State HCD Income Limits.
Income categories based on two-person household with single wage earner.
Max affordable housing cost based on 30% of income.
                                                                                          Housing Element
Appendix A                                          A-11                               Background Report

Household Overcrowding
Overcrowding typically results when either the cost of available housing with a sufficient
number of bedrooms for larger families exceeds the family's ability to afford such
housing, or unrelated individuals (such as students or low-wage single adult workers)
share dwelling units due to high housing costs. This can lead to overcrowding if the
housing unit is not large enough to accommodate all of the people effectively. In
general, overcrowding is a measure of the ability of existing housing to adequately
accommodate residents and can result in deterioration of the quality of life within a
community.
The Census defines an overcrowded housing unit as one occupied by more than 1.01
persons per room (excluding kitchens, porches, and hallways). A unit with more than
1.51 occupants per room is considered severely overcrowded.
Table 11 shows the incidence of overcrowding in Monrovia and Los Angeles County by
tenure, as measured by the 2007-2011 American Community Survey. As indicated, 6.4
percent of all households in Monrovia were living in overcrowded conditions, well
below the incidence of overcrowding Countywide where overcrowding impacts 12
percent of households. While the City’s renter households were more likely to
experience overcrowded living conditions than owner households (9.4% for renters vs.
3.2% for owners), the level of renter overcrowding has declined over the past decade,
from 13.8 percent in 2000 to 9.4 percent in 2010.
                            Table 11: Overcrowded Households 2010
                      Overcrowding              Households      Percent L.A. Co. %
            Owners
            Overcrowding                             214          3.2%     6.1%
              Severe Overcrowding                     29          <1%      1.5%
            Renters
            Overcrowding                             645          9.4%    17.4%
               Severe Overcrowding                   132          1.9%     8.0%
            Total Overcrowding                       859          6.4%    12.0%
           Source: 2007-2011American Community Survey
           Note: Severe overcrowding is a subset of overcrowding.
While household overcrowding is a relatively minor issue in Monrovia, certain
neighborhoods do evidence greater concentrations of overcrowded households.
Figure 4 depicts renter overcrowding by census block group. The highest incidence of
renter overcrowding (42%) occurs in the neighborhood east of Shamrock Ave, north of
Royal Oaks Dr and south of Foothill Blvd. (though it should be noted that just 1/4 of the
households in this area are renters). Three additional areas evidence renter
overcrowding of 20 percent: the adjacent neighborhood west of Shamrock and north
of Colorado (also a designated Low Income census tract); the residential
neighborhoods west of California and east of downtown (encompassing two MAP
neighborhoods and a designated low income tract); and the area south of the 210
freeway and west of Alamitas Avenue.
                                                                                   Housing Element
Appendix A                                     A-12                             Background Report

   Figure 4.                                                                                                                                                                                                              City of Monrovia
                                                                                                                                                                                                           RENTER OVERCROWDING
                                                                                                     VD
                                                                                                   BL
                                                                                                                      MYRTLE AVE
                                                                                               T
                                                                                          ES
                                                                                 L   CR
                                                                             HIL
                                                            MAYFLOW ER                                                                                                                                                            BRADBURY
                                                            AVE
                                                                                                                                                       FOOTH IL L BLV D
                   FOOTH IL L BLV D
                                                                                                                                                                            S HAMR OCK AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MOUN TAIN
                                                                                                          Lib ra ry
        5TH                                                                                                Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                           AVE
        AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                             Recre ation
                                                                                                                                                                                               Park
                                        Olive Aven ue
                                            Park
 §
 ¦
 ¨210
                                      HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                                            S HAMR OCK AVE
                                                                                                                          MYRTLE AVE                                                                       MOUN TAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Duarte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DUARTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sports P ark
                                                                                                                                                                                                           AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¨  210
                                                                                                                                         DUARTE   RD
                        TE RD
                 DUAR
                                                                MAYFLOW ER
          5TH
          AV E                                                  AVE                                                                                                                                                     PERCENT RENTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OVERCROWDING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              None
                                                                                                                                                                                 AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.1 - 5.4
                                                                                                                                                                           TA IN
                                                                                                                                             S. Monrovia                  UN
                                                                                                                                             Island CDP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5.5 - 12.9
                                                                                                                  MYRTLE AVE
                   EL CAM INO REA L AV E                                                                                                                                  MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13.0 - 22.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   22.5 - 41.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IRWINDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Citywide = 9.4%
  ARCADIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L IV E
                                        Mayflower
                                         Village
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¨  605
                                                                                                                                       NOTE: "None" reflects block groups having no renters living in
                                                                                                                                       overcrowded conditions, as well as block groups having an
                                                      OAK
                                                              DR                                                                       insufficient or unknown number of such households to accurately
                                             L IV E                                                                                    calculate a percentage.
Source: 2007-2011 American Community Survey, Table B25014.                                                                                                                                                                                      DIVERSA CONSU LTING 090513 lR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ab
                                                                               4314003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sa

Household Overpayment
A standard measure of determining housing affordability is that housing expenses
(including utilities) should not exceed 30 percent of a household’s income. Households
that exceed 30 percent are considered to be overpaying. Severe overpaying occurs
when households pay more than 50 percent of their gross income for housing. A lack of
affordable housing opportunities often results in households overpaying for housing.
Table 12 shows the incidence of overpayment in Monrovia.
                               Table12: Housing Overpayment 2010
                        Overpayment                  Households   Percent  L.A. Co. %
            Owners
            Overpayment                                 2,863       41%       45%
            (>30% income on housing)
              Severe Overpayment                        1,083       16%       22%
                (>50% income on housing)
            Lower Income Households Overpaying           748        60%       65%
            Renters
            Overpayment                                 3,282       48%       56%
            (>30% income on housing)
               Severe Overpayment                       1,872       27%       29%
                (>50% income on housing)
            Lower Income Households Overpaying          2,306       68%       67%
            Total Overpayment                           6,145      44%        49%
            Source: 2005-2009 American Community Survey. Lower income overpayment
            derived from HUD CHAS.
            Note: Severe overpayment is a subset of overpayment.
According to the 2005-2007 American Community Survey, 48 percent of renters in
Monrovia were spending more than 30 percent of their income on housing, with 27
percent spending more than half their income. This level of renter overpayment
represents an increase from 2000 when 40 percent of Monrovia renters experienced
overpayment, and 17 percent experienced severe overpayment. Similarly, the level of
renter overpayment increased significantly in Los Angeles County over the past
decade, and at 56 percent exceeds that in Monrovia. In terms of overpayment among
lower income households (<80% AMI), 2,306 lower income renter households and 748
lower income owners were faced with overpayment in Monrovia. The impact of
housing overpayment on Monrovia’s lower income households is significant, with the
community’s special needs populations – seniors, persons with disabilities, and female-
headed households with children - most vulnerable to losing their housing due to an
inability to pay.
                                                                                    Housing Element
Appendix A                                      A-14                             Background Report

C. Employment Characteristics
The Southern California Association of Governments’ (SCAG) Regional Transportation
Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy Growth Forecast estimates there were a total of
17,700 jobs in Monrovia in 2008, and projects a 7.8 percent increase in Monrovia’s
employment over the 2008-2035 period. In contrast, SCAG projects a 10.9 percent
increase in employment Countywide during this same period.
                                 Table 13: SCAG Employment Projections
                                             2008               2020                   2035
         Monrovia                           17,700             18,300                 19,100
                   % change                                     3.4%                   4.4%
         Los Angeles County               4,340,000          4,558,000              4,827,000
                   % change                                     5.0%                   5.9%
         Source: SCAG 2012-2035 Regional Transportation Plan/ Sustainable Communities Strategy
As depicted in Table 14, the Census identifies approximately 17,000 primary jobs in
Monrovia in 20111. Manufacturing is the most dominant employment sector (14.1%),
followed by retail trade (13.2%), administration and support (11.8%), and professional,
scientific and technical services (10%).
                             Table 14: Primary Jobs by Industry Sector 2011
                                                                                          % Total
          Industry Sector                                                    # Jobs
                                                                                           Jobs
          Manufacturing                                                       2,348        14.1%
          Retail Trade                                                        2,179        13.1%
          Administration & Support, Waste Management & Remediation            1,972        11.8%
          Professional, Scientific and Technical Services                     1,662        10.0%
          Health Care and Social Assistance                                   1,381         8.3%
          Accommodation and Food Services                                     1,302         7.8%
          Educational Services                                                1,196         7.2%
          Finance, Insurance and Real Estate                                  1,124         6.7%
          Wholesale Trade                                                      889          5.3%
          Other Services (excluding Public Administration)                     727          4.4%
          Construction                                                         586          3.5%
          Management of Companies and Enterprises                              402          2.4%
          Public Administration                                                288          1.7%
          Transportation and Warehousing and Utilities                         287          1.7%
          Information                                                          272          1.6%
          Arts, Entertainment and Recreation                                    80          0.5%
          TOTAL                                                              16,995        100%
          Source: 2011 Census OnTheMap Application http://onthemap.ces.census.gov/
1 The Census defines a “primary job” as the highest paying job for a worker for the year, but excluding self-
employed or “informally employed” workers.
                                                                                               Housing Element
Appendix A                                           A-15                                   Background Report

Resident Employment and Commuting Patterns
The State Employment Development Department (EDD) identifies 21,100 Monrovia
residents in the civilian labor force in 2013. EDD measured the July unemployment rate
in Monrovia at 9.5 percent, compared to countywide unemployment of 10.8 percent.
The majority of Monrovians in the labor force work elsewhere in Los Angeles County.
Therefore the County’s employment trends have a great impact on the City. While Los
Angeles County has a diverse economy, its composition has changed substantially over
the past several decades and continues to transition. Still one of the largest
manufacturing centers in the United States, since the 1960s, the manufacturing industry
has declined steadily. However, other sectors, such as information, health and
education, and service oriented industries have grown.
In addition to land availability, the lack of higher wage jobs continues to be a concern
for economic development and social considerations for the future of the County.
Some higher paying sectors are projected to grow in the coming years, including
Educational and Health Services, and Professional and Business Services. These sectors
have the potential for higher wages, which can contribute to the overall strengthening
of the economy, although they may require higher educational attainment.
Table 15 documents commuting patterns in Monrovia and Los Angeles County in 1990
and 2010. As indicated, 21 percent of Monrovia residents work within the City,
compared to 39 percent of residents Countywide also working in the city in which they
live. (The County % is skewed by the presence of large cities like Los Angeles and Long
Beach where high proportions of residents are also able to work within their city limits).
It is interesting to note however, that even though that a smaller percentage of
Monrovians also work in the same city in which they reside than countywide, the
median travel time to work is 2½ minutes less than the County as a whole. Average
travel time in Monrovia increased by two minutes between 1990 to 2010.
One of the primary goals of the City is to encourage a greater job balance with
residential including live/work development.
                              Table 15: Commuting Patterns 1990-2010
                                               Monrovia               Los Angeles County
                                          1990          2010         1990            2010
    Residents worked in City              20%           21%          39%             39%
    Residents Worked outside City         80%           79%          62%             61%
    Residents Worked in County            95%           96%          94%             93%
    Residents Worked outside County        5%            4%           6%              7%
    Median Time to Work (minutes)         24.4          26.5         25.8            29.1
    Source: 1990 Census; 2007-2011 American Community Survey
                                                                                   Housing Element
Appendix A                                     A-16                              Background Report

D. Persons with Special Needs
Special housing needs arise due to physical, economic, social, or cultural
characteristics or conditions that are present in a substantial percentage of the local
population. Characteristics such as age, physical limitations and single parenthood are
typically present in a large portion of the special needs population. It is important for
the community to accommodate a variety of housing types to serve such special
needs groups. Affordability issues are also important to groups such as female-headed
households or college students. Therefore, the City needs to evaluate the types of
special needs groups to appropriately address special housing needs.
                              Table 16: Special Needs Populations 2010
     Special Needs Groups                                      Persons    Households     Percent
     Seniors (65+)                                              4,241                      12%
        With a Disability*                                       1,540                    (36%)
     Senior Households                                                        2,744        20%
        Renter                                                                1,087       (40%)
        Owner                                                                 1,657       (60%)
           Senior Homeowners Living Alone                                      585        (35%)
     Persons with Disability*                                   3,313                       9%
     Female-Headed Households                                                 2,073        15%
        with Related Children                                                  950        (46%)
     Large Households                                                         1,647        12%
        Renter                                                                 852        (52%)
        Owner                                                                  795        (48%)
     Total Monrovia Population/Households                       36,590       13,762
     Source: 2010 Census; *2009-2011 American Community Survey
     Note: Numbers in ( ) reflect % of special needs group, and not % of total City population/
     households. For example, of Monrovia’s senior households, 40% are renters and 60% are owners.
Senior Households
Seniors are a significant special needs group in Monrovia, comprising 20 percent of the
community’s households. Senior citizens are considered to have special housing needs
because their fixed incomes, higher health care costs and physical disabilities make it
more difficult to find suitable and affordable housing. Consistent with trends throughout
the nation, this population is expected to continue increasing as the baby boom
generation approaches retirement.
Although often viewed as homogeneous, Monrovia’s senior population is quite diverse.
Among the City’s 2,744 senior households, 60 percent own a home and 40 percent rent
housing. Nearly half of Monrovia’s seniors are 75 years of age and above, a
population, which may require more supportive housing options as they age and
become frailer.
                                                                                         Housing Element
Appendix A                                       A-17                                  Background Report

Some of the more pressing housing needs of Monrovia’s seniors include:
       Rental affordability. Rising rents are a particular concern due to the fact that
        most seniors are on fixed incomes. Of Monrovia’s approximately 1,100 senior
        renter households, half are very low income (<50% AMI). Market rents in Monrovia
        are beyond the level affordable to very low income households, as confirmed by
        the Census, which documents 50 percent of the City’s very low income senior
        renters spending more than half of their incomes on rent.
       Disabilities. The Census identifies 36 percent of Monrovia’s seniors as having one
        or more disabilities, encompassing physical, sensory and mental disabilities, as
        well as conditions that limit the senior’s ability to leave their home. Combined
        with the significant number of older seniors (age 75+), this indicates a large
        segment of the senior population may require various levels of housing support.
       Housing maintenance. Of Monrovia’s approximately 1,700 senior homeowners,
        one-third live alone. As these homeowners age, many may be unable to
        maintain their homes and may benefit from the installation of assistance devices
        to enhance accessibility. Figure 5 depicts the incidence of senior homeowners
        residing alone in Monrovia by census block group, with the greatest
        concentration located in eastern edge of the City north of Huntington Drive,
        which encompasses the City’s two mobile home parks. Several neighborhoods
        located immediately north of Foothill Boulevard also exhibit high numbers of
        single-family homes occupied by an individual senior citizen.
Addressing the diverse housing needs of Monrovia’s senior population will require
strategies that foster independent living (such as home accessibility improvements,
second units, rehabilitation assistance), as well as strategies that encourage the
provision of variety of supportive living environments for seniors of all income levels.
The City and its former Redevelopment Agency have assisted in the development of
two affordable rental housing developments for independent seniors – Regency Court
and Heritage Park. These two projects provide 191 rent-restricted units for very low and
low income seniors.
Another common special need among the senior population is for care facilities that
combine meal, medical, and daily living assistance in a residential environment.
Monrovia currently has four California Department of Social Services licensed elderly
care facilities that provide such supportive services: The Gables (75 person capacity),
Singing Oaks Retirement Community (49 person capacity), Leven Oaks (36 person
capacity), and Golden Paradise Guest Home (6 person capacity). In addition, the
recently completed Royal Oaks/Santa Teresita Assisted Living provides 22 congregate
care apartment units for seniors.
                                                                                 Housing Element
Appendix A                                   A-18                              Background Report

   Figure 5.                                                                                                                                                                                                         City of Monrovia
                                                                                                                                                                                               SENIOR (65+) HOMEOWNERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                     LIVING ALONE
                                                                                                     VD
                                                                                                   BL
                                                                                                                      MYRTLE AVE
                                                                                               T
                                                                                          ES
                                                                                 L   CR
                                                                             HIL
                                                            MAYFLOW ER                                                                                                                                                          BRADBURY
                                                            AVE
                                                                                                                                                     FOOTH IL L BLV D
                   FOOTH IL L BLV D
                                                                                                                                                                          S HAMR OCK AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MOUN TAIN
                                                                                                          Lib ra ry
        5TH                                                                                                Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AVE
        AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                           Recre ation
                                                                                                                                                                                             Park
                                        Olive Aven ue
                                            Park
 §
 ¦
 ¨210
                                      HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                                          S HAMR OCK AVE
                                                                                                                          MYRTLE AVE                                                                     MOUN TAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Duarte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DUARTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sports P ark
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¨  210
                                                                                                                                       DUARTE   RD
                        TE RD
                 DUAR
                                                                MAYFLOW ER
          5TH
          AV E                                                  AVE                                                                                                                                                   PERCENT SENIOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HOMEOWNERS
                                                                                                                                                                               AV E                                     LIVING ALONE
                                                                                                                                                                         TA IN                                               None
                                                                                                                                         S. Monrovia
                                                                                                                                         Island CDP
                                                                                                                                                                        UN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1 - 7.9
                                                                                                                  MYRTLE AVE
                   EL CAM INO REA L AV E                                                                                                                                MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8.0 - 9.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10.0 - 12.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13.0 - 17.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IRWINDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Citywide = 8.6%
  ARCADIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L IV E
                                        Mayflower
                                         Village
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¨  605
                                                                                                          NOTE: "None" reflects block groups having no senior homeowners
                                                              DR                                          living alone, as well as block groups having an insufficient or
                                             L IV E
                                                      OAK                                                 unknown number of such households to accurately calculate a
                                                                                                          percentage.
Source: 2010 Census, Table H18.                                                                                                                                                                                                               DIVERSA CONSU LTING 090513 lR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ab
                                                                               4314003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sa

Female-headed Households
Female-headed households are generally considered to have special needs because
their incomes tend to be lower, making it difficult to obtain affordable housing or
because they have specific physical needs related to housing (such as child care). The
2010 Census reports 2,073 female-headed family households in Monrovia, comprising 15
percent of total households. Approximately half have children under the age of 18; 29
percent of the City’s female-headed households with children have incomes which fall
below the level of poverty. These households need assistance with housing subsidies, as
well as accessible and affordable child care.
Persons with Disabilities
A disability is generally defined as a long lasting condition that impairs an individual’s
mobility, ability to work, or ability to care for themselves. Persons with disabilities include
those with physical, mental, or emotional disabilities. Disabled persons have special
housing needs because of their fixed income, shortage of affordable and accessible
housing, and higher health costs associated with their disability.
The 2009-2011 American Community Survey (ACS) identifies 3,313 Monrovia residents as
having one or more disabilities, representing nine percent of the City’s population.
Nearly half of these residents are unable to live independently. The ACS documents the
presence of the following types of disabilities among Monrovia’s disabled residents:
                Ambulatory – 63%
                Cognitive – 37%
                Hearing – 27%
                Vision – 17%
Of the City’s senior population, 36 percent suffer from a disability. As Monrovia’s
population continues to age, the number of residents with disabilities will also increase.
The living arrangements for persons with disabilities depends on the severity of the
disability. Many persons live at home in an independent environment with the help of
other family members. To maintain independent living, disabled persons may require
assistance. This can include special housing design features for the physically disabled,
income support for those who are unable to work, and in-home supportive services for
persons with medical conditions. Monrovia has five licensed adult residential facilities
and three licensed group homes for youth, providing housing for up to 25
developmentally disabled adults and 16 children with disabilities.
Developmental Disabilities
Due to the dramatic rise in autism spectrum disorders (ASD), in 2010 the California
legislature passed SB 812, which requires the Housing Element to specifically analyze the
housing needs of persons with developmental disabilities, and to identify resources
available to serve this population. The State Department of Developmental Services
(DDS) currently provides community-based services to 6,000 adults diagnosed with ASD;
over 4,000 California teenagers diagnosed with ASD will reach adulthood over the next
                                                                                 Housing Element
Appendix A                                     A-20                            Background Report

five years, many of whom will want to live independently and need appropriate
housing.
The San Gabriel Valley Regional Center (SGPRC) is among 21 regional centers
operated by the State DDS to serve the developmentally disabled population. The goal
of these centers is to: 1) prevent/minimize institutionalization of developmentally
disabled persons and their dislocation from family and community; and 2) enable this
population to lead more independent and productive lives. Within the City of
Monrovia zip code 91016, the San Gabriel/Pomona Regional Center currently provides
services to 286 residents with developmental disabilities, generating an estimated need
for 93 housing units:
                             Table 17: Developmentally Disabled Residents
                           Served By San Gabriel/Pomona Regional Center
                              0 - 14     15 - 22    23 - 54     55 - 65     65+
       City of Monrovia                                                                Total
                              years       years      years       years    years
       Persons served          132         54         84          12         4          286
       Est. Housing
                                33         27         29           3         1          93
       Need*
       Source: San Gabriel/Pomona Regional Center, September 2013
       * The following need factors have been developed by the Golden Gate Regional Center and
       can be used to generally estimate housing needs for the developmentally disabled
       population by age group: age 0-14 25% need hsg; age 15-22 50% need hsg; age 23-54 35%
       need hsg; age 55-65 25% need hsg; age 65+ 20% need hsg.
The regional centers have identified a number of community-based housing types
appropriate for persons living with a developmental disability: licensed community care
facilities and group homes; supervised apartment settings with support services; SB 962
homes (for persons with special health care and intensive support needs); and for
persons able to live more independently, rent subsidized homes, affordable inclusionary
units, and Section 8 rental vouchers.
Monrovia supports the provision of housing for persons with disabilities, and has
provisions in its Zoning Code to enable group housing, and is developing written
procedures for reasonable accommodation requests. Housing Element programs to
facilitate affordable housing can also assist residents with developmental disabilities.
Large Households
Large households are defined as consisting of five or more members and are
considered a special needs population due to the limited availability of affordable and
adequately sized housing. The lack of large units is especially evident among rental
units. Large renter households are vulnerable to overcrowding due to the shortage of
adequately sized rentals, and insufficient income to afford 3+ bedroom rentals, which
typically consist of single-family homes.
In Monrovia, large households comprise 12 percent of total households. Of the City’s
large households, approximately half are renters, totaling 852 renter households with
five or more members. The 2007-2011 American Community Survey documents 1,144
                                                                                       Housing Element
Appendix A                                       A-21                                Background Report

rental units in Monrovia with 3 or more bedrooms, in general, the appropriate size for
households with five to six members. While the supply of 3+ bedroom rental units
exceeds the number of large renter households, the actual availability of these units is
limited. For example, just five percent of the apartments identified in the Housing
Element rent survey were three bedroom units (refer to Table 26 later in this document).
And while a greater number of 3+ bedroom single-family homes were listed, rent levels
are far less affordable than apartments.
Homeless
Homelessness has been a persistent problem throughout Los Angeles County. However,
the transitory nature of much of the homeless population makes getting an accurate,
up-to-date count difficult. The Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA)
coordinates the biennial Greater Los Angeles2 Homeless Count, one of the largest
homeless count operations in the United States. The count encompasses homeless on
the street, in shelters (emergency, transitional and safe haven), and “hidden homeless”.
LAHSA’s January 2013 count of homeless on the street and in shelters identified 35,534
men women and children, reflecting a 2.6 percent increase above the 2011 count.
When the “hidden homeless” are included in the estimates, the number increases to
53,798 people, an 18 percent increase from 2011.
While the 2013 Homeless Count doesn’t provide detailed information on why
homelessness has increased in the region, the Report identifies the following
contributing factors:
       The lingering effects of the recession and continued high unemployment
       A loss in state and federal funding to provide housing and homeless assistance
       Lack of adequate affordable housing options for low income households, and
         increasing housing rental rates
       Increasing numbers of probationers released as a result of prison reallignment
       The in-migration of homeless persons to Los Angeles County
In the San Gabriel Valley, LA Service Provider Area (SPA) 3, the total homeless
population increased from the 2011 count of 3,918 to 4,444 in 2013, a 13.4 percent
increase. As summarized in Table 18, the number of sheltered homeless in SPA 3
decreased by approximately 100 persons between 2011 and 2013, whereas the count
identified an increase in over 400 unsheltered homeless and 200 hidden homeless.
Interestingly, while the San Gabriel Valley evidenced a total increase in over 500
homeless, the number of chronic homeless remained virtually unchanged, with many
homeless subpopulations actually declining in numbers (i.e. substance abuse, mentally
ill, HIV/AIDS, domestic violence). These trends would indicate that much of the growth
in homelessness between 2011 and 2013 in the San Gabriel Valley was likely situational
in nature, and a reflection the prolonged recession and related joblessness.
2  The Greater Los Angeles Homeless Count includes all of Los Angeles County, except the cities of
Glendale, Pasadena, and Long Beach, who administer their own counts.
                                                                                   Housing Element
Appendix A                                    A-22                               Background Report

                            Table 18: 2013 and 2011 LAHSA Homeless Count
                           SPA 3 – San Gabriel Valley (excluding Pasadena)
                                                         2013                     2011
                                                 Number       Percent      Number      Percent
       Total SPA 3 Homeless Count                 4,444        100%         3,918
       Sheltered                                  1,367        30.8%        1,475       37.6%
       Unsheltered                                1,428        32.1%        1,024       26.1%
       Hidden                                     1,649        37.1%        1,419       36.2%
       Homeless by Household Type
       Single Adults                              3,935         89%         3,385        86%
       Family Members                              487          11%          526         13%
       Unaccompanied Youth (<18 years)              22          <1%           7          <1%
       Homeless Subpopulations
       Chronically Homeless                       1,147         26%         1,149        29%
       Substance Abuse                            1,360         31%         1,849        47%
       Mentally Ill                               1,348         30%         1,472        38%
       Veterans                                    533          12%          381         10%
       Persons with HIV/AIDS                        45          1%           106          3%
       Survivors of Domestic Violence              416          9%           697         18%
       Physical Disability                         838          19%          754         19%
       Source: 2013 & 2011 Greater Los Angeles Homeless Count www.lahsa.org/homelesscount.asp
The City of Monrovia participated in the 2013 Homeless count as an “Opt-In”
jurisdiction. These actual count figures identified 17 homeless in Monrovia, all from the
street count. All persons counted were single adults, with no families or unaccompanied
youth identified. Seven persons observed were residing in cars or campers, with the
remaining ten identified in street locations.
The San Gabriel Valley Consortium on Homelessness has developed an on-line
database of services available to the homeless in the San Gabriel Valley
(www.sgvc.org). The following agencies in and around Monrovia offer shelter,
counseling, and other services for the homeless, abused, or elderly. These organizations
include:
        The Foothill Unity Center in Monrovia provides services for the homeless. The Unity
         Center does not run a shelter but does distribute motel vouchers to people who
         need emergency shelter. Other services include food, clothing, personal items
         and medical referrals.
        The Second Baptist Church in Monrovia offers a hot meal program two days a
         week.
        The Santa Anita Family Services in Monrovia serves local families and seniors.
         They offer programs to help families cope with child abuse, drug and alcohol
         abuse, depression, and anxiety. They assist low-income elderly with temporary
         personal care, in-home care during illness, respite for family caregivers,
         employment assistance, housekeeping, and assistance in filing out forms or with
                                                                                       Housing Element
Appendix A                                       A-23                                Background Report

        other legal matters. They also offer minor home renovation for low-income
        seniors with physical limitations.
       Union Station in Pasadena has a capacity of 86 beds and offers emergency
        assistance to approximately 600 clients from the area each year. Approximately
        1,000 people seek food assistance, transitional housing assistance through
        vouchers and other homeless aid.
       Elizabeth House, Haven House, and the Oasis Youth Shelter are located in
        Pasadena and offer shelter to women and/or children. Haven House serves
        approximately 40 women and 130 children annually. Haven House offers 36
        beds, food, and counseling services.
       The YWCA Wings Shelter serves women and their dependent children, providing
        25 beds.
Farm Workers
Farmworkers are traditionally defined as persons whose primary incomes are earned
through seasonal agricultural work. Farm workers have special housing needs because
they earn lower incomes than many other workers and move throughout the season
from one harvest to the next. In many parts of southern California, agriculture
production is an important contribution to local economies. The City of Monrovia has
no agricultural land in active crop production, or land zoned for agricultural use.
According to data compiled by SCAG, just 33 Monrovia residents were occupied in
farm-related occupations, representing less than 0.02 percent of the City’s labor force.
As a highly urbanized area, Monrovia’s need for farm worker housing is less than
significant, and the City thus has no specialized housing programs targeted to this
group beyond overall programs for housing affordability.
                                                                              Housing Element
Appendix A                                 A-24                             Background Report

E. Existing Housing Stock
Housing Growth
Following a decade of very limited residential construction during the 1990s, the most
recent decade evidenced a significant increase in housing development in Monrovia.
The 2010 census documents a total of
14,473 units in Monrovia, reflecting the
addition of over 500 new units added to
the City’s housing stock since 2000. The
most significant development during this
period was the 163 unit mixed-use
apartment complex (Paragon) located
directly adjacent to Monrovia’s Old Town.
Numerous Planned Unit Developments
also contributed to the City’s residential
growth.                                                  Paragon Mixed Use Apartments
Types of Housing
Table 19 depicts the mix of housing types in Monrovia. Nearly 70 percent of dwelling
units that make up Monrovia’s housing stock are classified as single-family units, an
increase from 2000 when single-family homes (both detached and attached)
comprised 66 percent of housing. The relative increase in single-family units is a
reflection of the prevalence of Planned Unit Developments (PUD) built in recent years,
categorized as single-family units by the census. Multi-family development makes up
the other 29 percent of Monrovia’s housing, encompassing duplexes, triplexes, two on a
lot (excluding second units), apartments and condominiums. The City also contains two
mobile home parks - Monrovia Mobile Home Estates and Ten Twenty Mobile Home Park
- with a combined 101 spaces.
                              Table 19: Housing Units by Type 1990-2010
                                  1990                       2000                   2010
         Unit Type        Units        Percent         Units      Percent     Units      Percent
   Single-Family          9,085         65.2%          9,198       65.9%     10,100       69.8%
   Multi-Family           4,571         32.8%          4,644       33.3%      4,215       29.1%
   Mobile Home &           276           2.0%           115         0.8%       158         1.1%
   Other
   Total                 13,932         100%          13,957       100%      14,473       100%
   Source: 1990, 2000 Census; 2010 Dept. of Finance Table E5
                                                                                       Housing Element
Appendix A                                        A-25                              Background Report

Housing Tenure
Housing tenure refers to whether a                 Table 20: Housing Tenure 1990-2010
housing unit is owned or rented. Tenure                       1990                    2010
influences residential mobility, with                Occupied
                                                                   Percent
                                                                             Occupied
                                                                                            Percent
owner units generally evidencing lower                  Units                   Units
turnover rates than rental housing. As      Owner       6,210       46.9%       6,809        49.5%
indicated in Table 20, Monrovia has         Renter      7,027       53.1%       6,953        50.5%
experienced an increase in the rate of      TOTAL      13,237        100       13,762         100
homeownership over the past two             Source: 1990, 2010 Census
decades, rising from 46.9 percent in
1990 to 49.5 percent in 2010. By comparison, the 2010 Census measures the rate of
homeownership Countywide at 47.7 percent, slightly below that of the City. As the
relative proportion of multi-family versus single-family development increases in
Monrovia as anticipated under the 2030 General Plan, the proportion of renter
households is also likely to increase.
Figure 6 illustrates the percentage of renter households in Monrovia in 2010 by census
block group. As depicted, neighborhoods with a majority of renter households are
generally located in the western half of the City and south of Foothill Boulevard. Four
census tracts (CTs) evidence renter concentrations exceeding 70 percent: CT 4311.03
in Old Town Monrovia (84% renters); CT 4310.13 located immediately north of the Old
Town (75% renters); CT 4309.13 located west of Monterey Ave and north of the 210
freeway, encompassing MAP Neighborhood 3 (76% renters), and CT 4313.02 located
south of Duarte Road and east of Mayflower Ave (74% renters).
Vacancy
The vacancy rate measures the overall housing availability in a community and is often
a good indicator of how efficiently for-sale and rental housing units are meeting the
current demand for housing. A vacancy rate of five percent for rental housing and two
percent for ownership housing is generally considered healthy and suggests that there is
a balance between the supply and demand of housing. A vacancy rate of less than
five percent may indicate that households are having difficulty finding affordable
housing, which can lead to overcrowding or overpayment. A low vacancy rate or a
particularly ‘tight’ housing market may also lead to high competition for units, raising
rental and housing prices.
According to the 2010 Census, the                  Table 21: Vacancy Rate 1990-2010
citywide residential vacancy rate in                                      1990             2010
Monrovia was 4.9 percent, a modest Vacant Units                            701              711
decrease from the 5.3 percent in 1990. Vacancy Rate                       5.3%             4.9%
Rental vacancies in 2010 were also 4.9 Rental Vacancy Rate                3.0%             4.9%
percent, indicating the supply of rental
                                           Owner Vacancy Rate             1.8%             1.3%
housing in 2010 was sufficiently meeting
demand and providing mobility. Source: 1990, 2010 Census
Ownership vacancies were at 1.3 percent, below the ideal rate of two percent.
                                                                                      Housing Element
Appendix A                                A-26                                    Background Report

   Figure 6.                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City of Monrovia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PERCENT RENTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HOUSEHOLDS
                                                                                                   VD
                                                                                                 BL
                                                                                                                    MYRTLE AVE
                                                                                             T
                                                                                        ES
                                                                               L   CR
                                                                           HIL
                                                        MAYFLOW ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BRADBURY
                                                        AVE
                                                                                                                                                    FOOTH IL L BLV D
                   FOOTH IL L BLV D
                                                                                                                                                                         S HAMR OCK AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MOUN TAIN
                                                                                                        Lib ra ry
        5TH                                                                                              Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AVE
        AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                          Recre ation
                                                                                                                                                                                            Park
                                        Olive Aven ue
                                            Park
 §
 ¦
 ¨210
                                      HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                                         S HAMR OCK AVE
                                                                                                                        MYRTLE AVE                                                                      MOUN TAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Duarte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DUARTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sports P ark
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¨  210
                                                                                                                                      DUARTE   RD
                        TE RD
                 DUAR
                                                              MAYFLOW ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PERCENT RENTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HOUSEHOLDS
          5TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           None
          AV E                                                AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.1 - 34.9
                                                                                                                                                                              AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                35.0 - 49.9
                                                                                                                                                                        TA IN
                                                                                                                                        S. Monrovia                    UN                                                       50.0 - 59.9
                                                                                                                                        Island CDP
                                                                                                                 MYRTLE AVE
                   EL CAM INO REA L AV E                                                                                                                               MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60.0 - 69.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                70.0 - 83.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IRWINDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Citywide = 50.5%
  ARCADIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L IV E
                                        Mayflower
                                         Village
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¨  605
                                                                                                                                 DR
                                                                                                                 OAK
                                                                                                        L IV E
Source: 2010 Census, Table H18.                                                                                                                                                                                                              DIVERSA CONSU LTING 090213 lR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ab
                                                                             4314003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sa

Age and Condition of Housing Stock
The age of the housing stock provides can provide an indicator of overall housing
conditions and adequacy. Although age does not always correlate with substandard
housing conditions, neighborhoods with a prevalence of homes more than 40 years old
are more likely than newer neighborhoods to have a concentration of housing
problems related to deferred maintenance, inadequate landscaping care, outdated
utilities or interior amenities, and a need for housing rehabilitation.
As one of the oldest communities in Los Angeles County, Monrovia’s housing stock is on
average older than many other cities. Table 22 displays the age of Monrovia’s
occupied housing stock by tenure as of 2010. Nearly two-thirds of the City’s housing
stock was built prior to 1969, representing 8,600 units that have reached the 40-year
benchmark, 45 percent of which are renter units.
                                 Table 22: Age of Housing Stock 2010
                          Renter                        Owner
     Year Structure     Occupied         Percent       Occupied      Percent
     Built               Housing          Renter        Housing      Owner   Total Percent
     2005 or later          153             2%            163          2%          2%
     2000-2004              121             2%            221          3%          3%
     1990-1999              568             8%            481          7%          8%
     1980-1989              976             14%           562          9%         11%
     1970-1979             1,154            17%           495          7%         12%
     1960-1969              962             14%           635          10%        12%
     1950-1959             1,235            18%          1,529         23%        21%
     1940-1949              601             9%            806          12%        10%
     1939 or earlier       1,063            16%          1,772         27%        21%
     Total                 6,833           100%          6,664        100%       100%
     Source: 2007-2011 American Community Survey
Figure 7 depicts concentrations of older housing (50+ years old) in Monrovia by census
block group. Two areas with the largest percentage of housing structures built before
1960 are Tracts 4303.01 and 4303.02; this area is north of Foothill Boulevard which is
generally a more affluent part of the City and the overall structure condition is very
good. In contrast, Tract 4310.01 (BG 1 and 2) located immediately south of Foothill
Boulevard also evidence a high proportion of pre-1960 homes, yet are predominately
renter-occupied, and thus housing conditions may be more of a concern. Tract
4313.00 (BG 2) shares similar characteristics with a predominance of renter housing 50+
years in age.
Over the past 20 years, there has been a very strong emphasis on the aesthetic, social
and historic value of Monrovia’s older structures. A number of properties have been
restored, thereby countering the effects of the structure’s age on the quality of life of
the residents of these older houses.
                                                                                 Housing Element
Appendix A                                       A-28                         Background Report

   Figure 7.                                                                                                                                                                                                    City of Monrovia
                                                                                                                                                                                                AGE OF HOUSING STOCK
                                                                                                     VD
                                                                                                   BL
                                                                                                             MYRTLE AVE
                                                                                               T
                                                                                          ES
                                                                                 L   CR
                                                                             HIL
                                                            MAYFLOW ER                                                                                                                                                 BRADBURY
                                                            AVE
                                                                                                                                            FOOTH IL L BLV D
                   FOOTH IL L BLV D
        5TH
        AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                  Recre ation
                                                                                                                                                                                    Park
                                        Olive Aven ue
                                            Park
 §
 ¦
 ¨210
                                                                                                                                                                 S HAMR OCK AVE
                                      HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                 MYRTLE AVE                                                                     MOUN TAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Duarte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DUARTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sports P ark
                                                                                                                                                                                                AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¨  210
                                                                                                                              DUARTE   RD
                        TE RD
                 DUAR
                                                                MAYFLOW ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PERCENT HOUSING
          5TH                                                                                                                                                                                                  BUILT <1960
          AV E                                                  AVE                                                                                                                                                 N.A.
                                                                                                                                                                    AV E                                               0.1 - 34.9
                                                                                                                                                                TA IN                                                  35.0 - 49.9
                                                                                                                                S. Monrovia
                                                                                                                                Island CDP                                                                             50.0 - 59.9
                                                                                                                                                               UN
                                                                                                          MYRTLE AVE
                   EL CAM INO REA L AV E                                                                                                                       MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60.0 - 79.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80.0 - 87.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Citywide = 52.0%
  ARCADIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DR
                                        Mayflower
                                                                                                                                                                IRWINDALE                                             L IV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OAK
                                         Village
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¨  605
                                                              DR
                                                      OAK
                                             L IV E
Source: American Community Survey, 2007-2011, Table B25036.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DIVERSA CONSU LTING 091213    ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lRi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ab
                                                                               4314003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sa

However, based on observations of Neighborhood Preservation staff, many of
Monrovia's older structures are showing signs of deferred maintenance, especially in the
Low Income/CDBG tracts (depicted earlier in Figure 3).            Based on the high
predominance of older housing structures, many of the City’s housing programs are
focused on preservation and rehabilitation, as a significant number of these older
structures provide the more affordable options in Monrovia. Conserving and improving
the existing housing stock is the City’s most pressing need.
Substandard Housing
A citywide survey of substandard housing has not been conducted in over 15 years.
However as part the MAP Program (Monrovia Area Partnership), Neighborhood
Preservation Staff evaluated each of the houses in MAP Area 1 (refer to Figure 8 for the
location of Monrovia's 3 MAP neighborhoods). Of the 500 dwelling units in that area, 40
percent had shown some level of deterioration from minor to substantial. This
neighborhood had a substantially higher incidence of code violations then other areas
of the City.
Through the MAP program, 61 home improvement grants were completed (through
2009) that helped to eliminate deteriorated conditions at dwelling units in MAP Areas 1
and 2. The grants helped to fund improvements such as paint and roof repair on
homes of income qualified residents that for a period of time resulted in an
improvement in substandard housing. However, that progress was short lived as the
grants were suspended in 2010 and at the same time there was a downturn in the
economy. Subsequently, a recent survey of this area by Neighborhood Services Staff
confirmed the previous level (40%) of deterioration.
Based on the age and other indicators of housing condition, the City estimates that up
to 20% of the housing stock (approximately 2,700 dwelling units) need varying levels of
repair or rehabilitation from deferred maintenance (painting, patching, weatherization,
or other minor repairs) to substantial rehabilitation (repair replacement of most
components of the dwelling unit). Less than one percent of the housing stock (150
dwelling units) is estimated to be in need of replacement.
                                                                             Housing Element
Appendix A                                  A-30                           Background Report

   Figure 8.                                                                                                                                                                                                     City of Monrovia
                                                                                                                                                                                                             DESIGNATED M.A.P.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NEIGHBORHOODS
                                                                                               VD
                                                                                             BL
                                                                                         T
                                                                                R   ES
                                                                             LC
                                                                       HIL
                                                                                                                  MYRTLE AVE
                                                     MAYFL OW ER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BRADBURY
                                                                                                                                                                    FOOTH IL L BLV D
              FOOTH IL L BLV D
                                                                                                                                                                                                MOUN TAIN
                                                                                                                                                             S HAMR OCK AVE
  5TH
                                                                                                    Lib ra ry
                                                                                                     Park
  AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                  Recre ation
                                                                                                                                                                                    Park
                                     Olive Aven ue
                                         Park
           M.A.P. 3
                                                                                                                                      M.A.P. 2
            §
            ¦
            ¨210
                             HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            HUNTING TO N DR
                                                                                                                                                               S HAMR OCK AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                MOUN TAIN
                                                                                                              MYRTLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DUAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¨210
                                                                                                                                                    M.A.P. 1
                                                                                                                                                                                DUARTE     RD
                          TE RD
                   DUAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DUARTE
                                                                                                           MYRTLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                  AV E
    5TH                                          AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                TA IN
                                                 MAYFLOW ER
    AV E                                                                                                                                                                  UN
                                                                                                                                                                      MO
                                                                                                                               S. Monrovia
                                                                                                                               Island CDP
                                                                                                                                                                                        M.A.P. - Monrovia Area Partnership
                    EL CAM INO REA L AV E
           ARCADIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IRWINDALE
                                    Mayflower
                                     Village
                                                                                                                                                        DR
                                                                                                                                                  OAK
                                                                                                                                         L IV E
Source: City of Monrovia, Neighborhood Services Division.                                                                                                                                                                DIVERSA CONSU LTING 102913
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v    er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ie l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ab r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G

F. Housing Costs and Affordability
Money spent on housing is typically the largest single expense for most people. In
general, housing costs in California especially the urban areas such as the Los Angeles
region is higher than most other places in the country. Because the demand for
housing in California has been consistent for more than a century, this has continually
been a challenge for people who earn below-average wages.
Affordability has continued to be voiced as a major housing issue in the Monrovia
community. Many residents have expressed their concern that their grown children will
no longer be able to afford to live                  Table 23: Median Value/Rent 1990-2010
in the area. As indicated in Table
                                                                                          % Change
23, over the past two decades,
                                              Median Value/Rent       1990      2010      1990-2010
median home values in Monrovia
have increased 133 percent and Median Home Value                    $231,500 $540,200         133%
median rents have increased 97 Median Gross Rent                      $654     $1,287           97%
percent, well above the growth in Source: 1990 Census; 2007-2011 American Community Survey
household incomes.
Ownership Housing Costs
Table 24 compares single-family and condominium sales prices in Monrovia and nearby
communities during calendar year 2012. A total of 264 single-family homes were sold in
Monrovia for a median sales price of $438,000, a slight 0.5 percent drop in the median
price from the previous year. In contrast, single-family sales prices in nearby San Gabriel
Valley communities evidenced positive appreciation between 2011 and 2012.
Condominiums represented 30 percent of all units sold in Monrovia in 2012, with 111
condos sold. The median condo sales price was $310,000, representing a 3.9 percent
decline from the previous year. Similar to single-family homes, condo prices in Monrovia
were above the Countywide average, as well as the nearby communities of Duarte
and Azusa, but below the median sales prices in Arcadia and Temple City.
                  Table 24: Single-Family Home and Condominium Sales 2012
                                                         Change                Median       Change
                     Zip      # Homes        Median                # Condos
    Community                                              from                 Condo          from
                    Code        Sold       Home Price                 Sold
                                                           2011                  Price         2011
  Arcadia           91006        321        $826,000       4.6%        72     $588,000         4.0%
  Arcadia           91007        250        $985,000       7.5%       122     $419,000        -7.7%
  Azusa             91702        325        $270,000       5.9%       139     $175,000         1.2%
  Duarte            91010        210        $300,000      10.9%        76     $243,000       -12.4%
  Monrovia          91016        264        $438,000      -0.5%       111     $310,000        -3.9%
  Temple City       91780        254        $538,000       2.8%        47     $415,000        -5.8%
  LA County          All       59,561       $340,000       4.6%      19,617   $285,000         3.6%
  Source: DQNews – 2012 Los Angeles Times Zip Code Chart, http://www.dqnews.com
                                                                                       Housing Element
Appendix A                                      A-32                                 Background Report

While the prior Table 24 provides an overview of the sub-regional housing market during
calendar year 2012, the following Table 25 provides detailed information on single-
family and condominium sales within the Monrovia city limits during the more recent 12-
month period of August 2012 through July 2013. A total of 309 single-family home sales
were recorded during this period, with median sales prices ranging from $440,000 (two-
bedrooms) to $475,000 (three-bedrooms), $654,000 (four bedrooms) and $739,000 (five
or more bedrooms). The overall median sales price of $490,000 during this period
reflects a 12 percent increase from the $438,000 median documented in calendar year
2012. Two and three bedroom units were the most prevalent homes sold, characteristic
of Monrovia’s older, relatively modest housing stock.
A total of 120 condominiums were sold during this 12-month period for a median price
of $349,000, a 13 percent price increase from 2012. By bedroom size, median prices
ranged from $297,500 (up to two-bedrooms), to $395,000 (three-bedroom), and
$469,000 (four or more bedrooms). Condominiums are newer in age and less expensive
than Monrovia’s single-family housing, but are also smaller in size than single-family
homes with a comparable number of bedrooms.
              Table 25: Home and Condominium Sales Prices, August 2012 - July 2013
       #      Units                             Median        Avg. Unit                    Avg. Year
                           Price Range                                    Avg. Lot Size
    Bdrms     Sold                                Price         Size                           Built
  Single-Family Homes
       2       94       $241,000 - $949,000     $440,000    1,125 sq. ft.  8,045 sq. ft        1938
       3      156       $120,000 - $959,000     $475,000    1,480 sq. ft.  8,278 sq. ft.       1949
       4       46      $350,000 - $1,500,000    $654,000    2,225 sq. ft. 10,342 sq. ft.       1954
      5+       13      $455,000 - $1,250,000    $739,000    3,075 sq. ft. 17,412 sq. ft.       1938
     Total    309     $120,000 - $1,500,000     $490,000    1,550 sq. ft.  8,899 sq. ft.       1946
  Condominiums
      1-2      54       $137,000 - $425,000     $297,500      980 sq.ft.        --             1984
       3       51       $246,000 - $595,000     $395,000     1,255 sq.ft.       --             1991
      4+       15       $280,000 - $601,000     $469,000    1,495 sq. ft.       --             2002
     Total    120       $137,000 - $601,000     $349,000    1,235 sq. ft.       --             1989
Source: Dataquick On-Line Real Estate Database. Complied by Karen Warner Associates, 2013.
Home Foreclosures
Approximately 1.5 million of the 8.7 homes and condominiums in California have been
involved in a foreclosure proceeding since 2007. In addition to impact of people losing
their homes, foreclosed properties can lead to other problems as these homes are left
abandoned, becoming potential blight and criminal concerns. Fortunately, the
number of mortgage default notices in California has been consistently declining since
its peak in 2009, with the number of default notices filed in the first and second quarters
of 2013 the lowest level in more than seven years. According to the real estate
information service DataQuick, the drop in foreclosure notices is the result of a
combination of rising home values, an improving economy, and government efforts to
reduce foreclosures.
                                                                                         Housing Element
Appendix A                                       A-33                                 Background Report

Within Monrovia, www.Realtytrac.com identified 85 single-family home and
condominiums units in July 2013 in various states of foreclosure, including “pre-
foreclosure” having received a notice of mortgage default, notice of a trustee sale,
and bank-owned. The number of properties that received a foreclosure filing in
Monrovia in July was 43 percent lower than the previous month and 75 percent lower
than the same time last year, and represented one filing for every 1,966 residential units
in the City. In comparison, the ratio of July foreclosure filings to total housing units in the
State, Los Angeles County, and the cities of Pasadena, Duarte and Azusa were all
higher than in Monrovia.3
                 Azusa                              1 : 730
                 Duarte                             1 : 1,057
                 California                         1 : 1,029
                 Los Angeles County                 1 : 1,184
                 Pasadena                           1 : 1,674
                 Monrovia                           1 : 1,966
                 Glendora                           1 : 2,202
                 Temple City                        1 : 2,301
                 Arcadia                            1 : 4,599
                 Sierra Madre                       1 : 4,858
While foreclosures have been on the decline, lenders have been shifting towards “short
sales” – transactions where the sales price falls short of what is owed on the property. In
terms of distressed property sales, short sales are preferable to foreclosures for several
reasons: 1) units are typically occupied and in better condition; 2) they tend to be
higher priced; and 3) short sales are more favorable financially for banks which may
translate into improved lending conditions. In 2012, short sales comprised 26 percent of
statewide resale activity.
3 The foreclosure ratio is calculated by dividing the number of dwelling units in the jurisdiction by the total
number of properties that received foreclosure notices that month. The lower the second number in the
ratio, the higher the foreclosure rate.
                                                                                                Housing Element
Appendix A                                           A-34                                    Background Report

Rental Housing Costs
Current rental information (August 2013) for Monrovia was obtained from Internet rental
listings on Craigslist.com. Table 26 presents the results of the rent survey by unit type,
including apartments/condominiums/townhomes, single-family homes, and individual
rooms for rent.
A total of 38 non-duplicative multi-family units were advertised for rent in Monrovia.
Median monthly rents ranged from $1,295 for a one-bedroom unit, $1,400 for a two-
bedroom unit, and $1,520 for a three-bedroom unit. Just two units with three-bedrooms
were advertised as available for rent, indicative of the limited availability of adequately
sized apartment units for large family households.
A relatively limited number of single-family homes were listed for rent in Monrovia, with
11 home rentals identified in the rent survey. Median rents ranged from $1,600 for a two-
bedroom home to $2,725 for a four-bedroom home, well above rent levels for
apartments.
In addition to the full rental units surveyed, nine individual rooms were listed for rent
within condominiums and single-family homes, ranging in price from $500 to $900, with
a median price of $645. Rooms provide a lower cost rental option for singles, as well as
allowing homeowners to supplement their income, particularly useful for senior
homeowners on fixed incomes.
                             Table 26: Monrovia Rent Survey August 2013
                     Unit Type and       # Units
                      Bedrooms         Advertised      Rental Range   Median Rent
                   Apartments/Condominiums/Townhomes
                            1              17           $925-$1,990     $1,295
                            2              19         $1,000 - $2,810   $1,400
                            3               2         $1,040 - $2,000   $1,520
                   Single-Family Homes
                            2               5          $1295-$1,700     $1,600
                            3               4         $1,800 – $2,300   $2,125
                            4               2         $2,250 - $3,200   $2,725
                   Rooms for Rent
                            1               9           $500 - $900      $645
                   Source: www.craigslist.org August 2013
                                                                                    Housing Element
Appendix A                                       A-35                             Background Report

Housing Affordability
The affordability of housing in Monrovia can be assessed by comparing market rents
and sales prices with the amount that households of different income levels can afford
to pay for housing. Compared together, this information can reveal who can afford
what size and type of housing as well as indicate the type of households that would
most likely experience overcrowding or overpayment.
For purposes of evaluating home purchase affordability, Table 27 presents the
maximum affordable purchase price for moderate income households (110% AMI), and
compares this with market sales prices for single-family homes and condominiums in
Monrovia as previously documented in Table 25. As illustrated below, the maximum
affordable purchase price ranges from $267,000 for a three-person household to
$300,900 for a four person household, rendering both condominiums and single-family
homes in Monrovia beyond the reach of moderate income households. In addition, as
the real estate market continues to improve, the affordability gap for moderate income
homeownership will widen.
                    Table 27: 2013 Los Angeles County Maximum Affordable Housing Cost
   Moderate Income (110% AMI)                                       2 Bedroom     3 Bedroom
   Affordable Housing Cost                                          (3 persons)   (4 persons)
   Household Income @ 110% Median1                                        $64,130       $71,280
   Income Towards Housing @ 35% Income1                                   $22,446       $24,948
   Maximum Monthly Housing Cost                                            $1,870        $2,079
             HOA Fees                                                        $270           $270
             Utilities2                                                       $91           $112
             Property Taxes (1.1% affordable hsg price)                      $245           $276
             Insurance (Property and Mortgage)                               $115           $130
   Monthly Income Available for Mortgage                                   $1,149        $1,291
   Supportable 30 yr Mortgage @ 4.0% interest                            $241,000      $270,800
   Homebuyer Downpayment (10%)                                            $26,700       $30,100
   Maximum Affordable Purchase Price                                    $267,000       $300,900
   Monrovia Median Single-Family Sales Price                            $440,000       $475,000
   Monrovia Median Condo Sales Price                                    $297,500       $395,000
    Source: Karen Warner Associates, 2013.
    1 110% moderate-income standard based on H&S Code Section 50093. 35% affordability standard
    based on H&S Code Section 50052.5
    2 Utility costs based on 2012/13 HACoLA schedule and assumes gas appliances.
                                                                                      Housing Element
Appendix A                                            A-36                         Background Report
Table 28 presents the maximum affordable rents for very low, low and moderate-
income households by household size, and compares with median apartment rents in
Monrovia (as documented in the rent survey presented in Table 26). As Table 28
indicates, median rents are well above the level of affordability for very low-income
households, regardless of household size. For low-income households, median rents for
two and three bedroom apartments fall just within the maximum affordable rent level.
Households earning moderate incomes can afford median rents in Monrovia, regardless
of unit size.
                   Table 28: 2013 Maximum Affordable Rents* Los Angeles County
       Income Level**                               1 Bedroom        2 Bedroom         3 Bedroom
                                                    (2 person)       (3 person)        (4 person)
       Very Low Income                              $753             $847              $935
       Low Income                                   $1,264           $1,423            $1,574
       Moderate Income                              $1,453           $1,636            $1,810
       Monrovia Median Apartment Rents              $1,295           $1,400            $1,520
      *Maximum rent reflects deduction of utility allowance per LACDC utility schedule: $89 for studios,
       $102 for 1 bedrooms, $114 for 2 bedrooms, and $133 for 3 bedrooms.
     **Income levels reflect the 2013 Official State Income Limits published by State HCD.
                                                                                              Housing Element
Appendix A                                           A-37                                  Background Report
G. Affordable Housing Inventory
State law requires the city to identify, analyze, and propose programs to preserve
housing units that are currently restricted to low income housing use and that will
become unrestricted and possibly be lost as low income housing. This section presents
an inventory of all assisted rental housing in Monrovia, and evaluates those units at risk
of conversion during the ten year, 2013-2021 planning period.
Assisted Housing Inventory
All multi-family rental units assisted under federal, State, and/or local programs are
included. The inventory was compiled based on review of HUDs Multi-family Assistance
and Section 8 Contracts Database and input from California Housing Partnership. As
indicated in Table 29, Monrovia currently contains the following four assisted apartment
complexes, totaling 221 rent-restricted units affordable to very low and low income
households.
                            Table 29: Inventory of Assisted Rental Housing
                                                            Funding     Applicable  Potential
       Project Name             Tenant
                                            Ownership        Source         Units  Conversion
                                  Type
                                                                                      Date
                                              Profit
       Regency Court            Senior                     RDA, Tax         115       2025
                                            Motivated
       720 Fifth Ave                                        Credits
                                              Profit       RDA, Tax
       Heritage Park            Senior                                       77       2058
                                            Motivated       Credits,
       630 W. Duarte Rd
                                                             HOME
                                              Profit       221(d)(4)         28      3/2023
       Mayflower Arms
                                Family      Motivated
       724 S. Monterey Ave
                                                           Section 8         28     11/2013
                                              Profit
       525 East Walnut Ave      Family                                       1      11/2013
                                            Motivated      Section 8
       Total Assisted Units                                                 221
        Source: City of Monrovia; California Housing Partnership, October 2013.
Regency Court - This 115 unit very low income senior housing project received Low
Income Housing Tax Credits and was assisted through the former Redevelopment
Agency. The contract for Regency Court began in October 1995 and extends through
2025. Therefore, the risk of conversion to market rate is very low at this time.
Heritage Park - In 2003, the Blackstone Apartments were completely rehabilitated and
converted from market rate to a 100% affordable senior apartment complex.
Renamed Heritage Park-Monrovia, the conversion was financed by a combination of
sources including Federal tax credits, County HOME funds, and Monrovia
                                                                                        Housing Element
Appendix A                                           A-38                            Background Report
Redevelopment Agency funds. The units are required to remain affordable until 2058
(55 years).
Mayflower Arms - Affordability in this 28 unit family complex is tied to project-based
Section 8 contracts. As these contract are subject to annual renewals from HUD, this
project is considered at-risk of conversion to market rates.
525 East Walnut Avenue - This 5 bedroom single-family home maintains a project-based
Section 8 contract under the ownership of Subsidized Housing Corporation 35. Similar to
Mayflower Arms, this unit is considered at-risk as its Section 8 contract is subject to
annual renewals from HUD.
Preservation and Replacement Options
Preservation or replacement of Monrovia's two at-risk projects- Mayflower Arms and 525
E. Walnut Avenue - can be achieved in several ways: 1) transfer of ownership to non-
profit organizations; 2) provision of rental assistance using other funding sources; or 3)
replacement or development of new assisted multi-family housing units. These options
are discussed below, along with a general cost estimate for each.
Acquisition – Transfer of ownership to an entity that would continue to offer subsidized
housing is generally the most economical option in maintaining affordability. It also
increases the number of government resources available to the project. The acquisition
cost for the 29 at risk units is estimated to be approximately $4.3 million. Taking into
account rehabilitation and other associated expenses, the per unit cost for this option is
around $155,000.
Rental Assistance - As mentioned previously, both at-risk projects in Monrovia use
Section 8 project-based contracts for rental assistance. Availability of funding at the
federal level for Section 8 contract renewal is uncertain. If terminated, rent subsidies
using alternative State or local funding sources could potentially be used to maintain
affordability at these projects. The feasibility of this alternative depends on the
willingness of property owners to accept rental assistance. Nonprofit owners are most
likely to be willing to accept other rent subsidies, while for-profit owners will compare
the negotiated rents to market rents.
The cost of providing rent subsidies to all 29 at-risk units (the difference between HUD
Fair Market Rents and maximum affordable rents for very low income households) is
generally estimated at $215,000 per year, or $5.4 million over a 25 year period. The cost
of annual subsidies would continue to increase as market rents and operating costs
increase. Though affordable rents will also increase based on the area median income,
this rise trends at a lower rate than rents and operating costs, raising the annual subsidy
required.
New Construction – Building new units to replace these units is another option that
could be used to replace at-risk units. Although real estate prices have decreased, the
cost of land is still relatively high combined with the fact that there is not vacant land
available in Monrovia. This means that the land acquisition cost would also include the
existing improvements which further drives up the costs. Using very conservative
                                                                               Housing Element
Appendix A                                   A-39                            Background Report

estimates below, the cost to replace the 29 units would be roughly $6,400,000 or over
$220,000 per unit.
               Land acquisition      $ 1,500,000
               Construction          $ 4,300,000
               Other costs           $ 600,000
Interested Parties – There are many organizations active in the region and throughout
the state that have the managerial capacity to own and manage existing subsidized
housing developments.            The state Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) maintains a list of Qualified Entities which are individuals or
organizations (public and private) that have expressed an interest in being notified of
the availability of assisted rental housing. The most recent roster is available on HCD’s
website (www.hcd.ca.gov).
Funding – Several funding sources could potentially be used to preserve or replace
assisted rental units at-risk of conversions (refer to Table 42 in Chapter II - Resources for a
more comprehensive listing of financial resources):
       Home Investment Partnership Program—a federal program providing funding for
        housing acquisition, rehabilitation, and construction.
       Community Development Block Grant Program—a federal program providing
        funding for housing acquisition and rehabilitation and some costs related to new
        housing construction.
       Section 8 Program (New Construction and Low/Moderate Income Set Aside
        Programs)—a federal program providing funding for rental housing construction
        in conjunction with Section 8 subsidies for the rental units.
       Section 202/811 Programs—a federal program providing funding for low-income
        rental housing restricted to seniors and handicapped individuals.
                                                                                   Housing Element
Appendix A                                    A-40                               Background Report

H. Regional Housing Needs
The Regional Housing Allocation (RHNA) is a state-mandated process, which
determines the amount of future housing growth each city and county must plan for in
their housing elements. This “fair share” allocation concept seeks to ensure that each
jurisdiction accepts responsibility for the housing needs of not only its resident
population, but also for the jurisdiction’s projected share of regional housing growth
across all income categories. Regional growth needs are defined as the number of
units that would have to be added in each jurisdiction to accommodate the
forecasted number of households, as well as the number of units that need to be
added to compensate for anticipated demolitions and changes to achieve an “ideal”
vacancy rate.
The RHNA process begins with the California Department of Housing and Community
Development’s (HCD) projection of future statewide housing growth need, and the
apportionment of this need to regional councils of government throughout the state. As
southern California’s designated Council of Government, the Southern California
Association of Governments (SCAG) is the agency responsible for developing an
allocation methodology to allocate the region’s assigned share of statewide need to
cities and counties by income level. In allocating the region’s future housing needs to
jurisdictions, SCAG is required to take the following factors into consideration:
              Market demand for housing
              Employment opportunities
              Availability of suitable sites and public facilities
              Commuting patterns
              Type and tenure of housing
              Loss of units in assisted housing developments
              Over-concentration of lower income households
              Geological and topographical constraints
  SCAG has adopted the RHNA for the 2014-2021 Housing Element cycle, and has
  allocated Monrovia the following share of the region’s housing needs:
                      Table 30: Regional Housing Needs Assessment 2014-2021*
                                           Percent of
                 Income Level                                   Units         Percent
                                              AMI*
                 Extremely Low**              0-30%              50             13%
                 Very Low                    31-50%              51             13%
                 Low                         51-80%              61             16%
                 Moderate                   81-120%              65             17%
                 Above Moderate              120%+              162             42%
                 Total                                          389            100%
                Source: http://SCAG.ca.gov.gov/Housing/rhna.htm
                * AMI – Area Median Income.
                ** An estimated half of the City’s very low income housing needs (50 units)
                are for extremely low income households.
                                                                                            Housing Element
Appendix A                                          A-- 41 -                             Background Report

The RHNA represents the minimum number of housing units each community is required
to provide “adequate sites” for through zoning and is one of the primary threshold
criteria necessary to achieve State approval of the Housing Element. As the RHNA
represents a planning target for new residential growth and not a building quota, so
long as a jurisdiction provides sufficient sites and does not impose constraints to
development, it is not penalized for falling short of its RHNA target. Monrovia will
continue to provide sites for a mix of single-family, multi-family and mixed use housing,
supported by a variety of programs to enhance affordability, to accommodate its
RHNA and contribute towards addressing the growing demand for housing in the
southern California region.
                                                                             Housing Element
Appendix A                                 A-- 42 -                        Background Report

II. HOUSING RESOURCES
An important component of the Housing Element is the identification of sites for future
housing development, and an evaluation of the adequacy of these sites in fulfilling the
City’s regional housing needs allocation (RHNA). This “Housing Resources” chapter
describes the resources available for development, rehabilitation, and preservation of
housing in Monrovia, including sites for new housing; financial and administrative
resources available to facilitate housing production and housing-related services; and
opportunities for energy conservation in existing and new residential development as a
means of reducing housing costs.
A. Sites to Accommodate the 2006-2014 RHNA
California State Housing Law states:
        For housing elements due on or after January 1, 2006, if a city or county in the
        prior planning period failed to identify or make available adequate sites to
        accommodate the regional housing need allocated, then the city or county
        shall, within the first year of the planning period of the new housing element, zone
        or rezone adequate sites to accommodate the unaccommodated portion of the
        regional housing need allocation from the prior planning period. (Government
        Code 65584.09(a), Chapter 614, Statutes of 2005 [AB 1233])
Monrovia completed a draft Housing Element for the prior 2008-2014 planning period
which was reviewed by the State Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD). In HCDs March 5, 2009 comment letter on Monrovia's draft
Housing Element, the State identified several revisions necessary to bring the Element
into compliance with housing element law, including additional analysis of the suitability
of non-vacant sites in the Element's sties inventory. Due to a significant reduction in
staff resources, Monrovia was unable to complete the necessary Element revisions and
did not adopt the draft Element. In order to demonstrate whether there is any
unaccommodated RHNA need to carry over into the new Housing Element, HCD
recommends the following steps:
        Step 1:     Subtract the number of units from the RHNA approved or
                    constructed (by income category) since the start of the prior
                    planning period.
        Step 2:     Subtract the number of units from the RHNA that could be
                    accommodated on any appropriately zoned sites specifically
                    identified in the element adopted for the previous planning period.
        Step 3:     Subtract the number of units from the RHNA accommodated on
                    sites rezoned for residential pursuant to the site identification
                    programs in the element adopted for the prior planning period.
        Step 4:     Subtract the number of units from the RHNA accommodated on
                    sites rezoned for residential development independent of the sites
                                                                                      Housing Element
Appendix A                                         A-- 43 -                         Background Report

                    rezoned in conjunction with the element’s site identification
                    program.
As illustrated in Table 31, Monrovia has fully addressed its 567 unit RHNA for the 2008-
2014 planning period through housing units that were built during the 2006-2014 RHNA
projection period, and capacity within existing residential zoning.
                Table 31: Unaccommodated Housing Need Analysis – 2006-2014 RHNA
                                  Very
                                             Low      Moderate    Above Mod
              Income Levels        Low                                           Total
    RHNA Targets                   142        88          96          241         567
    Units Built                     4         10          22          407         443
    Existing Residential Zoning
    Old Town Extension                  761                                       761
    Station Square                     2,064                                     2,064
    Cherry/Montana                                        150                     150
    Total Site Capacity                2,839              172         407        3,418
    Remaining RHNA Need             0         0            0           0           0
Because Monrovia does not have an unaccommodated housing need, its 2006-2014
RHNA does not carry over into the future planning period. The City's actions are
described in the narrative which follows.
Housing Constructed in Prior Planning Period
As presented in Table 32, a total of 443 net new units were approved and built in
Monrovia during the 2006-2014 RHNA planning period, including the following:
        A four unit Habitat for Humanity project assisted by the former Monrovia
         Redevelopment Agency, providing affordability to low income homeowners.
        13 second dwelling units. Affordability assumptions based on 1 bedroom
         apartment rents in Monrovia (affordable to low income households), and Sierra
         Madre's second unit survey, which documented 32% of second units affordable
         to very low income, 49% affordable to low income, and 19% affordable to
         moderate income. Based on these factors, the estimated affordability of
         Monrovia's 13 new second units is 4 very low, 6 low and 3 moderate income units.
        19 affordable home ownership units within several projects assisted by the former
         Monrovia Redevelopment for moderate income households.
        The City issued building permits for 407 market rate units during the RHNA
         planning period. Both the 163-unit 700 South Myrtle Avenue and the 68-unit
         Colorado Commons mixed use developments were developed on property not
         previously developed with residential uses.
                                                                               Housing Element
Appendix A                                   A-- 44 -                        Background Report

                        Table 32: Residential Units Built and Occupied - 2006-2013
                                                             Units by Income Level
                                                   Total                            Affordability
                  Project Name                     Units     VL     L     M    AM   Determination
  Permits Issued 2006
  Duarte/Magnolia                                    14                    5     9 MRA
  Colorado Commons                                   68                    7    61 MRA
  139 W Cherry                                        4                          4 Sales Price
  526 Fano                                            4                          4 Sales Price
  333 Genoa                                           8                          8 Sales Price
  1840 S. Mayflower                                   3                          3 Rent price
  435-471 Monrovista                                 14                    3    11 MRA
  502-506 E. Olive                                    3                          3 Rent price
  Singe Family dwellings                             11                         11 Sales price
  Second Units                                        3       2      1           0 Rent Survey
                                       2006 Total   132       2      1    15   114
  Permits Issued 2007
  335 Genoa                                                                     13 Sales Price
  102 S Ivy                                           6                          6 Sales Price
  722 W Lemon                                         2                          2 Rent
  401 Monrovista                                     20                    4    16 MRA
  713 Montana                                         4                          4 Sales Price
  901 Royal Oaks                                      4                          4 Sales Price
  1825 Tenth                                          5                          5 Sales Price
  Single Family Dwellings                             4                          4 Sales Price
  Single Family Dwellings                             2                          2 Sales Price
  Second Units                                        2       1      1           0 Rent Survey
                                       2007 Total    62       1      1     4    56
  Permits Issued 2008
  Single Family Dwellings                             8                          8 Sales Price
  700 S Myrtle Ave Mixed Use                        163                        163 Rent price
  1402 S California (live/work)                      16                         16 Sales Price
  1210 Sherman/Habitat for Humanity                   4              4             Sales Price
  309 Violet (PUD)                                    4                          4 Sales Price
  706 Duarte                                          9                          9 Sales Price
  Second Units                                        3       1      2             Rent Survey
                                       2008 Total   207       1      6         200
  Permits Issued 2009
  607 Fano SFR                                        1                          1
  1410 Encino                                         1                          1
                                                                                       Housing Element
Appendix A                                          A-- 45 -                        Background Report
                 Table 32: Residential Units Built and Occupied - 2006-2013 (cont'd)
                                                  Total      Units by Income Level         Affordability
                 Project Name                     Units                                  Determination
                                                            VL      L      M     AM
 790 Oakglade (unit over garage)                     1                             1
 704 W Colorado (unit over garage)                   1                             1
 721 E Palm                                          1                             1
                                       2009 Total    5                             5
 Permits Issued 2010
 704 Montana                                         1                             1
 Second Units                                        3               2      1
                                       2010 Total    4               2      1      1
 Permits Issued 2011
 1116-1122 S. Magnolia (PUD)                         7                             7
 Second unit                                         1                      1
                                       2011 Total    8                      1      7
 Permits Issued 2012
 547 El Norte (PUD)                                  4                             4
 212-218 W Olive (PUD)                               3                             3
 630 - 632 W Olive (detached rental units)           5                             5
 953 Wildrose                                        1                             1
 955 Wildrose                                        1                             1
 830 S California (manufactured unit)                1                             1
 268 N Myrtle                                        1                             1
 865 A & B W Olive (duplex behind SFR)               2                             2
 Second unit                                         1                      1
                                       2012 Total   19                      1     18
 Permits Issued 2013*
 432 Genoa                                           1                             1
 159 El Norte                                        1                             1
 122 N Alta Vista                                    1                             1
 239 Hillcrest                                       1                             1
 318 N Encinitas                                     1                             1
 276 Stedman                                         1                             1
                                       2013 Total    6                             6
                    2006-2013 TOTAL UNITS BUILT    443        4     10     22    407
  MRA - Monrovia Redevelopment Agency
  * Projects permitted in 2013 but not occupied until 2014 are counted in the 2014-2021 planning period.
                                                                                             Housing Element
Appendix A                                         A-- 46 -                               Background Report
Site Capacity within Existing Zoning
As detailed in the 2014-2021 Sites Inventory section which follows, Monrovia has
developed a thorough and realistic approach to identifying vacant and underutilized
sites suitable for development during the planning period. Through this more refined site
inventory analysis, the City is able to demonstrate sufficient site capacity zoned at
appropriate densities to accommodate its RHNA for both the prior (2008-2014) and
current (2014-2021) planning periods. Monrovia's Land Use Element Update, adopted
on January 15, 2008, increased the City's development capacity by over 3,700 higher
density units, establishing the zoning to provide sufficient site capacity at the start of the
2008-2014 planning period.
As summarized in Table 31 (and provided in greater detail in Table 34), sites have been
identified in Monrovia's residential and commercial districts suitable to accommodate
2,825 units affordable to very low and low income households, and 150 units affordable
to moderate income households. In terms of evaluating the adequacy of these sites to
address the affordability targets established by the RHNA, Housing Element statutes
provide for use of “default densities” to assess affordability. Based on its population,
Monrovia falls within the default density of 30 units/acre for providing sites affordable to
very low and low income households. For moderate income households, based on
several moderate income projects developed in the City, the City has chosen a
threshold of 12 units/acre to reflect a reasonable density with which moderate income
development can be achieved. Allocating Monrovia's residential sites inventory based
on these density thresholds results in the allocation of sites by targeted income group as
presented in Table 31.
B. Sites to Accommodate the 2014-2021 RHNA
This section documents the availability of sites for future development and the
adequacy of these sites to address Monrovia's regional housing needs for the 2014-2021
planning period. The City plans to fulfill its share of regional housing needs through:
       Residential projects with development entitlements with occupancy post
        12/31/13
       Vacant and underutilized sites currently zoned for residential and mixed use
        development.
Each of these two components is described in the narrative which follows.
Projects in Process
A variety of residential projects with development entitlements will contribute towards
addressing Monrovia's housing needs. Projects range in size from the 154 unit
apartment development at 5th and Huntington, to a 21 unit planned unit development
in the Cherry/Montana neighborhood, and several smaller 1 to 4 unit projects.
                                                                                 Housing Element
Appendix A                                    A-- 47 -                         Background Report

Both the 5th and Huntington and 21-unit PUD demonstrate the City’s willingness to
accommodate additional housing opportunities housing on underutilized sites. The
property at 5th and Huntington was identified in the 2008 update of the Land Use
Element as a site that would be appropriate for redevelopment. For many years, the
site was improved with a low profile self-storage facility. Based on its location, proximity
to public transportation and the freeway, the designation of the area was changed to
allow for high density mixed use development. Additionally, based on market and
parking studies, this development was approved with both smaller sized apartment units
and a parking ratio of 1.8 spaces per unit which is significantly less than the
requirements of the Municipal Code.
To accommodate the 21-unit PUD, the City approved a zone change from P/QP
(Pubic/Quasi-public) to RH (Residential High Density) on a site previously occupied by a
private school. Although the zoning would allow a higher density, based on current
development trends, the developer decided a PUD development was the appropriate
property type for the site.
As presented in Table 33, a total of 209 market rate units within seven projects will come
on line in 2014.
                Table 33: Residential Projects with Entitlements (post 2013 occupancy)
                                                              Parcel                  Project
          Project Location        Unit Type       Zoning                 # of Units
                                                                Size                  Density
      5th & Huntington           Apartment         RCM       2.9 acres      154     54 du/ acre
      1323 S Magnolia                PUD            RH       1.7 acres       21     12 du/acre
      138 E. Olive              Condominium         SP       0.7 acres       18     25 du/acre
      706 W. Duarte             Condominium         RH      0.45 acres        9     20 du/acre
      535 W Lemon                    PUD          RM3500     14,000 sf        4     13 du/acre
      1820 S. Alta Vista         Second unit      RM4000      8,200 sf        2     11 du/acre
      335 W Olive                Back house       RM3500      7,500 sf        1     13 du/acre
      Total                                                                 209
Suitable Sites Methodology
The parcel-specific sites inventory prepared in 2008 for Monrovia's draft Housing Element
served as the foundation for the sites inventory update and refinement. Due to fact
that Monrovia is built-out, the sites inventory consists almost entirely of property that is
underdeveloped, that is at a density less than allowed by the General Plan. Remaining
vacant parcels in the City's hillsides has not been included in the inventory due to
environmental and topographic constraints which will limit future development.
Monrovia's 2008 Land Use Element Update significantly increased the City's capacity for
new residential development, accommodating over 3,700 additional higher density
units. The Land Use Element focuses this growth in three areas: South Myrtle Avenue
Corridor, Station Square Transit Village, and West Huntington Drive Corridor. The 2008
draft Housing Element sites analysis evaluated development potential in each of these
                                                                                        Housing Element
Appendix A                                        A-- 48 -                           Background Report

three areas, as well as the Cherry/Montana neighborhood which has been transitioning
to higher multi-family densities. In order to narrow the updated Housing Element sites
inventory to those properties that have the most realistic development potential in the
near future, several filtering criteria were applied to the City's 2008 sites inventory based
on the Los Angeles County Assessor online property database:
          Commercial Areas4 - Old Town Extension and Station Square
                Age of improvements on site minimum of 30 years old (except where value of
                   improvement < 20% total assessed property value)
                Low building structure value, generally minimum 60% ratio of assessed land value
                   to total assessed property value
                Low ratio of existing building floor area to parcel size (FAR), generally 0.50 or less
                Not listed on City's list of approved projects
          Residential Areas - Cherry/Montana Neighborhoods
                 Existing improvements developed pre-1965
                 Site can yield at least 2 units
                 Low building structure value, as measured by minimum 50% ratio of assessed land
                   value to total assessed property value (except where parcel can yield at least
                   double the existing units)
                 Not listed on City's list of approved projects
The above criteria was applied to parcels from the City's 2008 inventory, and combined
with site visits (to assess the physical condition of existing buildings, characteristics of
commercial tenants and building vacancies), resulted in a narrowing down of the
inventory to those sites most suitable for development during the 2014-2021 planning
period. In comparison to the 3,973 unit potential identified in the City's 2008 inventory,
the updated inventory identifies the near term development potential for 2,975 units,
distributed among the three areas as presented in Table 34. A parcel-specific sites
inventory is included in Attachment 1, identifying the zoning and detailed site
characteristics of each parcel.
                        Table 34: Vacant and Underutilized Sites Inventory Summary
                                   Total Vacant/
                                                        Maximum             Realistic         Realistic Unit
              Area                 Underutilized
                                                          Density            Density            Capacity
                                      Acreage
Old Town Extension                  19.02 acres          54 du/ac           40 du/ac              761
Station  Square1                     27.7 acres        No maximum           90 du/ac             2,064
Cherry/Montana2                      9.9 acres           54 du/ac         17 - 40 du/ac           150
              Total                 57.9 acres                                                   2,975
1  The 80 acre Station Square Planning Area permits up to 3,600 dwelling units. The Plan establishes unit
   capacities by block, with no maximum densities per parcel. The assumed density of 90 units/acre is
   based on two previously entitled projects within the Plan Area.
2  Realistic densities vary based on parcel size, as described in Cherry/Montana narrative.
4 The Huntington Drive Corridor growth area was not included in the updated suitable sites inventory due to
the uncertainty of near-term residential development in this area.
                                                                                               Housing Element
Appendix A                                            A-- 49 -                              Background Report

Residential Growth Areas
The following summarizes the characteristics and realistic development potential within
each of the three identified growth areas, with the detailed sites inventory and maps
included in Attachment 1 to the Element.
Old Town Extension: This 6 block area is the
northernmost section of the larger South
Myrtle Avenue Corridor Planning Area. The
General Plan's vision for this area is to
expand the success of Monrovia's Old Town
by expanding Myrtle Avenue's pedestrian
orientation south of Olive Avenue to Maple
Avenue through the introduction of higher
density housing opportunities. The Old Town
Extension is designated Specific Plan/
Planned Development Overlay (SP/PD
Overlay), providing for a mix of residential and office uses to be built as integrated,
cohesive developments. Parcels facing Myrtle are required to have ground floor
commercial uses, with either residential or office uses on the floors above. Parcels
without Myrtle Avenue frontage may be developed exclusively with residential uses.
Existing uses are primarily light industrial and warehousing, with a limited number of
older, single-story offices and a few scattered non-conforming single family homes. As
indicated in the parcel-specific sites inventory table (refer to Attachment 1), many
adjacent parcels in this area are under single-ownership, facilitating lot consolidation
and development potential. The General Plan and RH zoning provides for densities of
54 dwelling units per acre, with building heights of up to four stories. For purposes of
estimating realistic development capacity, an average density of 40 units/acre was
assumed, yielding 761 high density units on the 53 parcels which met the underutilized
site criteria previously defined. The first project to implement the new General Plan in
this area - Paragon at 700 South Myrtle Avenue - redeveloped previous light industrial
uses to provide 163 apartment units on 3 acres (54 du/ac); the City granted a parking
reduction to help facilitate the project.
Station Square Transit Village: The primary
factor driving the City's vision for conversion
of the older industrial uses south of the I-210
freeway into a mixed use Transit Village is the
opening of a Metro Gold Line Station in this
location in 2016. The General Plan identifies
the opportunity for a true transit-oriented,
high-density development in this area, with
renovation of the historic Santa Fe depot to
"serve as the centerpiece of a transit center surrounded by a mix of retail, office,
residential, hotel, and open space uses."
                                                                             Housing Element
Appendix A                                   A-- 50 -                     Background Report
The General Plan establishes the Station Square Transit Village Planned Development
area (PD-Station Square Transit Village) as the land use designation for this
approximately 80 acre area, also serving as the zoning. The PD designation is purposely
designed to allow maximum flexibility in the intensity and location of development in
response to market conditions. The Transit Village provides for a range of housing types,
with a minimum of 1,400 units up to 3,600 units within the PD area, but no density cap on
individual parcels. Units can be built as stand-alone product or as part of a horizontally
or vertically integrated mixed-use development above retail uses. Residential uses,
however, are not permitted immediately adjacent to the I-210 Freeway.
The area west of Myrtle Avenue, surrounding the future Metro Gold Line light rail station
and the bus terminal, will consist of high-density development that supports the transit-
oriented nature of this sub-district. Residential development east of Myrtle Avenue will
vary in densities that are most appropriate to the market at the time of development.
The City has been actively working to facilitate the redevelopment of this area. The
former Monrovia Redevelopment Agency (MRA) has acquired over 5 acres in the
Station Square area, and has transferred 2.8 acres of cleared and graded land to a
developer; the developer's preliminary concept plan depicts 248 apartment units (89
units/acre). To the east of this site, the City previously (2009) entitled a 337 unit mixed
use project on 3.4 acres (100 units/acre). Based on these prior development
applications, the Housing Element sites analysis utilizes an average density of 90
units/acre in three blocks, with 70 units/acre utilized on two blocks based on various site
factors. Applying these density factors to the 51 parcels within the Station Square Transit
Village PD which meet the Housing Element underutilized sites criteria yields 2,064 high
density units, towards the low end of the 1,400 - 3,6005 unit range provided for in the
General Plan.
West Cherry/Montana: The West Cherry/Montana
neighborhood is an older, predominately lower
density neighborhood that has been planned and
zoned Residential High Density (54 units/acre) to
facilitate infill development and revitalization. This is
an area that is experiencing residential recycling, with
25 new units added since 2003, and an additional 21
units which began construction in 2013.
The overwhelming majority of the lots are less than
10,000 square feet (typical of the entire City). Due to lot size constraints, conservative
potential density estimates were used, consistent with the typical density range of
recent infill residential redevelopment projects:
5 Subsequent to adoption of the City's Land Use Element, approximately 25 acres on the east end of the
Transit Village PD was acquired by the Gold Line Construction Authority for the Gold Line Operations
Campus. This area, Phase 3 of the Transit Village, was previously envisioned as a mix of residential and
commercial/office uses in the Land Use Element, contributing to the reduced unit potential under the
Housing Element.
                                                                                          Housing Element
Appendix A                                       A-- 51 -                             Background Report
           lots < 15,000 sq ft                17 du/ac
           lots 15,000 - 20,000 sq ft         29 du/ac
           lots 20,000 - 43,560 sq ft         40 du/ac
Additionally, properties that were developed after 1965 were excluded. Based on the
lot sizes of the 47 parcels identified as underutilized, the re-use of these sites would likely
result in a total of 190 dwelling units, a net gain of 150 units. Lot consolidation in this
area is encouraged to create larger development sites. This would significantly
increase the densities that could realistically be achieved.
Comparison of Sites Inventory with RHNA
Table 35 compares Monrovia's 2014-2021 RHNA for 389 new units with the City’s
aggregate residential sites inventory derived from the following:
         209 units in projects with entitlements
         761 units in the Old Town Extension area
         2,064 units in the Station Square Transit Village
         150 units in the West Cherry/Montana neighborhood
         Table HE-35: Comparison of Regional Housing Growth Need and Residential Sites
                                          SP/PD             PD-12          RH
                Entitled
                           Minimum      Old Town      Station Square West Cherry/
  Income        Projects                                                           Total Unit 2014-2021
                            Density     Extension     Transit Village  Montana
 Category     (post 2013)                                                          Potential     RHNA
                           Guidelines  (av. density      (av. density (av. density
             occupancy)
                                        40 du/ac)     70 -90 du/ac) 17-29 du/ac)
Very Low           --         30+                                           --                    101
                                           761              2,064                    2,825
Low                --       du/acre                                         --                     61
                              12+
Moderate           --                       --                --          150         150          65
                            du/acre
Above                         <12
                  209                       --                --            --        209         162
Moderate                    du/acre
Total
                  209                      761              2,064         150        3,184        389
Units
In terms of evaluating the adequacy of these sites to address the affordability targets
established by the RHNA, Housing Element statutes provide for use of “default densities”
to assess affordability. Based on its population, Monrovia falls within the default density
of 30 units/acre for providing sites affordable to very low and low-income households.
For moderate-income households, based on several moderate-income projects
developed in the City, the City has chosen a threshold of 12 units/acre to reflect a
reasonable density with which moderate-income development can be achieved.
Allocating Monrovia's residential sites inventory based on these density thresholds results
in the provision of sites suitable for development of 2,825 units affordable to lower
income households, 150 units affordable to moderate income households, and 209
units for above moderate income households.
                                                                                          Housing Element
Appendix A                                      A-- 52 -                               Background Report

In summary, Monrovia has provided more than adequate sites to fulfill its regional
housing needs by income category. The City will further encourage and facilitate
production of affordable units on these sites through regulatory incentives, including:
flexible development standards and parking reductions; reduction/ deferral of
development fees; and by-right development for small multi-family infill projects, and
projects with affordable units.
Availability of Infrastructure and Public Services
As an urbanized community, the majority of Monrovia already has in place all of the
necessary infrastructure to support future development. All areas identified for
residential development have direct access to roads, water and sewer lines,
communications lines, and electricity. The City’s Capital Improvement Program has
been updated to implement new programs specific to the redevelopment of the
Station Square Transit Village based on measures identified in the Land Use Element EIR.
The residential build out analysis conducted in the City's 2008 Land Use Element EIR
documents adequate infrastructure and public services to accommodate future
growth. As the 2014-2021 Housing Element residential sites inventory is a subset of build
out under the Land Use Element, the City has determined there are no public facilities
or services constraints that would impede the development of housing units to meet its
RHNA allocation for 389 new units. The following are more detailed discussions of water
and wastewater capacities as documented in the Housing Element negative
declaration.
The City of Monrovia operates its own water utility, with all water obtained from five
active wells located in the San Gabriel Groundwater Basin. In 2010, available supplies
were estimated at 7,600 acre-feet per year (af/yr) and citywide water demand was
estimated at 7,411 af/yr. By 2030, supplies are projected to drop to 7,000 af/yr, but
citywide demand is forecast to fall to 6,847 af/yr due to reductions in per capita use
(City of Monrovia Utilities Division, 2011). Because the 2014-2021 Housing Element would
not accommodate any residential development beyond what could be developed
under the current Land Use Element and Zoning Code, it would not increase water
demand beyond the above forecasts.
New development pursuant to the Land Use Element will generate approximately 7
million gallons of wastewater per day in 2025. The Whittier Narrows, San Jose Creek, and
Los Coyotes Water Reclamation Plants, which treat the City’s wastewater, process a
total of approximately128.3 million gpd. Monrovia would therefore account for no more
than 0.3 percent of the reclamation plants’ daily treated wastewater. The 2014-2021
Housing Element would not result in any housing beyond what could be developed
under the current Land Use Element and Zoning Code.
SB 1087, effective January 2006, requires water and sewer providers to grant priority for
service allocations to proposed developments that include units affordable to lower
income households. Pursuant to these statutes, upon adoption of its Housing Element,
Monrovia will immediately deliver the Element to local water and sewer providers,
along with a summary of its regional housing needs allocation.
                                                                              Housing Element
Appendix A                                    A-- 53 -                      Background Report

C. Financial Resources
The extent to which Monrovia can achieve its Housing Element goals and objectives is
in large part dependent upon the availability of financial resources for implementation.
The primary local source of funds for affordable housing in Monrovia has traditionally
been its Redevelopment Agency’s Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Fund.
However, due to passage of Assembly Bill (AB) 1X 26, redevelopment agencies across
California have been eliminated as of February 1, 2012, removing the primary local tool
for creating affordable housing. Loans made by Monrovia's former Redevelopment
Agency using Low and Moderate Income Housing Funds will return to the City acting as
the Agency's Housing Successor, and become available to support in future housing
development in Monrovia. In addition, unused proceeds from the FY 2011 Housing
Bond issued by the former MRA will also continue to be available to support housing
activities identified on the bond project list.
The City will continue to explore new funding sources and programs, and opportunities
to partner with the private sector and local non-profit organizations. Examples of
potential new funding opportunities include:
       The $93 million Golden State Acquisition Fund (GSAF) was launched in early 2013
        by State HCD in partnership with seven Community Development Financial
        Institutions (CDFIs), providing developers and public agencies with access to
        favorably priced funds for developing and preserving affordable rental and
        ownership housing.
       Passage of SB 391, the California Home and Jobs Act of 2013, would generate
        approximately $525 million annually for affordable housing by imposing a $75
        recording fee on real estate documents. The bill has secured a super majority in
        the Senate and two Assembly policy committees, and will remain on the
        Assembly Appropriations Committee’s calendar entering into the 2014 legislative
        session.
       SCAG Sustainability Program 2013-2014 Call for Proposals. This new local
        assistance planning program combines Compass Blueprint assistance for
        integrated land use and transportation planning with new Green Region
        initiative assistance for bicycle and pedestrian planning efforts.
Table 36 on the following pages identifies a variety of Federal, state, local and private
resources that may be available to carry out housing activities in Monrovia.
                                                                              Housing Element
Appendix A                                   A-- 54 -                      Background Report

                    Table 36: Financial Resources Available for Housing Activities
Program Name                  Description                                           Eligible Activities
1. Federal Programs
Community Development         As a participating City in Urban LA County,               Acquisition
Block Grant (CDBG)            grants are allocated directly to the City on              Rehabilitation
                              a formula basis for housing and                           Homebuyer Assistance
                              community          development             activities     Economic Development
                              primarily benefiting low and moderate
                                                                                        Homeless Assistance
                              income households. Monrovia receives
                              approximately $240,000 in CDBG funds                      Public Services
                              from LACDC on an annual basis, but may
                              be subject to additional federal cutbacks.
HOME                          Funding used to support a variety of                      New Construction
                              County housing programs that the City                     Acquisition
                              can access for specific projects. Funds                   Rehabilitation
                              are used to assist low income (80% MFI)                   Homebuyer Assistance
                              households.
                                                                                        Rental Assistance
Section 8 Rental Assistance   Rental assistance payments to owners of                 Rental Assistance
                              private market rate units on behalf of low-
                              income (50% MFI) tenants. Administered
                              by the Housing Authority of the County of
                              Los Angeles.
Section 202                   Grants to non-profit developers                    of     Acquisition
                              supportive housing for the elderly.                       Rehabilitation
                                                                                        New Construction
Section 811                   Grants to non-profit developers of                        Acquisition
                              supportive housing for persons with                       Rehabilitation
                              disabilities,   including        group      homes,        New Construction
                              independent         living       facilities     and       Rental Assistance
                              intermediate care facilities.
 2. State Programs
Low-income Housing Tax        State and Federal tax credits to enable                 New Construction
Credit (LIHTC)                sponsors/ developers of low income rental               Acquisition/Rehabilitation
www.treasurer.ca.gov/ctcac/   housing to raise project equity through the
                              sale of tax benefits to investors. 4% and
                              9% credits available, with 4% credits often
                              coupled with tax-exempt bonds.
Multi-Family Housing          Deferred      payment        loans       to    local      New Construction
Program (MHP)                 governments, non-profit and for-profit                    Rehabilitation
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/mhp/        developers        for     new       construction,         Preservation
                              rehabilitation      and       preservation         of     Conversion of
                              permanent and transitional rental housing                  nonresidential to rental
                              for lower income households. Includes
                                                                                        Social services within
                              separate       Supportive         Housing       and
                                                                                         project
                              Homeless Youth MHP components.
                                                                                                      Housing Element
Appendix A                                            A-- 55 -                                     Background Report

                       Table 36: Financial Resources Available for Housing Activities
Program Name                     Description                                    Eligible Activities
Building Equity and Growth       Grants to cities to provide downpayment            Homebuyer Assistance
in Neighborhoods (BEGIN)         assistance (up to $30,000) to low and
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/begin/         moderate income first-time homebuyers of
                                 new homes in projects with affordability
                                 enhanced by local regulatory incentives
                                 or barrier reductions.
CalHome                          Grants to cities and non-profit developers         Predevelopment, site
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/calhome        to offer homebuyer assistance, including            development, site
                                 downpayment assistance, rehabilitation,             acquisition
                                 acquisition/rehabilitation, and homebuyer          Rehabilitation
                                 counseling. Loans to developers for                Acquisition/rehab
                                 property acquisition, site development,            Downpayment assistance
                                 predevelopment and construction period
                                                                                    Mortgage financing
                                 expenses for homeownership projects.
                                                                                    Homebuyer counseling
Affordable Housing               Funding for pilot programs to demonstrate
Innovation Fund                  innovative, cost-saving ways to create or
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa                preserve affordable housing. Under AB            Varies depending on activity
                                 1951      (2012),    funding     has     been
                                 appropriated to the following activities:
                                     Local Housing Trust Fund Grant
                                     Golden State Acquisition Fund
                                     Innovative Homeownership Program
Infill Infrastructure Grant      Funding of public infrastructure (water,           Development of parks and
Program                          sewer, traffic, parks, site clean-up, etc)          open space
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/iig/           that supports higher-density affordable            Water, sewer or other utility
                                 and mixed-income housing in locations               service improvements
                                 designated as infill.                              Streets, roads, parking
                                                                                     structures, transit linkages,
                                                                                     transit shelters
                                                                                    Traffic mitigation features
                                                                                    Sidewalks and streetscape
                                                                                     improvements
Housing Related Parks            Financial incentives to jurisdictions who          Grants for creation of new
Program                          construct new units affordable to very low          parks, or rehabilitation or
www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrpp/         and low income households.                          improvements to existing
                                                                                     parks.
Transit-Oriented                 Funding      for   housing     and     related     Capital improvements for
Development Program              infrastructure within one-quarter mile of           qualified housing
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/tod/           transit stations. Upon funding of the future        developments, including
                                 Gold Line extension, the State TOD                  enhancing pedestrian or
                                 program may be applicable to facilitate             bike access between
                                 development around the planned station              project and transit
                                 in Monrovia.                                       Land acquisition
                                                                                                   Housing Element
Appendix A                                             A-- 56 -                                 Background Report

                        Table 36: Financial Resources Available for Housing Activities
 Program Name                     Description                                   Eligible Activities
 CalHFA Residential               Low interest, short term loans to local           Site acquisition
 Development Loan                 governments for affordable infill, owner-         Pre-development costs
 Program                          occupied housing developments. Links
 www.calhfa.ca.gov/               with CalHFA’s Downpayment Assistance
 multifamily/special/rdlp.pdf     Program to provide subordinate loans to
                                  first-time buyers. Two funding rounds per
                                  year.
  3. County Programs
 City of Industry Funds           Industry funds are redevelopment tax              Acquisition
                                  increment funds administered by the               Rehabilitation
                                  Housing Authority of the County of Los            New Construction
                                  Angeles (HACoLA).          Loans for rental       Homebuyer Assistance
                                  housing, special needs housing, and for-
                                  sale housing (acquisition and permanent
                                  financing). With the dissolution of
                                  redevelopment agencies, HACoLA has
                                  been designated the successor agency,
                                  and is responsible for dispersing the
                                  remaining $38 million in City of Industry
                                  Funds for affordable housing.
 Southern California Home         Loans to first-time homebuyers in the             First-Time Homebuyer
 Financing Authority              County, provided through participating                   Assistance
                                  lenders
  4. Private Resources/Financing Programs
 Federal National Mortgage        Fixed rate mortgages issued by private            Homebuyer Assistance
 Association (Fannie Mae)         mortgage insurers; mortgages which fund
                                  the purchase and rehabilitation of a
                                  home; and low downpayment mortgages
                                  for homes in underserved areas.
 Federal Home Loan Bank           Direct subsidies to non-profit and for profit     New Construction
 Affordable Housing               developers and public agencies for
 Program                          affordable low-income ownership and
                                  rental projects.
 Savings Association              Pooling process to fund loans for                 New construction of
 Mortgage Company Inc.            affordable ownership and rental housing            rentals, cooperatives, self
                                  projects.      Non-profit and for profit           help housing, homeless
                                  developers contact member institutions.            shelters, and group homes
 Freddie Mac                      HomeWorks-1st and 2nd mortgages that              Home Buyer Assistance
                                  include rehabilitation loan; City provides         combined with
                                  gap       financing     for    rehabilitation      Rehabilitation
                                  component. Households earning up to
                                  80% MFI qualify.
Source: Karen Warner Associates, October 2013.
                                                                                                   Housing Element
 Appendix A                                            A-- 57 -                                 Background Report

D.      ADMINISTRATIVE RESOURCES
Described below are several non-profit agencies that are currently active and have
completed projects in Los Angeles County. These agencies serve as resources in
meeting the housing needs of the City, and are integral in implementing activities for
acquisition/rehabilitation, preservation of assisted housing, and development of
affordable housing.
Habitat for Humanity is a non-profit, Christian organization that builds and repairs homes
for sale to very low income families with the help of volunteers and homeowner/partner
families. Recipient families are asked to provide sweat equity, while volunteers
consisting of church members, business persons and local organizations provide labor
and materials. The homes are sold to families with no interest loans. The former
Monrovia Redevelopment Agency partnered with Habitat for Humanity to achieve the
development of four low income units for first-time homebuyers.
Heritage Housing Partners (HHP) is a Pasadena-based non-profit housing developer
specializing in affordable homeownership through the preservation of existing historic
homes and the construction of new, contextual single-family residences. HHP has sold
over 80 affordable homes (both new construction and historic rehab) in Pasadena,
South Pasadena, and Glendale, with 120 units in the pipeline. HHP enhances the quality
of life in the communities it serves by promoting historic preservation, providing
affordable homeownership opportunities and creating community stakeholders.
Rebuilding Together is a national volunteer organization
which helps preserve owner occupied houses and
neighborhoods to assure a safe and accessible home for
people in need. Rebuilding Together works with low income
households and concentrates on the elderly, the disabled
and families with children so that they may continue to live
with pride and dignity. The local affiliate, Rebuilding Together
Duarte/Monrovia, formed in 2001 and has established a goal to repair and rehabilitate
at least two owner-occupied low-income homes per year with the assistance of local
sponsors and other volunteer based organizations.
Jamboree Housing Corporation (JHC) is a non-profit developer that has developed and
implemented numerous affordable housing projects throughout Southern California as
well as the State. Jamboree has also established an in-house social services division to
assist residents in maintaining self-sufficiency. “Housing with a HEART” (Helping Educate,
Activate and Respond Together) now operates at most Jamboree-owned properties.
National Community Renaissance is a nonprofit developer whose mission is to create
affordable housing communities that contribute to neighborhood vitality.                  The
company owns and manages more than 4,500 multifamily units throughout Southern
California, and staffs community resource centers at all its properties administered by
the Hope Through Housing Foundation.
                                                                               Housing Element
Appendix A                                    A-- 58 -                       Background Report

E.      OPPORTUNITIES FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION
Housing Element statutes require an analysis of opportunities for energy conservation
with respect to residential development. The energy conservation section of the
element must inventory and analyze the opportunities to encourage the incorporation
of energy saving features, energy saving materials, and energy efficient systems and
design for residential development. Planning to maximize energy efficiency and the
incorporation of energy conservation and green building features can contribute to
reduced housing costs for homeowners and renters, in addition to promoting
sustainable community design and reduced dependence on vehicles. Such planning
and development standards can also significantly contribute to reducing greenhouse
gases.
There are many opportunities for conserving energy in new and existing homes.
Construction of energy efficient buildings does not lower the price of housing.
However, housing with energy conservation features should result in reduced monthly
occupancy costs as consumption of fuel and energy is decreased.
In 2007, the Monrovia City Council adopted the Monrovia Environmental Accords
through Administrative Policy No. 9.02. The Monrovia Environmental Accords are
modeled after the United Nations Urban Environmental Accords and consist of 21
action items (Attachment 2). The action items focus on seven major topic areas
sustainability: Energy, Waste Reduction, Urban Design, Urban Nature, Transportation,
Environmental Health and Water. Based on the progress made, Monrovia has been
recognized as a Model City by the San Gabriel Energy Wise Partnership. Monrovia's
Green Team has identified the importance in developing an Action Strategy for all of
the items and presenting to City Council for their annual review.
Additionally, the City completed the Energy Action Plan (EAP) through a partnership
with the San Gabriel Valley Council of Governments, which includes strategies for
reducing residential energy consumption (i.e., education, energy efficiency
improvements, etc.).
Land Use and Urban Design Opportunities
Although there are no specific energy provisions in the zoning code, the policies and
programs of the Housing Element encourage the use of energy conservation methods
to lessen the environmental impact of development.
The 2008 update to the Land Use Element addressed the need to create a stronger
job/housing balance and facilitates the development of housing close to existing and
future transportation corridors. By significantly increasing allowable densities in these
areas, the City is encouraging more compact development and mixed use
development. These actions were taken specifically to reduce the development
pressure on existing neighborhoods and undeveloped hillside land.
                                                                            Housing Element
Appendix A                                 A-- 59 -                      Background Report
Conservation Opportunities
As part of the Environmental Accords, the City is actively conducting outreach and
marketing of energy-saving incentives including available funding opportunities to assist
with energy conservation retrofits and weatherization. The City’s newsletter Monrovia
Today now includes a regular column Going Green that devotes an entire page to the
topic.
The MAP program includes grants to assist with the installation of weatherization and
energy conservation devises. Additionally, Southern California Edison (Monrovia’s
electricity provider) offers incentives to improve energy efficiency. The City maintains a
good working relationship with Edison and will continue to promote its program to
Monrovia residents. The City recognizes the need for proper load management to
ensure that power plants do not become overloaded during peak hours. To reduce
this risk, residents are encouraged to turn off unnecessary appliances during peak load
hours to reduce the need for new power plants and energy overload.
Finally, the Foothill Area Community Services and East San Gabriel Valley Consortium
are non-profit organizations providing free energy conservation repairs and insulation
for homeowners and tenants unable to afford such repairs.
Green Building Opportunities
One of the projects that resulted from the Environmental Accords is the creation of the
Green Building Program, which is being implemented through adoption of the
California Green Building Code within Monrovia's Municipal Code. The City’s Building
Official is an active member of the United States Green Building Council (UBGBC) which
is instrumental in promoting green building in the nation.
Energy efficient appliances, such as low flow showerheads, can reduce the level of
natural gas used for water heating. The City also encourages proper maintenance and
the use of energy efficient models of large appliances such as refrigerators, stoves,
dryers, and others. Energy efficient light fixtures and light bulbs, which save electricity
and last longer than average light bulbs are also encouraged.
In addition to the required compliance with Title 24, the City is exploring green building
strategies which include providing incentives for sustainable development (including
use of solar power, energy efficient appliances, eco-friendly paint), promoting the use
of “alternative” or recycled building materials, permeable paved surfaces and
ultimately the development of a “tool box” for greener development.
While green building practices may increase the costs of housing construction, the long
term benefits outweigh initial development costs. The City is actively exploring methods
and funding opportunities to promote and encourage greener building practices. The
Green Building Program in the Housing Element discusses the City’s initiatives.
                                                                              Housing Element
Appendix A                                   A-- 60 -                       Background Report

Monrovia has hosted multiple events to educate residents on energy efficiency,
including a Sustainability Expo which offered workshops pertaining to green building,
energy efficiency and solar power, and the annual MAP conference which includes a
booth and conference sessions promoting sustainability programs for residents.
The City recently became a participating jurisdiction in the California Home Energy
Renovation Opportunity (HERO) financing program. HERO allows property owners to
fund small renewable energy or energy efficiency improvements through a Property
Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) program and repay the loans as an item on the owner's
property tax bill.
                                                                           Housing Element
Appendix A                               A-- 61 -                        Background Report
III. POTENTIAL HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
The provision of adequate and affordable housing can be constrained by a number of
factors. This section assesses the various governmental, market, and environmental
factors that may serve as a potential constraint to housing development and
improvement in Monrovia.
A. Governmental Constraints
Local jurisdictions influence the cost and availability of housing through a number of
development regulations and policies.         Land use controls, site improvement
requirements, building codes, development permit and impact fees, and other local
programs intended to improve the overall quality of the community may serve as
potential constraints to the development and improvement of housing.
Land Use Controls
The General Plan sets forth the City’s policies for guiding local development and
growth. These policies, together with zoning regulations, establish the amount and
distribution of land uses within the City. Monrovia's General Plan provides for five
residential land use categories, ranging from Foothill Residential at maximum densities
of one unit/acre, to High Density Residential, permitting densities up to 54 units/acre.
Monrovia's 2008 Land Use Element Update expanded the areas where high density
residential is permitted to several non-residential land use districts, significantly
increasing the City's capacity for new residential development.
                                         Table 37: General Plan Land Use Designations
                                   General Plan Designation                Maximum Density
                               High Density Residential                        54 du/acre
                               Medium Density Residential                     17.4 du/acre
             Residential
                               Low Density Residential                         5.8 du/acre
                               Residential Estate                               2 du/acre
                               Foothill Residential                             1du/acre
                                                                             No density limit.
                               Station Square TOD
                                                                             Max 3,600 units
             Non Residential
                               Neighborhood Commercial                         54 du/acre
                               Retail Corridor Mixed Use                       54 du/acre
                               Historic Downtown Commercial                    54 du/acre
                               Specific Plan/Planned Development Overlay
                                                                               54 du/acre
                               (Old Town Extension)
                                                                                                   Housing Element
Appendix A                                                    A-- 62 -                           Background Report

Residential Development Standards
The Zoning Ordinance is the primary tool for regulating location, massing, intensity, and
design and site planning. Monrovia’s residential development standards have not
changed significantly over the past few decades and are generally no more or less
restrictive than other jurisdictions and therefore probably do not impact the
development of housing affordability issues much differently than in other communities.
However, it is safe to say that the proportion of the number of properties zoned for
multifamily development is greater in Monrovia than most other communities in the San
Gabriel Valley.
The City offers a variety of housing opportunities through its land use policies. There are
14 zoning districts that allow some type of residential development. Residential
development is permitted or conditionally permitted in these zones:
         RF – Residential Foothill
         RE – Residential Estate
         RL – Residential Low Density
         RM4000 – Residential Medium Density 4000
         RM3500 – Residential Medium Density 3500
         RM3000 – Residential Medium Density 3000
         RM2500 – Residential Medium Density 2500
         RM/RH – Residential Medium/Residential High Density
         RH – Residential High
         PD – Planned Development
         SP – Specific Plan
         HCD – Historic Commercial Downtown
         NC – Neighborhood Commercial
         RCM – Retail Corridor Mixed Use
There are 25 PD (Planned Development) zones throughout the City, with the regulations
for each contained in the Land Use Element. PD zones are typically areas with a mix of
uses where traditional zoning regulations may not effectively ensure compatibility.
Some PD zones allow commercial uses, while others permit residential and others allow
both; 21 of the 25 PDs permit residential uses (refer to Attachment 3 for a listing of PD
zones that permit residential).
Monrovia's residential development standards are summarized in Table 38 on the
following page. As a means of encouraging lot consolidation, the City's multi-family
zones use an FAR (floor area ratio) standard on lots greater than 15,000 square feet in
size, thereby allowing for greater flexibility (additional smaller units or fewer larger units)
within the overall 0.75 FAR envelope. Furthermore, there are no specified height limits in
the RM and RH zones, with building heights controlled by a multi-story setback
requirement (described in the footnote to Table 38).
                                                                                  Housing Element
Appendix A                                    A-- 63 -                         Background Report

                                                             Table 38: Residential Development Standards
                                                Min. Lot Size     Min. Unit Size   Max FAR¹     Max. Bldg      Front Yard    Side Yard   Rear Yard      Open Space
    Zone                   Density
                                                   (sq ft)3             (sq ft)                   Height²         (ft)4          (ft)        (ft)            Req.
      RF                Up to 1 du/ac              15,000               2,000     Max of all       30 ft.          25      10% lot width      20             N/A
                                                                                  bldgs = 0.3                               or 15’ max
      RE                Up to 2 du/ac              20,000               2,000       .17 + 0.5      30 ft           25      24% lot width      20             N/A
                                                                                                                             or 5’ min.
      RL               Up to 5.8 du/ac              7,500               1,250       .17 + 0.5      30 ft           25      24% lot width      20             N/A
                                                                                                                             or 5’ min.
  RM2500-         1 unit per 2,500 sf up to 1      10,000           Detached        0.4 + 0.2    2nd floor+        25      10% lot width      20        40% of each
  RM7500        unit per 7,500 sf of lot area                         1,250 sf                   setbacks                    or 5’ min.                 unit’s square
                                                                    Attached                                                                               footage
   RM/RH         Lots <15,000 sf = 1 unit per                    bachelor - 500     0.4 + 0.2    2nd floor+        25      10% lot width      20         20%/40% of
                           2,500 sf                15,000       efficiency - 600                setbacks                     or 5’ min.                  each unit’s
                   Lots >15,000 = 0.75 FAR                         1 bdrm - 800     0.4 + 0.4                                                         square footage
                                                                 2 bdrm - 1,000
      RH         Lots <15,000 sf = 2 units for     15,000                          0.75 + 0.4    2nd floor+        25      10% lot width      20             20%
                                                                 3 bdrm - 1,200
                 1st 5,000 sf + add'l unit for                                                   setbacks                    or 5’ min.
                    every 1,500 ft > 5,000                       +50 sf for every
                                                                     bdrm > 3
                   Lots >15,000 = 0.75 FAR
     NC                    0.5 FAR                 15,000                             0.75            --           10         0’ to 20’   0’ to 20’            0
    HCD                Up to 25 du/ac              10,000          studio - 500        2.0         35 ft            0             0            0
                                                                   1 bdrm - 600
                                                                   2 bdrm - 800
    PD 12             Up to 110 du/ac              3 acres            Flexible        none         none             0             0            0          3.0 acres/
   Station
                  3,600 du maximum in 80                             Based on                                                                          1,000 residents
Square Transit
   Village                acre area                               specific plan
         1 FAR (floor area ratio) - first number reflects max FAR for dwelling units, second number reflects max FAR for accessory structures.
         2 Building heights in multi-family districts are controlled through multi-story setback requirements. In the RH zone, the base side yard setback is 10%
         of the lot width (with a min of 5’). The multi-story setback requires 6’ for the second story and an additional 5’ for each story above two. For
         example, on a 100’ wide lot, the base setback would be 10’, with the second story also setback 10’, and the third story setback 11’ (6’ second
         story + 5’ for the third story). Each story, not the entire building, above that would need to be stepped back an additional 5’.
         3 Existing subdivided parcels are not required to meet the minimum lot size under zoning. For example, only newly subdivided lot in the PD 12 zone would
         be subject to a 3 acre minimum.
         4 Or block average setback if more than 25’.
                                                                                                           Housing Element
     Appendix A                                                A-- 64 -                                  Background Report

Parking Requirements
Monrovia has established minimum parking requirements as follows:
     Single family dwellings: Two garage spaces per unit (if access is from a hillside
        street, three garage spaces must be provided)
     Multifamily dwellings: Two garage spaces per unit in complexes of one to five
        units, and in complexes of six or more units, two garage spaces and one half
        guest space must be provided per unit.            In addition, in Planned Unit
        Developments of 25 units or more, or large units greater than 2,000 square feet
        with four bedrooms, additional parking is required. One open parking space
        adjacent to the unit must be provided, or a three car garage in lieu of a two car
        garage must be provided, or a driveway of at least 18 feet must be provided
     Convalescent, nursing homes, or sanitariums: One space per four beds
     Senior citizen housing: One space per unit and one guest space per every ten
        units, with a minimum of 75% of the spaces in carports or garages
     Mobile homes: Two spaces per dwelling unit, plus one space within the park for
        every ten units for guest parking.
As an older community, there are a significant number of residential properties (both
single family and multi-family) that provide little or no on-site parking, therefore the
provision of adequate parking for new development is an important consideration. This
is especially true for the historic core of the Monrovia, which encompasses
approximately the central third of the City. Monrovia’s parking requirements are typical
for most suburban communities, although the amount of resident parking required for
multi-family housing may be somewhat higher. The City’s parking requirements could
make it difficult to accommodate affordable housing on infill sites, however, due to the
requirement for two covered resident spaces per dwelling unit regardless of the number
of bedrooms.
Deviations from the Parking Ordinance (except for the elimination of all required
parking) are classified as Minor Exceptions as opposed to Major Variances and can be
approved by the Development Review Committee. The City has been open to
reviewing feasible alternatives on a case-by-case basis: the 68-unit Colorado Commons
mixed use development was approved with 2 tandem parking spaces per unit and
employed a shared parking concept for the provision of guest parking and the
commercial uses; a shared parking concept was used for the 163-unit 700 South Myrtle
Avenue development; and most recently, the 154-unit 5th and Huntington apartments
was approved with a parking ratio of 1.8 spaces per unit.
Cumulative Impact of Development Standards
The number of dwelling units that may be constructed on any individual multi-family
residential property is determined by applying a combination of standards to the
specific site, summarized in Table 44 and the parking standards presented above.
While the three large scale apartment projects described above have all achieved the
maximum 54 unit/acre density permitted under zoning, each of these projects required
a reduction in the City's parking and minimum unit size standards. This would indicate
the City's minimum unit sizes and parking requirements are limiting the achievable
densities to less than that otherwise permitted under zoning. As a means of better
facilitating the provision of smaller, and more affordable units, the City has included a
                                                                              Housing Element
Appendix A                                  A-65                            Background Report

program in the Housing Element (Program 18) to undertake a review and update of its
minimum unit sizes and parking standards, including evaluation of the following to
enhance parking efficiencies and sustainability:
           Reduced parking requirements for studio and one bedroom units;
           Reduced parking requirements in proximity to transit;
           Inclusion of bicycle parking requirements in parking standards; and
           Establishment of shared parking guidelines for mixed-use projects.
Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
Housing element law specifies that jurisdictions identify adequate sites to be made
available through appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the
development of various types of housing for all economic segments of the population,
including multi-family rental housing, manufactured housing, second dwelling units,
single room occupancies, emergency shelters, and transitional and supportive housing.
Table 39 summarizes the variety of housing types permitted within Monrovia's zoning
districts.
                            Table 39: Housing Types by Residential Zone Category
                                                   RF
                                                           RM
              Housing Types Permitted              RE                RH         HCD        NC       RCM          M
                                                         RM/RH
                                                   RL
   Single family dwelling                           P       P         P
   Multiple-family dwelling                               P/C       P/C          CS        C          C
   Senior citizen housing (multiple)                       C         C           CS        C
   Manufactured Housing                             P       P         P
   Mobile Home Park                                                  C                                           C
   Second dwelling unit                             P       P         P
   Group Dwelling (State mandated)                  P       P         P
   Group Dwelling                                          C         C
   Transitional and Supportive Housing1,2                 P/C       P/C          CS        C          C
   Emergency     Shelters2                                                                                       P
   SROs3                                                                   To be defined
   Farm Employee Housing                                                  Not applicable
   P – Permitted    C – Conditional Use Permit Required  S – not permitted at street level Blank – Not Permitted
    1 Transitional and supportive housing shall be considered as a residential use of property and shall be
      subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the
      same zone.
    2 City Council is in the process of adopting Code amendments to specify transitional and supportive
      housing are a residential use of property, and to permit shelters in M zone district, with second
      reading of the Ordinance scheduled for 1/21/14.
    3 City to adopt Code amendment in 2014 to conditionally permit SROs in specified commercial zones.
   Source: Monrovia Zoning Ordinance, Land Use Element
                                                                                                        Housing Element
Appendix A                                              A-66                                         Background Report

Multiple-family dwellings
Multiple family dwellings are allowed in all six multiple family residential zones, 20
Planned Development (PD) zones, and 3 non-residential zones. This use type includes
apartments, condominiums, townhomes and Planned Unit Developments (PUD).
Transitional and supportive housing that operate as a multifamily use are regulated the
same as other multifamily dwellings.
The vast majority of new multifamily residential development takes place on infill lots,
replacing existing residential development in established neighborhoods. The City uses
a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) to ensure neighborhood compatibility. Since 1998, the
City has approved close to 900 multifamily dwelling units through the CUP process, with
not a single application being denied. In addition to the CUP, the majority of multi-
family applications in recent years have also required review of a tentative map which
also requires a public hearing as per the Subdivision Map Act; the CUP process occurs
concurrently with these other reviews, so that the processing time is not affected.
Nonetheless, the requirement for a CUP for multi-family projects in multi-family zoning
districts adds time and costs for projects not requesting other entitlements. As a means
of better facilitating the multi-family infill envisioned under the General Plan for areas
designed High Density Residential, the City has included a program in the Housing
Element to eliminate the CUP requirement for projects with fewer than ten units within
the RH zone.       Furthermore, RH zoned projects which incorporate a minimum of 25
percent affordable units will be processed through a site plan and design review
process, regardless of project size.
Factory Built/Modular Homes/Mobile Homes
These housing types that are installed on a permanent foundation and that meet the
State Uniform Housing Code are considered single-family homes and subject to the
same regulations as stick-built dwellings. Design review is limited to siding materials,
roofing materials, and roof overhang.
Second Units
Second units (also known as "granny flats") provide additional affordable housing
opportunities. The City has permitted second units in single-family zones for over 20
years. In 2003, the Zoning Ordinance was amended in compliance with AB 1866,
allowing second units by right in Monrovia's single and multi-family residential zones,
subject to the development standards of the underlying zone. Under the City's
regulations, second units can range in size from 150 to 640 square feet and are
permitted to have just one bedroom. One additional off-street garage parking space is
required for the second unit.
While Monrovia continues to process second unit applications, with 13 permits issued
during the last 2006-2013 RHNA planning period, the level of activity has been fairly
modest. Considering the benefits second units can offer an aging population in
particular, the City will undertake the following actions to encourage and facilitate the
provision of second units (Housing Element Program #12):
       Re-evaluate current second unit standards, including requirement for garage
        parking, prohibition of exterior stairs for attached second units, and restrictions on
                                                                                 Housing Element
Appendix A                                     A-67                           Background Report

         second units above a detached garage. Consider allowance for reduced
         setbacks and deviations from other standards through an administrative
         remedy process.
Group Dwellings
Monrovia's Zoning Code establishes the following two categories of groups dwellings:
         GROUP DWELLING (STATE MANDATED). A residential facility which serves six or fewer
         persons who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption on a weekly or longer in as
         such much as it is mandated by state law to not distinguish such residents from persons
         who reside in other family dwellings of the same type in the same zone (Cal. Health and
         Safety Code §§ 1500 et seq.). Group dwellings under this classification may be used for
         such uses as residential care facility, homes for handicapped persons or dependent and
         neglected children.
         GROUP DWELLING. A residential facility designed for occupancy of persons who are not
         related by blood, marriage or adoption, on a weekly or longer basis. Typical uses shall
         include dormitories, sorority or fraternity houses, retirement homes, boarding and rooming
         houses and other such facilities.
As indicated in Table 45, the City permits State mandated group dwellings in all
residential zones, as well as in those PD zones permitting residential uses. All other group
homes not covered under state regulations are allowed in all multifamily residential
zones with approval of a CUP; this includes residential care facilities.
Transitional and Supportive Housing
SB 2, effective January 2008, amended Housing Element law regarding planning and
approval for transitional and supportive housing. Specifically, SB 2 requires transitional
and supportive housing to be treated as a residential use and only subject to those
restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. For
example, if the transitional housing is a multi-family use proposed in a multi-family zone,
then zoning should treat the transitional housing the same as other multifamily uses in
the proposed zone.
Transitional housing is temporary housing (often six months to two years) for a homeless
individual or family who is transitioning to permanent housing. This housing can take
several forms, including group housing or multi-family units. However, as the Zoning
Ordinance does not currently contain a discrete definition of such facilities, the City will
add the following definition to its Code and add provisions which shall state explicitly
that transitional housing shall be considered a residential use of property and shall be
subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same
type in the same zone:
         Transitional Housing. A dwelling unit or units intended for use as rental housing but
         operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and
         recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a
         predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the binning
         of the assistance.
                                                                                        Housing Element
Appendix A                                         A-68                               Background Report

Supportive housing is generally defined as permanent, affordable housing with on-site
services that help residents transition into stable, more productive lives. Services may
include childcare, after-school tutoring, career counseling, etc. Most transitional
housing includes a supportive services component. However, similar to transitional
housing, the City will add the following definition to the Zoning Code and add
provisions which shall state explicitly that supportive housing shall be considered a
residential use of property and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to
other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone:
        Supportive Housing A dwelling unit or units with no limit on length of stay, that is intended
        for occupancy by the target population (as defined in California Government Code
        Section 65582), as amended or replaced from time to time), and that is linked to onsite or
        offsite services that assist the supportive housing residents in retaining the housing,
        improving their health status, and maximizing their ability to live and, when possible, work
        in the community.
Emergency Shelters
SB 2 also requires the Housing Element to address planning and approval requirements
for emergency shelters. More specifically, jurisdictions with an unmet need for
emergency shelters for the homeless are required to identify a zone(s) where
emergency shelters will be allowed as a permitted use without a conditional use or
other discretionary permit. The identified zone must have sufficient capacity to
accommodate the shelter need, and at a minimum provide capacity for at least one
year-round shelter. Permit processing, development and management standards for
emergency shelters must be objective and facilitate the development of, or conversion
to, emergency shelters.
As discussed in the homeless section of Housing Element Needs Assessment, the Los
Angeles Homeless Service Authority (LAHSA) January 2013 point-in-time count identified
17 homeless within the Monrovia city limits. Given that Monrovia has no emergency
shelters within it City limits, Monrovia can be considered to have an unmet need for an
emergency shelter.
Monrovia staff have conducted a review of the City's zoning districts and determined
the Manufacturing (M) zone is the most conducive to provision of an emergency
homeless shelter by right. Since there are almost no vacant developable parcels
remaining in the City, the accommodation of an emergency shelter will require either
redevelopment of a site or the utilization of an existing building. Based on the
development standards and existing development within the City, the M zone district
offers many opportunities for provision of an emergency shelter.
Existing development within the M zoning district is mainly comprised of smaller industrial
or warehousing buildings occupied by lower intensity light industrial, research and
development, warehousing or office uses. Many of these properties are underutilized
and could be easily modified to accommodate a shelter. Very few heavy industrial
uses operate within the City. New uses that fall within the heavy industrial classification
would require the approval of a Conditional Use Permit. Part of the consideration of the
approval of a new heavy industrial business would be potential impacts on surrounding
                                                                                       Housing Element
Appendix A                                    A-69                                   Background Report
existing properties and uses, thereby providing protection for an existing shelter use.
The following distinct areas fall within the M zoning district: South Mountain, Old Town
Extension/West Chestnut, Railroad/ Raymond, and Taylor/Walker. Each of these areas
are within close proximity to public transportation. Additionally, the Foothill Unity
Center, a provider that among other services offers assistance to people who are
situationally homeless, is based in one of the largest manufacturing districts.
The City has included a program in the Housing Element (Program #17) to amend the
Zoning Ordinance (by January 2014) to Identify emergency shelters as a by-right,
permitted use in the M-1 zone district subject to the same development and
management standards as other uses permitted in the M-1 zone.
Single Room Occupancy (SRO)Units
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) residences are small, one room units (generally 100-250
sq. ft.) occupied by a single individual, and may either have shared or private kitchen
and bathroom facilities. SROs are rented on a weekly to monthly basis typically without
rental deposit, and can provide an entry point into the housing market for extremely
low income individuals, formerly homeless and disabled persons. While Monrovia’s
Zoning Ordinance does not explicitly address Single Room Occupancy uses, they
currently would be treated the same as motels and hotels.
In order to better facilitate SROs, the City will revise its Zoning Code to explicitly identify
SROs as a conditionally permitted use within specified commercial zoning districts.
Farm Employee Housing
Based on Census data compiled by the Southern California Association of
Governments (SCAG), just 33 Monrovia residents were occupied in farm-related
occupations, representing less than 0.02 percent of the City’s labor force. The City has
no land remaining in agricultural use and does not have any farm housing. Therefore,
given the absence of farmworkers in the community, the City has not identified a need
for specialized farmworker housing beyond overall programs for housing affordability.
                                                                                 Housing Element
Appendix A                                  A-70                              Background Report

Development Review Process
In order to facilitate development applications, City Staff strongly encourages all
property owners and/or developers to discuss their proposals prior to developing a fully
realized proposal. Staff Planners are assigned to projects early on and will generally
follow the project through to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. Although
applicants are encouraged to meet with the various departments early on in the
process, the fact that City Staff involved in development are located in three separate
buildings could be a constraint to development. Due to the limited staff, it is
impractical to create a “one-stop” counter; however the provision of documents from
other departments at each customer service counter could help disseminate
information.
To facilitate development proposals, pre-application meetings are scheduled with the
Engineering Division, Building Division, Planning Division and the Fire Department to
identify any potential issues and to find solutions that can be incorporated into the final
proposal. Staff’s philosophy is to provide as much information up front and to set the
applicant up for success.
Critical to the efficient processing of applications is the Development Review
Committee (DRC) review. DRC is an interdisciplinary review for new development (both
single-family and multifamily). The Committee is made up of the Director of Public
Works, Fire Chief, Police Chief and is chaired by the Director of Community
Development. DRC makes recommendations on applications under the Planning
Commission’s purview and has jurisdiction on applications for minor conditional use
permits and minor exceptions. This committee was established to streamline the permit
process.
The DRC process provides for better-coordinated, concurrent, and expedited review of
development proposals. The process also provides for more rapid trouble-shooting of
potential problems that could delay development review due to the interdepartmental
nature of the process. For these reasons, the City considers the DRC process as a
benefit, and not a constraint, to housing.
Conditional Use Permit Process for Multifamily Housing
As previously described under "Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types", Monrovia
currently requires a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) for multi-family housing within multi-
family zoning districts as a means of ensuring neighborhood compatibility.
Development proposals are reviewed by the Monrovia Planning Commission at a
public hearing.
The City strives to use the CUP process to reduce potential issues of neighborhood and
environmental concern so that multifamily projects can be processed as expeditiously
as possible. Staff review of multifamily proposals is typically completed within 30 days,
and total time between submission of a complete application and approval of a CUP is
about eight weeks. The use of an Interdepartmental Development Review Committee
(DRC) assures timely and coordinated review of development proposals.
                                                                              Housing Element
Appendix A                                  A-71                           Background Report

Nonetheless, the requirement for a CUP for multi-family projects in multi-family zoning
districts adds time and costs for projects not requesting other entitlements. As a means
of better facilitating the multi-family infill envisioned under the General Plan for areas
designated High Density Residential, the City has included a program in the Housing
Element to eliminate the CUP requirement within the RH zone for projects with fewer
than ten units.     Furthermore, RH zoned projects which incorporate a minimum of 25
percent affordable units will be processed through a site plan and design review
process, regardless of project size. Monrovia will also be establishing a clear set of Multi-
Family Design Guidelines (Housing Element Program #6) which will further help to
facilitate the planning review process and address potential constraints associated with
the City's multi-family processing procedures.
Development Approval Timelines
The City of Monrovia prides itself on its ability to process all applications in a timely and
efficient manner. The time required for development approval is not generally a
constraint or substantial cost to housing developers. Items requiring a public hearing
typically take 6-8 weeks to the date
of the hearing from the time of                             Table 40: Approval Timelines
submittal of a complete application.              Type of Approval or Permit      Typical Processing
                                                                                          Time
If City Council approval is also
                                             Ministerial Review                         2 weeks
required (e.g. Tentative Tract Maps)
                                             Conditional Use Permit                    6-8 weeks
an additional 2 weeks is standard.
                                             Zone Change                              2-3 months
Average       processing     time    for General Plan Amendment                       2-3 months
residential projects varies depending Site Plan Review                                  2 weeks
on project complexity. Single-family Design Review                                      2 weeks
residential projects must be reviewed Tract Maps                                      8-10 weeks
by      the    Development       Review Parcel Maps                                    6-8 weeks
Committee, which meets every week.
                                             Initial Environmental Study               6-8 weeks
If approved, the project must go
                                             Environmental Impact Report             4-12 months
through the plan check process,
which takes up to four weeks. Multi- Source: Monrovia Community Development Dept, 2013.
family projects of three or more units
must be reviewed at a public hearing. The process, from preliminary review to plan
check, including public hearings, may take up to 10 weeks. Monrovia’s typical time to
process development applications is less than most other local jurisdictions and do not
constrain the development of affordable housing.
                                                                                        Housing Element
Appendix A                                     A-72                                 Background Report

Permit and Development Impact Fees
Monrovia charges a number of permit and development impact fees to cover the cost
of processing development requests and providing public facilities and services to new
development.           Although these fees are necessary to meet City service and
environmental standards, they can have an impact on the cost of housing, particularly
affordable housing.             The following Tables 41 and 42 list the City’s current
Planning/Entitlement Fees and Development/Impact Fees.
                       Table 41: Summary of Monrovia Planning/Entitlement Fees
    Fee                                                                  Amount
    Development Review Committee                   Single-family (addition)                  $142
                                                   Single-family (new)                       $170
                                                   Commercial/industrial/multi-family         $340
                                                   Miscellaneous                             $115
                                                   City Initiated Fee                        No Fee
    Minor Exception                                                                           $315
    Major Variance                                                                            $1,155
    Major Conditional Use Permit (CUP)             New = $2,215      Amend = $960 Use only = $1,155
    Tentative or Vesting Parcel Map                New = $1,565      Amend = $915
    Tentative or Vesting Tract Map                 New =       $1,565 (+$150 per dwelling unit)
                                                   Amend = $1,050 (+$150 per dwelling unit)
    Hillside Development Permit                                                               $630
    Cumulative Fee Collection                      All multiple request applications = 100% main
    (for above categories)                         request + 50% all additional requests
    Property Ownership List Preparation                                                       $211
    Public Hearing Publication Fee                 Planning Commission                        $108
    (for above categories)                         Planning Commission & City Council         $216
    Environmental Review                           Negative Declaration                      $850
    (not subject to cumulative fee collection)
    CCR Review                                                                                $415
    Landscape Plan Check                                                                      $365
    Appeal to Planning Commission                  Single-family                             $160
                                                   All Others                                $525
    Appeal to City Council                         Single-family                             $130
                                                   All Others                                $355
    Computerization Cost Recovery                  $5 per application for all applications
    Historic Preservation Cost Recovery            $3 per application for all applications
    Source: Source: Monrovia Community Development Dept, 2013.
                                                                                           Housing Element
Appendix A                                     A-73                                     Background Report

                              Table 42: City of Monrovia Development Fees
             Fee                                                    Amount
             School Facility Fee                             $1.84 per square foot
             Construction Tax                                  $125 per bedroom
             Building Permit Cost                                $115 Minimum
             Electrical Permit Cost                               $59 minimum
             Plumbing Permit Cost                                 $59 minimum
             Mechanical Permit Cost                               $59 minimum
             State Seismic Fee (SMIP)                      1% cost of building permit
             Sewer Connection Fee                                Varies by zone
                                                    From $0 to $550 for each dwelling unit
             Water Connection Fee                 1” copper service with 1” meter = $3,900
             Sewer Lateral                                            $250
             Grading Plan Check                                Engineers estimate
             Grading Inspection Fee                            Engineers estimate
             General Plan Cost Recovery                         Varies by project
             Art in Public Places                  1% of project cost ($1 million and over)
             Fire Service Impact Fees              $40 site plan review + $.35 to $.70 per SF
               Source: Source: Monrovia Community Development Dept, 2013.
The City’s fee schedule is based on the actual cost of providing the requested service.
Fees are reviewed annually and adopted by the City Council at a public hearing. In
addition to the fee cost study, a survey of surrounding cities is also completed to
compare Monrovia’s fees to other jurisdictions.                      The majority of the fees are
proportionate to the size of the proposed project which help to keep costs down for
smaller developments. While any fees add to the overall cost of housing, Monrovia’s
fees consistently remain at or below the average of other San Gabriel Valley
jurisdictions.
Monrovia will waive or defer fees for affordable housing developments on a case-by-
case basis, or use local funds if the City determines that the waiver or deferral is
necessary to maintain the affordability of housing to low-income households. The City
considers fee waiver requests for both affordable ownership and rental housing.
Estimated Project Costs
Development and impact fees for a typical single family home would be approximately
$6,000 (without subdivision). For Multi-family development, the fees average $17,780
per unit or 9% of the valuation. Based on the schedule of fees provided in Tables 41
and 42 above, the following Table 43 illustrates the fees for a 10-unit Planned Unit
Development (PUD) with 3 bedrooms per 1,700 square foot dwelling and a valuation of
$187,000 per unit.
                                                                                              Housing Element
Appendix A                                        A-74                                      Background Report

                     Table 43: Total Project Development Fees for 10 unit PUD
           Fee Category                                           Fee Amount
           Planning
            Conditional Use Permit                                    $2,215
            Architectural / Site Plan Review (DRC)                     $340
            Other (publication and owner list)                         $427
           Building
            Plan Check                                               $17,227
            Building Permit                                          $24,770
            Electrical Permit                                         $2,534
            Mechanical Permit                                         $1,260
            Plumbing Permit                                           $2,342
            Construction Tax                                          $3,750
            State Seismic Fee                                        $18,700
            Waste Mgmt. Fee                                            $500
            General Plan Cost Recovery                                $5210
            Art In Public Spaces                                     $18,700
           Subdivision
            Certificate of Compliance                                  N/A
            Lot Line Adjustment                                        N/A
            Tentative Tract Map                                       $3065
            Other (Landscape Plan Check)                               $365
            CC&Rs                                                      $415
           Environmental N/A
           Impact Fees
            Fire Impact fee (per SF)                                 $13,750
            Sprinkler Plan Check and Permit Fee                        $1430
            Dry Stamp Pipe                                              $200
            Water Connection line and meter                          $29,000
            Sewer Hook-up (included in plumbing)                         N/A
            School ($1.84 per SF)                                    $31,280
            Drive Approach (each)                                       $322
                          TOTAL PROJECT FEES                        $177,802
                          TOTAL FEES PER UNIT                        $17,780
                 Proportion of Total Development Cost                   9%
              Source: Source: Monrovia Community Development Dept, 2013.
                                                                                Housing Element
Appendix A                                       A-75                         Background Report
Building Code Requirements
The City's Building Code follows the standards established in the California Building
Code. Many of these standards are reinforced through the policies of the General Plan
and basic safety standards. Building Code standards do not constrain the placement
of affordable housing in portions of the City where the land is flat. However, the
standards are more restrictive in the hillside areas, requiring more safety studies and
safety materials to combat the environmental hazards present in the hillside areas.
Therefore, additional costs are associated with meeting these requirements, making
placement of affordable housing in these areas unlikely. These standards are necessary
to ensure the health and safety of those residing in the dwelling and should not be
weakened in order to site high-density housing in a hazardous area. Enforcement of
the Building Code does not constrain housing.
Off-site requirements
All properties zoned for multifamily uses are on dedicated/improved streets with curbs
and gutters and most with sidewalks. Unless the improvements in adjacent right-of-way
are damaged, enhancements are generally not required. Monrovia’s street grid system
helps to mitigate potential traffic impacts and except for very large projects (over 50
units), traffic mitigation measures have not been required.
The utility delivery system is already in place and all property zoned for multifamily uses
is currently served by or directly adjacent to utilities. In general, off site requirements are
minimal and do not constrain housing development.
Regulations Applying to Persons with Disabilities and Special Needs
The Monrovia Municipal Code classifies most supportive housing for persons with
disabilities including licensed residential care facilities as “group dwellings”. Group
dwellings serving six or fewer people are permitted by right in all residential zones as
required by state law and subject to the state’s maximum concentration requirements.
No review by the City is required. The Girls Republic which provides a full continuum of
care facility for recovering teenaged girls operates under this classification, and
recently expanded to 8 beds.
Group dwellings that are not regulated by the state can be located in all RM zones,
RM/RH and RH zones with approval of a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) by the Planning
Commission; there are no maximum concentration requirements in the City’s
regulations. Supportive and transitional housing that are developed and operated as
multi-family dwellings are regulated the same as other multi-family dwellings pursuant to
state requirements. Second units, which are permitted in all residential zones, can
provide another type of supportive housing or can function as a caretaker/companion
unit.
In the past 20 years, there has been only one request for supportive housing in
Monrovia. Phoenix House operates a residential treatment facility for female parolees.
                                                                                    Housing Element
Appendix A                                   A-76                                 Background Report

The CUP was originally approved in 1999 and was amended in December 2005 to allow
an expansion.
The CUP process allows the consideration of reasonable accommodation for residential
development for persons with disabilities and evaluates individual requests on a case-
by-case and site-by-site basis. Factors such as proximity to services and transportation
can be examined on determining the suitability of the location based on the specified
user.
Conditions are placed to ensure that the facility meets all applicable laws including the
provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and help to ensure a successful
integration into an existing neighborhood. Deviations from setback, parking, floor area
ratio, and accessory structure requirements can be requested through a concurrent
variance process. Findings would be consistent with the Federal Fair Housing Act and
the California Fair Employment and Housing Act. For the most part, the regulations do
not significantly constrain the ability to locate these facilities.
Monrovia does not have a written policy of reasonable accommodation, however,
most requests for accommodation that require a deviation from the development
standards can be handled through the minor exception process. Additionally, access
modifications like ramps are ministerial through the building permit process. In order to
better facilitate housing for persons with disabilities, the Housing Element includes a
program for the City to adopt written procedures for reasonable accommodation.
                                                                             Housing Element
Appendix A                                    A-77                        Background Report
B. Non-Governmental Constraints
The major non-governmental constraints in the provision of housing are the related
costs: construction costs, labor costs, land costs and market financing. Over the past
decade all of these costs have risen substantially. This drives up the cost of housing,
making the provision of affordable housing even more difficult and unlikely without
some sort of assistance. These constraints are not specific to Monrovia and do not differ
significantly from other communities in California.
Land Costs
As with much of southern California, over the past several decades the price of land in
Monrovia has increased substantially and is the leading factor to the high housing
prices and rents throughout the region.           Being a built out city means that new
development is taking place on already improved land, which further drives up the cost
of building new housing. The high cost of land along with the improvements makes it
very difficult for developers to build housing for the lower income segment of the
market.
In general, the high cost of land in Monrovia limits market-built affordable housing
without significant financial incentives.
Construction Costs
A major cost associated with the development of housing is the cost of building
materials, which have risen dramatically in recent years. According to the U.S.
Department of Labor Construction Cost Trends for 2013, the overall cost of construction
materials rose from approximately $178 to $205 per square foot between 2006-2012,
reflecting a 15 percent increase in materials costs. The increase in construction costs is
slowing, but were up 2-2.5% in the first half of 2012, with labor cost increases above that
of materials (2.5% labor compared to 1.5% material cost increases).6
A reduction in amenities and the quality of building materials (above a minimum
acceptability for health, safety, and adequate performance) can result in lower
development costs. As part of the City’s density bonus program, the City allows for
affordable units to be smaller in size (maintaining the same number of bedrooms) and
have different features and interior finishes than market rate units, provided all project
units were comparable in construction quality and exterior design. Another factor
related to construction costs is the number of units built at one time. As that number
increases, overall costs generally decrease as builders are able to take advantage of
the benefits of economies of scale.
6 www.dcd.com/pdf_files/1301trends.pdf
                                                                                Housing Element
Appendix A                                  A-78                              Background Report

The Cost and Availability of Financing
The primary factor related to home finance affecting housing affordability and
availability is the cost of borrowing money (interest rates). Historically, substantial
changes in interest rates have correlated with swings in home sales. When interest rates
decline, sales increase. The reverse has been true when interest rates increase.
Over the past two decades, there has been a dramatic growth in alternative mortgage
products, such as graduated mortgages and variable rate mortgages also known as
subprime lending. These types of loans allow homeowners to take advantage of lower
initial interest rates and qualify for larger home loans. However, as the terms of the
introductory rates began to expire, loan rates were adjusted upward increasing
mortgages. This forced many people with these types of loans into default. By late
2007, foreclosures accelerated triggering a global financial crisis in 2008.
This has completely changed the face of the mortgage industry. The standards for
both new loans and refinancing have been tightened and significantly limited
available options for prospective borrowers.
The availability of financing in a community depends on a number of factors, including
the type of lending institutions active in the community, lending practices, rates and
fees charged, laws and regulations governing financial institutions, and equal access to
those institutions. Through analysis of Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data on
the disposition of residential loan applications, an assessment can be made of the
availability of residential financing within a community.
Table 44 summarizes HMDA data for both Monrovia and Los Angeles County as a
whole, providing information on the approval status of all home purchase loan
applications during 2011. Residential lending activity in Monrovia was relatively modest,
with just 315 applications for conventional and FHA home purchase loans. At 77
percent, the mortgage loan approval rate in Monrovia was higher than the County’s
approval rate of 71 percent. Review of loan denials by census tract indicates no tracts
with loan denial rates significantly above the ten percent citywide average.
                             Table 44: Status of Home Purchase Loans 2011
                            Loans Approved              Loans Denied         Loans Withdrawn/
        Loan Type                                                                Incomplete
                                          L.A.                    L.A.                    L.A.
                          Monrovia                 Monrovia               Monrovia
                                        County                  County                  County
        # Loan
                             241        62,225         33       13,050        41         12,556
        Applications
        % of Total           77%         71%          10%         15%        13%          14%
        Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Data, 2011. Compiled by Karen Warner Associates.
         Note: Approved loans include loans originated & applications approved but not accepted.
                                                                                           Housing Element
Appendix A                                        A-79                                  Background Report

Environmental Hazards
Other non-governmental constraints include environmental factors such as geological
or flood hazards that cause land to be unsuitable for resident use. The City is prone to
earthquakes and seismic related hazards such as landslide, liquefaction, and extreme
ground shaking. Geological hazards, such as erosion prone soils, also create potential
constraints. The Hillside areas are located closer to the active fault lines that cross
through Monrovia than the flatlands. Much of the hillside area is zoned for residential
use and already contains developments that have been properly engineered
according to the specifications of each parcel.
There are two dams in Monrovia that could significantly impact the City if failure should
occur. These dams are located in the foothills and would therefore inundate areas
down slope of the dams. However, if such an event should occur, the entire City of
Monrovia, as well as adjacent cities, would be flooded. While this poses a threat to all
dwellings in the City, development of vacant parcels in the flat regions is still possible
and can be accomplished in a manner that improves safety through proper design
and the provision of adequate drainage.
Mudslides affect the hillside areas and occur when saturated soils are unable to
stabilize and succumb to gravity. This is most common in areas where improper grading
and vegetation removal has occurred, which can destabilize soils. This constraint can
be overcome through proper construction management, dwelling design, and
engineering to maintain slope stability. Also, the provision of adequate drainage also
combats this constraint. The City has established regulations and standards to ensure
safety from these environmental hazards.
In addition, there are a number of fire safety standards to ensure structures in fire prone
areas are adequately equipped with sprinkler systems, fire retardant materials, and
surrounding vegetation is maintained.
Therefore, compliance with these objectives and standards, minimizes safety risk, and
allows development in the hillside areas with proper approval, construction methods
and materials, and maintenance.
While there are a number of environmental hazards in Monrovia, most of these hazards
can be overcome through engineering, design, construction techniques, and
maintenance. The City's Land Use Element Update directs higher density development
away from environmentally sensitive areas. The presence of environmental constraints
in Monrovia are primarily related to the community's hillsides, and the City has
determined there are no environmental constraints that would impede the
development of housing units to meet the City's regional housing needs.
                                                                              Housing Element
Appendix A                                 A-80                            Background Report
IV. EVALUATION OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS
UNDER EXISTING HOUSING ELEMENT
Under State Housing Element law, communities are required to assess the achievements
under their adopted housing programs as part of the five-year update to their housing
elements. These results should be quantified where possible (e.g. the number of units
rehabilitated), but may be qualitative where necessary (e.g. mitigation of
governmental constraints). The results should then be compared with what was
projected or planned in the earlier element. Where significant shortfalls exist between
what was planned and what was achieved, the reasons for such differences must be
discussed.
The City of Monrovia 2008-2014 draft Housing Element set forth a series of housing
programs to address the following issue areas:
       Programs to Preserve and Improve Existing Affordable Housing
       Programs to Assist in the Development of Affordable Housing
       Programs to Maintain or Achieve Compliance with Housing Regulations
This section reviews the City’s progress to date in implementing these housing programs
and their continued appropriateness for the updated Housing Element. Table 45 which
follows summarizes the City’s housing program accomplishments, followed by a review
of its quantified objectives.      The results of this analysis provides the basis for
development of the program strategy for Monrovia's 2014-2021 Housing Element.
                                                                             Housing Element
Appendix A                                  A-81                          Background Report

              Table 45: Review of Accomplishments under 2008-2014 Monrovia Housing Element
Policy/Program                                 Accomplishments
Programs to Preserve and Improve Existing Affordable Housing
1. Monrovia Area Partnership                   Progress: 61 grants completed. The MAP Neighborhood
                                               Improvement Grants were suspended in 2010 due to lack of
2008-14 Objective: Complete 90 MAP
                                               available funds. The grants program will be funded again in fiscal
neighborhood improvement projects
                                               year 2013-2104 for 10 neighborhood improvement projects.
(grants), including 25 very low, 34 low and 31
                                               Effectiveness: The neighborhood improvement grants assist
moderate income.
                                               households with low to moderate incomes with exterior home
                                               improvements, maintenance and the elimination of blighted
                                               conditions.
                                               Appropriateness: MAP’s focus on preserving and improving the
                                               quality of existing housing and neighborhoods through community
                                               involvement as well as providing financial assistances is the center of
                                               the City’s housing programs. The benefits of this program are
                                               evidenced by the elimination of neighborhood blight and have
                                               proven to spur additional neighborhood improvements. Future
                                               funding is uncertain.
2. Code Enforcement/ Neighborhood              Progress: An average of 6,000 inspections are conducted annually
Preservation Program                           as part of the Code Enforcement/Neighborhood Preservation
                                               Program. Reduced staffing levels have resulted in fewer annual
2008-14 Objective: 7,500 inspection annually
                                               inspections conducted. Cases are imitated on a complaint basis
                                               only.
                                               Effectiveness: An average of 700 cases are closed annually from all
                                               inspections including households with no income limits. The majority
                                               of inspections occur in CDBG Census Tracts.
                                               Appropriateness: Code Enforcement is the City’s primary tool for
                                               bringing substandard housing into compliance and will continue to
                                               play a vital role in the preservation of the City’s affordable housing
                                               stock. This is an important program that would benefit from
                                               additional funding to allow it to move from reactive to proactive.
3. Emergency Grant Program                     Progress: 4 grants completed. The grants were suspended in 2010
                                               due to lack of available funds. Two grants will be funded and
2008-14 Objective: 10 grants
                                               completed in fiscal year 2013-14.
                                               Effectiveness: The emergency grants have assisted households with
                                               low to moderate incomes with exterior or interior repairs, home
                                               improvements, maintenance and the elimination of blighted or
                                               unsafe conditions.
                                               Appropriateness: The benefits of this program are evidenced by the
                                               elimination of neighborhood blight, but future funding is uncertain.
4. Handyworker Grant Program                   Progress: 27 grants were given between 2008 and 2011. There will
                                               be 4 grants (8 total) completed annually for 2012-2014 due to the
2008-14 Objective: 6-7 grants annually
                                               reduction in CDBG funding for this same period.
                                               Effectiveness: The Handyworker Program assists income qualified
                                               homeowners with minor home improvements to eliminate
                                               substandard housing conditions in a cost effective manner.
                                               Appropriateness: The benefits of this program are evidenced by the
                                               elimination of substandard conditions of residential structures and is
                                               targeted to income qualified residents. The program will continue
                                               although, future CDBG funding is uncertain.
5. Neighborhood Pride Program                  Progress: This program was not continued due to reduced staffing
                                               and cuts in CDBG funding.
2008-2014 Objective: 8 properties annually
                                               Effectiveness: N/A
                                               Appropriateness: N/A
6. Homeowner Education Project                 Progress: Several independent workshops were conducted;
                                               however, this program has been consolidated into MAP. As part of
                                                                                                        Housing Element
       Appendix A                                          A-82                                      Background Report

              Table 45: Review of Accomplishments under 2008-2014 Monrovia Housing Element
Policy/Program                              Accomplishments
2008-2014 Objective: 3-4 workshops per year the annual Neighborhood Conference, several sessions are focused
                                            on providing information to residents on property maintenance and
                                            improvements.
                                            Effectiveness: Providing education on specific improvement/
                                            maintenance topics is an effective way of spurring housing
                                            improvements which often lead to resident-initiated neighborhood
                                            improvements.
                                            Appropriateness: This program will continue under the MAP
                                            umbrella with various classes offered through the Neighborhood
                                            Conference. Lack of City staff reduces the ability expand the
                                            program.
7. Make a Difference Day                    Progress: Home repairs/maintenance was provided to 24 properties.
                                            were assisted with home repairs and maintenance.
2008-2014 Objective: 4 properties annually
                                            Effectiveness: The recipients were low-moderate income and/or
                                            seniors. The program is cost effective and very successful.
                                            Appropriateness: This program will continue as it assists those
                                            homeowners with repairs and maintenance and has proven to
                                            stimulate neighborhood improvements. The Volunteer Center is the
                                            lead on the planning and implementation of this program with the
                                            City providing administrative support.
8. Historic Landmark/ Mills Act Contract    Progress: 9 contracts were applied for and approved between 2008
                                            and 2013. A reduction in staffing dedicated to historic preservation
2008-2014 Objective: 5 contracts annually
                                            contributed to fewer contracts being initiated.
                                            Effectiveness: 3 of the 9 were in CDBG Census Tracts which will
                                            preserve older structures in lower income neighborhoods in
                                            Monrovia. City designated historic landmarks are required to be
                                            maintained both by the Municipal Code and the conditions of the
                                            Mills Act Contract. Blocks with at least one designated landmark
                                            tend to be better maintained and have fewer code enforcement
                                            cases than those that do not.
                                            Appropriateness: This program will continue to be implemented as is
                                            and has been effective in the preservation and maintenance of
                                            older homes and encourages neighborhood improvements.
9. Rental Rehabilitation Program            Progress: This program was not implemented.
                                            Effectiveness: N/A
2008-2014 Objective: 4 units
                                            Appropriateness: Due to the dissolution of the MRA, there is no
                                            funding available for this program.
10. Section 8 Rental Assistance             Progress: Monrovia continues to actively participate in the Section 8
                                            through a cooperative agreement with the Baldwin Park Housing
2008-2014 Objective:
                                            Authority. Neighborhood Services staff is trained to provide
Maximize Monrovia’s participation in the    information and provide referrals to BPHA.
Section 8 program.                          Effectiveness: Although the City cannot directly affect the number
                                            of vouchers available to residents, the education and referral
                                            component provide a service to residents.
                                            Appropriateness: It is appropriate for the City to continue to provide
                                            referral information to the public.
11. Preservation of Affordable (At-Risk)    Progress: The City provides basic information on tenant rights and
Housing Units                               referral information (also available on the City website). No
                                            additional City action taken during this time period.
2008-2014 Objective: 29 affordable units
                                            Effectiveness: Property owners continued to renew Section 8
preserved.
                                            contracts, and thus none of the projects converted to market-rate.
                                            Appropriateness: While this program remains appropriate to the
                                            updated Housing Element, with the loss of redevelopment funds to
                                            provide property owners incentives, other than provide information
                                            and education, preservation will be difficult to achieve.
                                                                                                  Housing Element
        Appendix A                                      A-83                                    Background Report

              Table 45: Review of Accomplishments under 2008-2014 Monrovia Housing Element
Policy/Program                                 Accomplishments
12. Monrovia Foreclosure Assistance            Progress: This program has been fully implemented including
Program                                        dedicated staff and a steady funding source for the continued
                                               operation. Code Enforcement staff monitor all properties in the
2008-2014 Objective: Prepare informational
                                               various stages of foreclosure on a routine basis. Properties found to
materials and market through various outlets.
                                               be in disrepair or creating a nuisance situation are addressed
                                               utilizing the code enforcement process.
                                               Effectiveness: These strategies have been very successful in tracking
                                               and minimizing negative impacts to neighborhoods.
                                               Appropriateness: The number of foreclosures have significantly
                                               reduced, and a city sponsored program is no longer necessary.
Programs to Assist in the Development of Additional Housing Opportunities
13. Monrovia Redevelopment Agency              Progress: The former MRA partnered with Habitat for Humanity to
                                               achieve the development of four low income units for first-time
2008-14 Objective: Strive to attain 113
                                               homebuyers. The MRA also assisted in the provision of 19 moderate
affordable units, as identified in the MRA's 5
                                               income ownership units within several projects. Over the past
Year Implementation Plan.
                                               decade, the Agency purchased several smaller underutilized
                                               industrial parcels in Station Square including parcels that have been
                                               consolidated into a 2.8 acre parcel that is in the process of being
                                               transferred to a developer for construction of several hundred
                                               apartment units.
                                               Effectiveness: In the past, MRA Low/Mod housing set- aside monies
                                               were the primary source of funds to assist with affordable housing.
                                               Appropriateness: Redevelopment Agencies statewide have been
                                               dissolved. However, prior MRA assets, including land holdings
                                               purchased with Low/Mod Funds, have been transferred to
                                               Monrovia's Housing Successor Agency and will provide resources in
                                               support of affordable housing in the upcoming planning period.
14. First-Time Homebuyers Assistance           Progress: This was a MRA funded program which was put on hold
Programs                                       during the recession. No second mortgages agreements were
                                               executed during this period.
2008-14 Objective: 40 Units
                                               Effectiveness: This was an effective program for providing assistance
                                               with a down payment through a silent second mortgage.
                                               Appropriateness: With the dissolution of the MRA, there is no funding
                                               available for this program.
15. Second Units                               Progress: Overall second unit construction has been modest, with 13
                                               units issued building permits during 2006-2013, or approximately two
2008-14 Objective: Approve 3-5 units
                                               per year.
annually
                                               Effectiveness: While Monrovia's second unit provisions have resulted
                                               in providing additional opportunities for alternative affordable
                                               housing, the level of activity has been relatively modest. The City will
                                               evaluate modifications to its current second unit standards, and
                                               pursue expanded educational outreach.
                                               Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate to the Housing
                                               Element update.
16. Habitat for Humanity                       Progress: Four low-income dwelling units were constructed.
                                               Effectiveness: Habitat for Humanity is one of the most cost effective
 2008-14 Objective: 12 units
                                               options for providing low income ownership housing. The four unit
                                               PUD built provided housing opportunities for low income families that
                                               would not have otherwise had this opportunity.
                                               Appropriateness: It is appropriate to continue to facilitate Habitat’s
                                               activities, however, without MRA funding, the City will not be in a
                                               position to assist financially.
17. Density Bonus                              Progress: No development applications have been submitted that
                                               utilized State density bonus provisions since 2008.
                                                                                                      Housing Element
        Appendix A                                          A-84                                   Background Report

              Table 45: Review of Accomplishments under 2008-2014 Monrovia Housing Element
Policy/Program                                Accomplishments
2008-14 Objective: 25 affordable units        Effectiveness: If utilized, the program would provide additional low-
                                              moderate income dwelling units.
                                              Appropriateness: The City will need to amend its existing regulations
                                              to be consistent with AB 2280.
18. General Plan Policies/Adequate Sites      Progress: As presented in Table H-2 at the end of this section, a total
                                              of 443 net new units were approved and built in Monrovia during the
2008-14 Objective: Achieve the City's RHNA
                                              2006-2014 planning period, including 4 very low income, 10 low
goal of 567 units, including 142 very low, 88
                                              income, 22 moderate income and 407 above moderate income.
low, 96 moderate, and 241 above moderate
                                              Effectiveness: While the City provided adequate sites zoned at
income units.
                                              appropriate densities through its General Plan, the level of
                                              affordable production fell below Monrovia's identified RHNA needs.
                                              Appropriateness: An adequate sites program, combined with
                                              incentives to facilitate affordable production, remains appropriate
                                              to the updated Housing Element.
19. San Gabriel Valley Council of             Progress: SGV Homeless Needs Assessment Study was completed
Governments Initiatives                       and adopted by the SGVCOG Board which resulted in the
                                              formation of the SGV Housing & Homeless Coordinating Council
2008-14 Objective: Completion of Homeless
                                              (HHCC)
Needs Assessment Study and Strategies
                                              Effectiveness: This program significantly increased the awareness
                                              and understanding of the problem of homelessness in SGV.
                                              Ultimately, HHCC was consolidated with the SGV Consortium on
                                              Homelessness for greater efficiency.
                                              Appropriateness: Homelessness is a regional issue and it is
                                              appropriate for the SGV Consortium to take the lead.
20. Pursue Housing Funding Sources – State    Progress: The economic recession, combined with the loss of RDA
Tax Credits/Bonds, Industry Funds, LA County  funds, resulted in a lack of affordable housing being proposed in the
Programs, CalHFA                              prior housing cycle.
                                              Effectiveness: n/a
2008-14 Objective: Submit one proposal
                                              Appropriateness: The updated Housing Element will identify a
                                              variety of financial resources to support affordable housing. As
                                              affordable projects are proposed, the City will evaluate the use of
                                              these and other funding sources.
Programs to Maintain or Achieve Compliance with Housing Regulations
21. Green Building Program                    Progress: Due to the significant staffing reduction in the Building
                                              Division, the City has not adopted a Green Building Ordinance.
2008-14 Objective: Adopt a Ordinance by
                                              However, the City has incorporated California Green Building Code
2009
                                              Standards within its Municipal Code.
                                              Effectiveness: The City has hosted several green building workshops
                                              targeted at residents.
                                              Appropriateness: A program for sustainability and green building
                                              remains appropriate to the updated Housing Element.
22. Monitoring Governmental Constraints       Progress:
                                              a. As part of the budget process, the City completes as fee survey
2008-14 Objective:
                                                   each year of other San Gabriel Valley cities and seeks to
a. Conduct fee survey annually                     maintain its fees around the median for the Valley.
                                              b. An online development guideline was created to provide easy-
b. Create development workbook on                  to understand information on Monrovia’s development
requirements, fees, processing procedures          processing procedures. The development guide is being further
                                                   updated as part of the City’s new website.
                                              c. The City has continued to monitor its multi-family CUP
c. Annually monitor CUP requirement for            requirement and to date, the City has not denied any CUP
multi-family as potential constraint               applications for multifamily development. Several multi-family
                                                   projects were entitled during the planning period. The majority
                                                   of multifamily entitlement applications were processed in less
                                                                                                     Housing Element
        Appendix A                                        A-85                                   Background Report

             Table 45: Review of Accomplishments under 2008-2014 Monrovia Housing Element
Policy/Program                                 Accomplishments
                                                    than 10 weeks from submittal of a complete application.
                                               d.   Due to reductions in staffing, the City has not yet adopted
d. Reasonable Accommodation procedures
                                                    specific Reasonable Accommodation procedures. The City’s
                                                    Development Review Committee has the authority to review
                                                    such requests as needed. However, there have been no
                                                    requests made to date. The City anticipates adopting a
                                                    procedure by early 2014.
                                               Effectiveness: The three implemented actions under this program –
                                               annual fee survey, development guide, and CUP monitoring – have
                                               proved successful in monitoring constraints and increasing the
                                               accessibility of information regarding development. While the City
                                               was not able to implement establishment of Reasonable
                                               Accommodation procedures, this did not serve as a constraint as no
                                               request for accommodation were received.
                                               Appropriateness: Each of these program actions remain
                                               appropriate for inclusion in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
23. Municipal Code Amendments Program          Progress: A preliminary review has been conducted by City Staff
                                               which resulted in draft policy changes. The project was put on hold
2008-14 Objective: Study and complete
                                               due to a significant reduction in staffing. Two projects were entitled
Code amendments on following issues:
                                               and one additional project constructed which were allowed to use
- Parking                                      parking ratios and minimum unit sizes less than what is permitted by
                                               the Zoning Ordinance. This information will be used as part of the
- Minimum unit sizes                           upcoming review of the City’s parking requirements.
- Emergency shelter, transitional & supportive Effectiveness: Although code amendments have not been
housing (SB 2 compliance)                      adopted, the preliminary research gathered during the entitlement
                                               process for three larger multi-family developments will be used to
                                               update the City’s regulations. The reduction in some of the
                                               minimum development standards applied to multifamily residential
                                               development will be effective in managing the regulatory
                                               constraints.
                                               Appropriateness: These code amendments are still appropriate and
                                               will be completed within the next planning period.
24. Equal Housing Opportunity                  Progress: The City continues to promote state and federal housing
                                               discrimination laws. Inquiries concerning housing discrimination
2008-14 Objective: Provide referral and
                                               issues are referred to the Baldwin Park Housing Authority as well as
mediation services for housing discrimination
                                               the Housing Rights Center. Housing rights brochures are made
complaints.
                                               available at City hall and MAP events.
                                               Effectiveness: Information provided by the City is useful to residents
                                               in providing education to the public on these issues. Staff’s
                                               familiarity with these options is beneficial to the community.
                                               Appropriateness: It is appropriate for the City to continue to provide
                                               information and referrals to BPHA. The City’s mediation program
                                               also provides another opportunity to resolve issues, especially when
                                               they do not directly involve a violation of housing laws. The City will
                                               continue to implement this program.
25. Housing Program Marketing Plan             Progress: Although many of the City’s housing programs have been
                                               limited in funding and/or scope, Staff continues to actively promote
2008-14 Objective: Update and market
                                               available programs. The majority of the housing materials have
housing program materials
                                               been updated and are available on the City’s website. Very
                                               limited funding of the City’s housing programs has made some of
                                               these materials obsolete. MAP activities have been the primary
                                               outreach avenue for the marketing of programs (both City programs
                                               and those of other providers).
                                               Effectiveness: The City’s website has been an effective vehicle for
                                               disseminating information. The MAP program has also proven to be
                                                                                                       Housing Element
        Appendix A                                         A-86                                      Background Report

             Table 45: Review of Accomplishments under 2008-2014 Monrovia Housing Element
Policy/Program                                   Accomplishments
                                                 successful in disseminating information.
                                                 Appropriateness: Marketing will continue to play an important role
                                                 in providing information of the various housing opportunities. As
                                                 funding becomes available and programs are implemented, new
                                                 marketing materials will need to be created.
       The following table summarizes the quantified objectives contained in the City’s 2008-
       2014 Housing Element, and compares the City’s progress in fulfilling these objectives.
                         Table 46: Summary of Quantified Objectives 2008-2014 Housing Element
                                 New Construction               Rehabilitation                Preservation
            Income Level
                                 Goal       Progress         Goal         Progress        Goal        Progress
            Very Low              142           4             42             23            29             29
            Low                   88            10            51             46
            Moderate              96            22            31             23
            Above
                                  241          407
            Moderate
            Totals                567          443           124             92            29             29
           New Construction: Goal reflects RHNA. Progress reflects low income 4 Habitat for Humanity units,
           22 MRA assisted moderate income homeownership units, and 13 second units.
           Rehabilitation: Goal reflects 90 MAP grants, 10 Emergency grants, 27 CDBG Handyworker grants.
           Progress reflects 61 MAP grants, 4 Emergency grants, and 27 Handyworker grants.
           Preservation: Goal and progress reflects preservation of the Section 8 contracts in Mayflower Arms
           and at 525 E. Walnut.
                                                                                                       Housing Element
       Appendix A                                           A-87                                    Background Report

      BACKGROUND REPORT
         ATTACHMENT 1
HOUSING ELEMENT SITES INVENTORY
                                                         Station Square
                                    Vacant and Underutilized Sites Inventory
                                  Zone/                                          Floor                      Ratio
                                                          Bldg Sq Year  Lot Area       Realistic Realistic
APN           Address            General  Existing Use                           Area                      Land to Comments
                                                              Ft  Built  Sq Ft         Density   Capacity
                                  Plan                                           Ratio                      Total
 Station Square-Phase 1/Block 1                                                                             Value 2.8 acres of 3.7
                                                                                                                     total acreage
8507-003-917  1622 S MAGNOLIA    PD 12A  vacant-graded        0          94,330  0.00    90                          transferred to
8507-003-919  204 W POMONA       PD 12A  vacant-graded        0          45,649  0.00    90                          developer for
                                                                                                                     multi-family -
8507-003-920  200 W POMONA       PD 12A  vacant-graded        0          22,477  0.00    90                         248 units shown
                                 TOTAL                                  162,456                    248              on concept plan
                                             Area 1
 Station Square-Phase 1/Block 2
8507-003-907  1613 S. MYRTLE     PD 12A  vacant/Pkg Lot       0          7,818   0.00    90         16         1.00
8507-003-908  1617 S. MYRTLE     PD 12A  vacant/Pkg Lot       0          7,818   0.00    90         16         1.00 Entire acreage
8507-003-909  1621 S. MYRTLE     PD 12A  vacant/utilities     0          7,818   0.00    90         16         1.00    under City
                                                                                                                       ownership
8507-003-915  1601 S. MYRTLE     PD 12A  vacant/Pkg Lot       0          5,744   0.00    90         12         1.00
8507-003-916  1601 S. MYRTLE     PD 12A  vacant/Pkg Lot       0          17,710  0.00    90         37         1.00
                                 TOTAL       Area 2                      46,908                     97
 Station Square-Phase 1/Block 6
8507-003-047  1725 PECK          PD 12A    Hvy manuf       15,904 1956   40,511  0.39    70         65         0.67
8507-003-050  225 W DUARTE       PD 12A   Commercial        8,200 1947   14,366  0.57    70         23         0.94
                                           parking lot
8507-003-048  225 W DUARTE       PD 12A    Hvy manuf       16,152 1956   25,700  0.63    70         41         0.22
8507-003-049  245 W DUARTE       PD 12A    veternarian      4,550 1954   19,598  0.23    70         31         0.28
                                              office
8507-003-051  1726 S MAGNOLIA    PD 12A     Lt manuf       18,286 1947   42,249  0.43    70         68         0.37
                                TOTAL        Area 6                     142,424                    229
                                                         Station Square
                                    Vacant and Underutilized Sites Inventory
                                  Zone/                                              Floor                       Ratio
                                                           Bldg Sq   Year Lot Area          Realistic Realistic
APN           Address            General  Existing Use                               Area                       Land to  Comments
                                                               Ft   Built   Sq Ft            Density  Capacity
                                  Plan                                               Ratio                       Total
                                                                                                                 Value
 Station Square-Phase 2/Block 1
8513-008-055  1602 S. MYRTLE     PD 12A    gas station       1,596  1967    24,428   0.07      90        50         0.62
8513-008-056  114 POMONA         PD 12B      Lt manuf        4,000  1948    7,998    0.50      90        17         0.29
8513-008-057  118 POMONA         PD 12B      Lt manuf        7,380  1954    16,000   0.46      90        33         0.46
8513-008-058  1601 RAYMOND       PD 12B      Lt manuf        4,750  1960    7,998    0.59      90        17         0.23
8513-008-059  1617 RAYMOND       PD 12B      Lt manuf        8,977  1960    17,860   0.50      90        37         0.74
8513-008-063  117 RAILROAD       PD 12B      Lt manuf        2,400  1947    9,148    0.26      90        19         0.83
8513-008-064  125 RAILROAD       PD 12B      Lt manuf        5,400  1959    9,148    0.59      90        19         0.60
8513-008-065  1620 S. MYRTLE     PD 12A      Lt manuf       11,200  1966    34,669   0.32      90        72         0.50
                                 TOTAL   Block 1                           127,249                      263
 Station Square-Phase 2/Block 2
8513-010-056  134 E. POMONA      PD 12B      Lt manuf        4,756  1947    7,309    0.65      70        12         0.75
8513-010-057  138 E. POMONA      PD 12B      Industrial      4,100  1946    5,500    0.75      70        9          0.85
8513-010-058  142 E. POMONA      PD 12B      Lt manuf        3,448  1946    7,331    0.47      70        12         0.60
8513-010-059  150 E. POMONA      PD 12B   open storage       4,085  1948    23,997   0.17      70        39         0.63
8513-010-060  210 E. POMONA      PD 12B      Lt manuf        1,624  1954    5,998    0.27      70        10         0.51
8513-010-062  218 E. POMONA      PD 12B      Lt manuf         980   1954    5,998    0.16      70        10         0.96
8513-010-063  222 E. POMONA      PD 12B         Food         7,144  1955    11,996   0.60      70        19         0.71
                                           processing
8513-010-064  230 E. POMONA      PD 12B      Lt manuf        3,492  1952    5,998    0.58      70        10         0.21
8513-010-065                     PD 12B  Indust/pkng lot     6,000  1970    5,500    1.09      70        9          0.79
8513-010-066                     PD 12B  Indust/pkng lot     6,000  1970    5,500    1.09      70        9          0.79
8513-010-067  244 E. POMONA      PD 12B      Lt manuf        6,300  1961    11,996   0.53      70        19         0.30
8513-010-068                     PD 12B  Indust/pkng lot     6,000  1965    5,500    1.09      70        9          0.83
8513-010-069  1617 S. CALIFORNIA PD 12B  Comm/pkng lot       6,000  1968    5,998    1.00      70        10         0.81
8513-010-070  258 E. POMONA      PD 12B         Light        2,362  1948    5,998    0.39      70        10         0.65
                                         manufacturing
8513-010-071  260 E. POMONA      PD 12B        2 units       1,344  1948    5,998    0.22      70        10         0.78
8513-010-072  266 E. POMONA      PD 12B        1 SFR          640   1946    5,998    0.11      70        10         0.80
8513-010-075  1609 S. CALIFORNIA PD 12B   1 story office      870   1946    4,404    0.20      70        7          0.88
8513-010-076  1601 S. CALIFORNIA PD 12B         Light        2,124  1954    7,681    0.28      70        12         0.53
                                         manufacturing
8513-011-030  116 RAILROAD       PD12A       Lt manuf       21,350  1963    22,647   0.94      70        36         0.48
8513-011-031  116 RAILROAD       PD 12A      Lt manuf       17,600  1963    5,227    3.37      70        8          0.38
8513-011-032  130 RAILROAD       PD 12B   Warehousing       12,880  1955    39,200   0.33      70        63         0.53
8513-011-033  146 RAILROAD       PD 12B         Light       12,600  1947    30,488   0.41      70        49         0.45
                                         manufacturing
8513-011-034  1624 RAYMOND       PD 12B      Industrial     26,698  1946    70,868   0.38      70       114         0.94
8513-011-036  200 RAILROAD       PD 12B      Lt manuf       64,183  1957    89,298   0.72      70       144         0.28
8513-011-035  201 RAILROAD       PD 12B    Commercial       48,300  1947    48,347   1.00      70        78         0.97
                                            parking lot
8513-011-037  1713 S. CALIFORNIA PD 12B      Lt manuf       38,255  1946   205,603   0.19      70       330         0.79
8513-011-038  229 RAILROAD       PD 12B      Lt manuf        8,000  1956    16,980   0.47      70        27         0.63
8513-011-039  1711 S. CALIFORNIA PD 12B      Lt manuf       13,384  1953    27,817   0.48      70        45         0.31
8513-011-040  1703 S. CALIFORNIA PD 12B      Lt manuf        6,480  1948    15,686   0.41      70        25         0.58
8513-011-041  1617 S. CALIFORNIA PD 12B    Hvy manuf        25,852  1952    53,143   0.49      70        85         0.36
                                 TOTAL   Block 2                           764,004                      1228
                                                                                                       2,064
                                                            Total Station Square Realistic DUs = 2,064
Adjacant Parcels under common ownership
                                                         Note: The 80 acre Station Square planning area43560
                                                                                                         permits up to
                                                         3,600 dwelling units. The Plan establishes unit capacities by
 Adjacant Parcels under common ownership                 block, with maximum parcel density established.
                                      Old Town Extension/South Myrtle Overlay
                                         Vacant Underutilized Sites Inventory
                                   Zone/                                                 Floor                     Ratio Land
                                                                          Year  Lot Area       Realistic Realistic
APN          Address             General      Existing Use     Bldg Sq Ft                Area                       to Total
                                                                          Built  Sq Ft         Density   Capacity
                                   Plan*                                                 Ratio                       Value
  Old Town Extension-Block 1
8516-033-030 701 S. Myrtle Ave   O/RD/RM      1 story office      7,212   1979   22,028  0.327   40        20             0.29
8516-033-031 701 S. Myrtle Ave   O/RD/RM      1 story office     17,912   1979   47,916  0.374   40        44             0.24
8516-033-033 144 W. Olive Ave    O/RD/RM   Light Manufacturing    7,750   1966   24,023  0.323   40        22             0.14
8516-033-034 144 W. Olive Ave    O/RD/RM   Light Manufacturing    3,034   1987    7,889  0.385   40         7             0.25
8516-033-013 718 S. Primrose Ave     M     Light Manufacturing    5,596   1979    7,998  0.700   40         7             0.16
8516-033-029 143 W. Walnut Ave       M         Auto Repair       16,830   1979   27,996  0.601   40        26             0.30
8516-033-032 137 W. Walnut Ave       M     Light Manufacturing   14,945   1979   19,998  0.747   40        18             0.53
                                  TOTAL           Block 1                       157,848                    145
  Old Town Extension-Block 3
8508-006-037 815 S. Myrtle Ave   O/RD/RM       repair shop        3,204   1925    7,566  0.423   40         7             0.84
8508-006-038                     O/RD/RM          vacant            0      n/a    7,998  0.000   40         7             1.00
8508-006-039 120 W. Walnut Ave       M            vacant            0      n/a    7,998  0.000   40         7             1.00
8508-006-040 126 W. Walnut Ave       M           Industrial       2,990   1979    7,998  0.374   40         7             0.57
8508-006-043 136 W. Walnut Ave       M           Industrial       4,000   1968    7,998  0.500   40         7             0.41
8508-006-044 140 W. Walnut Ave       M             1 SFD           984    1912    7,998  0.123   40         7             0.87
8508-006-045 144 W. Walnut Ave       M             1 SFD          1,116   1911    7,998  0.140   40         7             0.80
8508-006-046 802 S. Primrose Ave     M           Industrial       3,940   1966    7,998  0.493   40         7             0.50
8508-006-054 825 S. Myrtle Ave   O/RD/RM         Industrial      20,865   1984   23,509  0.888   40        22             0.17
8508-006-055                     O/RD/RM          Vacant            0      n/a   29,904  0.000   40        27             1.00
8508-006-056 128 W. Walnut Ave       M           Industrial      16,230   1985   37,893  0.428   40        35             0.90
8508-006-800                         M            Utilities        288     n/a    6,996  0.041   40         6
                                  TOTAL           Block 3                       161,854                    149
                                       Old Town Extension/South Myrtle Overlay
                                          Vacant Underutilized Sites Inventory
                                    Zone/                                                        Floor                        Ratio Land
                                                                                Year   Lot Area           Realistic Realistic
APN          Address              General        Existing Use       Bldg Sq Ft                   Area                          to Total
                                                                                Built    Sq Ft             Density  Capacity
                                    Plan*                                                        Ratio                          Value
  Old Town Extension-Block 4
8508-007-034 140 E. Walnut Ave        M     Industrial warehousing     3,540    1982      7,998  0.443       40        7             0.57
8508-007-035 136 E. Walnut Ave        M             Industrial         4,242    1962      7,998  0.530       40        7             0.57
8508-007-036 130 E. Walnut Ave        M    Industrial manufacturing    2,400    1962      7,998  0.300       40        7             0.61
8508-007-042 135 E. Chestnut Ave  O/RD/RM Industrial manufacturing    25,502    1976     56,859  0.449       40       52             0.67
8508-007-060 800 S. Myrtle Ave    O/RD/RM     Light manufacturing     22,045    1978     47,284  0.466       40       43             0.54
8508-007-061 800 S. Myrtle Ave    O/RD/RM           Industrial         6,064    1978     16,660  0.364       40       15             0.56
8508-007-062 112 E. Walnut Ave    O/RD/RM           Industrial         7,180    1978     17,598  0.408       40       16             0.58
8508-007-063 890 S. Myrtle Ave    O/RD/RM            Vacant              0       n/a     16,000  0.000       40       15             1.00
                                   TOTAL             Block 4                            178,395                       164
  Old Town Extension-Block 5
8508-006-015 901 S. Myrtle Ave    O/RD/RM    Comm office 1 story       6,868    1956     13,573  0.506       40       12             0.57
8508-006-016 907 S. Myrtle Ave    O/RD/RM          Parking lot           0      1960      3,598  0.000       40        3             0.93
8508-006-018 120 W. Chestnut Ave      M         Auto body shop         2,460    1961      8,899  0.276       40        8             0.60
8508-006-019 128 W. Chestnut Ave      M       Light manufacturing      8,495    1968     16,039  0.530       40       15             0.13
8508-006-020 144 W. Chestnut Ave      M       Light manufacturing      4,000    1964     16,000  0.250       40       15             0.40
8508-006-021 144 W. Chestnut Ave      M       Light manufacturing      4,000    1963      7,998  0.500       40        7             0.18
8508-006-022 902 S. Primrose Ave      M       Light manufacturing      8,000    1966     16,000  0.500       40       15             0.69
8508-006-023 924 S. Primrose Ave      M       Light manufacturing     14,044    1954     16,000  0.878       40       15             0.59
8508-006-024 924 S. Primrose Ave      M       Light manufacturing      7,000    1976     16,000  0.438       40       15             0.64
8508-006-025 924 S. Primrose Ave      M       Light manufacturing      9,360    1963     16,000  0.585       40       15             0.23
8508-006-027 909 S. Myrtle Ave    O/RD/RM     Light manufacturing      9,380    1981      6,996  1.341       40        6             0.30
8508-006-050 S. Primrose Ave          M              Vacant              0       n/a      5,332  0.000       40        5             1.00
8508-006-051 909 S. Myrtle Ave    O/RD/RM     Light manufacturing      9,350    1981      7,026  1.331       40        6             0.71
8508-006-029 923 S. Myrtle Ave    O/RD/RM     Light manufacturing      9,416    1946     10,663  0.883       40       10             0.48
8508-006-052 111 W. Maple Ave     O/RD/RM   Industrial warehousing    10,696    1946     16,000  0.669       40       15             0.48
                                   TOTAL             Block 5                            176,124                       162
  Old Town Extension-Block 6
8508-007-043 917 S. Ivy Ave           M               1 SFD            1,728    1922      7,998  0.216       40        7             0.93
8508-007-044 144 E. Chestnut Ave      M     Industrial warehousing    10,000    1966     16,000  0.625       40       15             0.52
8508-007-047 120 E. Chestnut Ave      M     Industrial warehousing     7,326    1977     18,665  0.392       40       17             0.22
8508-007-059 134 E. Chestnut Ave      M       Light manufacturing      5,000    1978      7,998  0.625       40        7             0.33
8508-007-055                      O/RD/RM Commercial parking lot         0      1964      2,666  0.000       40        2             0.85
8508-007-052 918 S. Myrtle Ave    O/RD/RM     Light manufacturing      6,140    1922      7,998  0.768       40        7             0.37
8508-007-053 922 S. Myrtle Ave    O/RD/RM     Light manufacturing     10,600    1953     16,000  0.663       40       15             0.42
8508-007-054                      O/RD/RM Commercial parking lot         0      1953      5,332  0.000       40        5             0.87
8508-007-058 133 E. Maple Ave         M       Light manufacturing     21,155    1952     31,999  0.661       40       29             0.42
8508-007-064 135 E. Maple Ave         M             Industrial        22,158    1983     31,999  0.692       40       29             0.39
8508-007-073 138 E. Chestnut Ave      M              Vacant              0       n/a      8,002  0.000       40        7             1.00
                                 TOTAL               Block 6                            154,657                       142
                                 Total Old Town Extension                              828,878             Total DUs 761761
   Adjacant Parcels under common ownership
                                                                             Note: All properties fall within the South Mrytle
    Adjacant Parcels under common ownership                                  Avenue Overlay
                                              Cherry/Montana
                                     Underutilized Sites Inventory
                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                 s
                                   Zone/ General Existing Bldg Area Lot Area Sq Maximum  Realistic Ratio Land to s
      APN           Address
                                       Plan       Units     Sq Ft        Ft     Capacity Capacity   Total Value  e
Cherry/Montana Property developed pre-1965
8508-010-026 115 W Cypress Ave          RH          1       1,321      9,400       12       4           0.79
8508-010-027 119 W Cypress Ave          RH          3       2,321      9,396       12       4           0.65
8508-010-028 123 W Cypress Ave          RH          6       5,280      9,396       12       4           0.56
8508-010-029 127 W Cypress Ave          RH          6       5,280      9,396       12       4           0.51
8508-010-030 131 W Cypress Ave          RH          4       2,582      9,396       12       4           0.73
8508-010-031 135 W Cypress Ave          RH          1       1,668      9,400       12       4           0.90
8508-010-032 139 W Cypress Ave          RH          1        940       9,400       12       4           0.91
8508-010-033 143 W Cypress Ave          RH          2       1,000      6,686       8        3           0.83
8508-010-035 1124 S Primrose Ave        RH          3        988       4,848       6        2           0.64
8508-010-036 1118 S Primrose Ave        RH          2       1,188      6,830       8        3           0.69
8508-010-038 1212 S Primrose Ave        RH          4       1,985      9,396       12       4           0.76
8508-010-041 132 W Cypress Ave          RH          1        864       5,900       7        2           0.65
8508-010-042 134 W Cypress Ave          RH          1        814       3,500       4        1           0.65
8508-010-043 128 W Cypress Ave          RH          1       1,248      9,776       12       4           0.80
8508-010-044 126 W Cypress Ave          RH          2        884       9,396       12       4           0.85
8508-010-053 117 W Cherry Ave           RH          3       2,422     12,171       15       5           0.39
8508-010-054 127 W Cherry Ave           RH          4       3,404      8,950       11       4           0.63
8508-010-055 131 W Cherry Ave           RH          4       3,501      8,947       11       4           0.60
8508-010-056 135 W Cherry Ave           RH          4       2,525      8,947       11       4           0.53
8508-010-058 147 W Cherry Ave           RH          5       3,754     13,421       17       5           0.55
8508-011-013 138 W Cherry Ave           RH          4       2,554      9,749       12       4           0.50
8508-011-015 132 W Cherry Ave           RH          2       1,956      9,200       11       4           0.29
8508-011-016 126 W Cherry Ave           RH          5       2,500      9,200       11       4           0.53
8508-011-017 124 W Cherry Ave           RH          3       2,803      9,527       12       4           0.50
8508-011-020 1324 S Primrose Ave        RH          1       1,920      7,200       9        3           0.52
8508-011-021 1326 S Primrose Ave        RH          1       1,732      9,300       12       4           0.70
8508-011-023 123 Montana St             RH          6       4,072     11,718       15       5           0.68
8508-011-024 117 Montana St             RH          2       2,240     11,726       15       5           0.53
8508-011-028 118 Montana St             RH          3       4,502     14,593       18       6           0.23
8508-011-029 117 W Central Ave          RH          4       2,400      7,449       9        3           0.73
8508-011-031 123 W Central Ave          RH          1       1,942      7,450       9        3           0.77
8508-011-032 125 W Central Ave          RH          1       2,078      7,450       9        3           0.65
8508-011-038 136 Montana St #136        RH          2       1,711      7,196       9        3           0.82
8508-002-056 1414 S Magnolia Ave        RH          1       1,248      7,250       9        3           0.59
8508-002-057 1420 S Magnolia Ave        RH          1       1,448      7,250       9        3           0.83
8508-002-058 1426 S Magnolia Ave        RH          1       1,594      7,250       9        3           0.77
8508-002-059 237 W Central Ave          RH          2       2,150      9,640       12       4           0.65
8508-002-066 201 W Central Ave          RH          1        960       9,052       11       4           0.77
8508-003-001 1408 S Alta Vista Ave      RH          1        909       8,832       11       4           0.80
8508-003-002 1414 S Alta Vista Ave      RH          1       1,393      9,200       11       4           0.74
8508-003-008 321 W Central Ave          RH          1        720       7,791       10       3           0.69
8508-003-009 319 W Central Ave          RH          1        972       7,791       10       3           0.80
8508-003-010 317 W Central Ave          RH          1        954       7,791       10       3           0.80
8508-003-013 1421 S Magnolia Ave        RH          1       1,056      6,840       8        3           0.88
                                              Cherry/Montana
                                     Underutilized Sites Inventory
                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                       s
                                   Zone/ General  Existing   Bldg Area  Lot Area Sq  Maximum   Realistic Ratio Land to s
      APN           Address
                                       Plan        Units       Sq Ft         Ft      Capacity  Capacity   Total Value  e
8508-003-020 1224 S Alta Vista Ave      RH           2         1,512      10,454        13         4          0.78
8508-003-022 1221 S Magnolia Ave        RH           4         4,110      21,375        26         20         0.21
8508-003-023 1219 S Magnolia Ave        RH           1         1,572      18,165        23         12         0.56
             Totals                                 40                   434,991       539        190
                                                               Realistic Net Increase DUs         150
                  Realistic Development
                           Potential             Density Assumption                 Parcels under common ownership
                   lots < than 15,000 sf                17 du/ac
                   lots 15,000-20,000 sf                29 du/ac
                   lots 20,001-43,560 sf                40 du/ac
                   lots 1 acre and larger               54 du/ac
     BACKGROUND REPORT
         ATTACHMENT 2
MONROVIA ENVIRONMENTAL ACCORDS
                           Monrovia Environmental Accords
                   MONROVIA ENVIRONMENTAL ACCORDS
                                                   ENERGY
Action 1: Adopt and implement a policy to increase the use of renewable energy to meet ten percent of
the city’s peak electric load by 2015.
Action 2: Adopt and implement a policy to reduce the city’s peak electric load by ten percent within seven
years through energy efficiency, shifting the timing of energy demands, and conservation measures.
Action 3: Adopt a citywide greenhouse gas reduction plan that reduces the jurisdiction’s emissions by
twenty-five percent by 2030, and which includes a system for accounting and auditing greenhouse gas
emissions.
                                            WASTE REDUCTION
Action 4: Establish a policy to achieve seventy-five percent diversion to waste disposal methods by 2015.
Action 5: Adopt a Municipal Code Ordinance that reduces the use of a disposable, toxic, or non-
renewable product category by at least fifty percent by 2015.
Action 6: Implement “user-friendly” recycling and composting programs, with the goal of reducing by
twenty percent per capita solid waste disposal by 2015.
                                               URBAN DESIGN
Action 7: Adopt a policy that mandates a green building rating system standard that applies to all new
municipal buildings.
Action 8: Adopt urban planning principles and practices that advance higher density, mixed use, walkable,
bikeable and disabled-accessible neighborhoods, which coordinate land use and transportation with open
space systems for recreation and ecological restoration.

Action 9: Adopt a policy or implement a program that creates environmentally beneficial jobs throughout
the community.
                                                 URBAN NATURE
Action 10: Ensure that there is accessible public parks, trails or recreational open space within half-a-mile
of every city resident by 2015.
Action 11: Conduct an inventory of existing canopy coverage in the city; and, then establish a goal based
on ecological and community considerations to plant and maintain canopy coverage in not less than fifty
percent of all available sidewalk planting sites.
Action 12: Adopt a Municipal Code Ordinance, in compliance with local, state and federal laws and
regulations, which protects critical habitat corridors and other key habitat characteristics (e.g. water
features, and shelter for wildlife and use of native species, etc.) from unsustainable development.
                                                TRANSPORTATION
Action 13: Develop and implement a policy which expands affordable public transportation coverage
within a quarter-mile of all city residents in ten years.
Action 14: Implement programs that phase down sulfur emission in diesel and gasoline fuels by fifty
percent concurrent with using advanced emission controls on all buses, taxis, and public fleets to reduce
particulate matter and smog-forming emissions from those fleets by fifty percent by 2015.
Action 15: Implement a policy to reduce the percentage of commute trips by single occupancy vehicles by
ten percent by 2015.
                                          ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
Action 16: Annually, identify one product, chemical, or compound that is used within the city (with a focus
on specific areas used by children and youth) that represents a risk to human health and reduce or
eliminate its use by the municipal government.
Action 17: Promote wellness and fitness when planning or redesigning city facilities.
                                                      WATER
Action 18: Adopt and implement policies to reduce per capita water demand by ten percent by 2015 and
thirty-five percent by 2030.
Action 19: Protect the ecological integrity of the city’s primary drinking water sources (i.e., water ways and
associated ecosystems).
Action 20: Adopt municipal wastewater management guidelines and reduce the volume of untreated
wastewater discharges by ten percent in by 2015.
Action 21: Increase groundwater recharge by five percent by 2020.

   BACKGROUND REPORT
       ATTACHMENT 3
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONES
  THAT PERMIT RESIDENTIAL
      Planned Development Zones That Permit Residential
PD-1      Mountain View/Ocean View/Valley View Area
PD-2      East Foothill Boulevard Area including Wildrose between Canyon Boulevard
          and Shamrock Avenue
PD-3      West Huntington Office/Business Area
PD-4      Highway Esplanade/Parker Neighborhood
PD-5      Downtown
PD-6      Royal Oaks Drive
PD-7      Area northeast of Huntington Drive/Mountain Avenue Intersection
PD-8      West Huntington Drive
PD-9      California Avenue between Cypress and Central
PD-11     Diamond Street/El Dorado/Encino/Alamitas Avenues
PD12a&b   Station Square
PD-14     El Norte Avenue
PD-15     Area Southwest of Peck Rod/Duarte Road Intersection (High density can
          continue on lots fronting Peck Road that are currently developed with
          residential uses)
PD-16     Peck Road/Myrtle Avenue
PD-17     El Sur St./Atara St. Area
PD-19     Novice Lane area between California/Myrtle Avenues
PD-20     Valley Circle
PD-23     Walnut/Royal Oaks Double Frontage Lots/805 South Shamrock
PD-24     Poppy /Shamrock
PD-25     Monrovista
      APPENDIX B
 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
    HOUSING NEEDS SURVEY
COMMUNITY WORKSHOP MATERIALS
                              Resident Survey
                 Monrovia 2014-2021 Housing Element
The City is in the process of updating the Housing Element of the General Plan for the 2014-
2021 period as required by State law. The Housing Element establishes policies and programs
to address Monrovia’s existing and projected housing needs for all economic segments of the
community. The first step in this process is to ask you as a Monrovia resident,
what you see as the community’s most important housing needs.
              Survey Responses - 123 completed surveys
1. How long have you lived in Monrovia?
15%    0-5 years
20%    6-10 years
23%    11-20 years
42%    21+ years
2. Select the type of housing unit you reside in:
69%    A detached single-family house
13%    A condominium/townhome/planned unit development (PUD)
7%     A duplex/triplex/fourplex
5%     An apartment (with more than 5 units on the property)
4%     A mobile home
2%     A second unit/guesthouse
3. Do you currently rent or own your home in Monrovia?
81%    Own
15%    Rent
3%     Own a mobile home, but pay mobile home park space rent
1%     Rent a mobile home

4. How would you rate the physical condition of the housing unit you live in?
52%     Excellent condition
34%     Shows signs of minor deferred maintenance (i.e. peeling paint, chipping stucco, etc)
9%      Needs modest rehabilitation improvements ( i.e. new roof, new wood siding, etc)
5%      Needs major upgrades (i.e. new foundation, new plumbing, new electrical, etc)
5. What types of housing are most needed to address Monrovia’s housing needs?
(select all that apply)
51%     Single-family Houses
37%     Senior Housing
34%     Workforce Housing
33%     Housing for Young Families
22%     Condos/Townhouses
22%     Housing for Persons with Disabilities
20%     Secondary Dwelling Units or "Granny Flats"
14%     Apartments
6. For single-family homeowners: If you could, would you potentially be interested
in having a small secondary housing unit on your property, either attached or detached
from your home?
63%     No
37%     Yes
6a. If yes, how would you envision using the second unit (select any that apply):
67%     To house a family member
49%     To provide rental income
32%     To house a caregiver

7. For senior citizens (age 65+): If you were unable to continue living in your
present home at some time in the future, which of the following would you envision
(select all that apply):
43%     Living in an independent living senior facility
27%     Living in an assisted living senior facility
27%     Moving in with friends or family
22%     Living in a city other than Monrovia
18%     Buying or renting another home in Monrovia which would be easier to maintain
6%      Buying or renting another home in Monrovia which is more affordable
8 . Are there any additional comments regarding housing needs and preferences you
would like to provide the City for its 2014-2021 Housing Element update?
Affordable Housing comments
- Affordable housing for those working in Monrovia is paramount
- Need more affordable housing for families and seniors.
- Seniors and retirees are forced to move due to lack of affordable housing in Monrovia
- Second units provide a good housing option for seniors
Housing and Neighborhood Conditions comments
- Focus on improving the quality of housing and living conditions
- Important to provide sufficient parking for new development to avoid spillover onto streets
- Need to ensure that owners of investment properties used as rentals maintain their
landscaping and housing.
- Multi-resident units with shared walls should be smoke-free to protect children, families and
the elderly.
Development comments
- Maintain Monrovia's small town feel
- Monrovia already has overabundance of housing. Our infrastructure, such as schools and
circulation system, can't sustain such growth
- Monrovia has grown very nicely and has become a beautiful city to live in.
- PUDS look nice and make good use of small lots.
- Single-story condos/townhomes are need for the aging that do not have family as an option.
- Housing to bring more owners is needed, especially south of the freeway. This will bring in &
keep families here, which is needed for the future of the citizen population.
            MONROVIA 2014-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT UPDATE
                            FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
1. Why does Monrovia have to plan for more housing?
   State Housing Element law requires each city and county to plan for their “fair share” of the state’s
   housing growth needs. The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) is the
   regional agency responsible for defining the fair share allocation among its six counties (Imperial,
   Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, Ventura) and 187 cities in the Southern California
   region. Based on economic and demographic forecasts, the State has determined that the SCAG
   region needs to accommodate 412,137 housing units between 2014 and 2021 to meet housing
   demand.
2. How much housing does Monrovia have to plan for in order to comply with Housing Element
   law? What is the City’s obligation to accommodate its Regional Housing Need (RHNA), and
   what happens if at the end of the Housing Element cycle if the City falls short of its RHNA
   goals?
   SCAG has allocated the region’s 412,137 housing unit growth needs to each city and county
   through a process called the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA). Monrovia’s RHNA for
   the 2014-2021period is 389 units, distributed among the following income categories:
                                           Percent of
                    Income Level          Area Median        Units          Percent
                                         Income (AMI)
                    Extremely Low             0-30%            50             13%
                    Very Low                 31-50%            51             13%
                    Low                      51-80%            61             16%
                    Moderate                81-120%            65             17%
                    Above Moderate           120%+            162             42%
                    Total                                     389            100%
   The RHNA represents the minimum number of housing units Monrovia is required to plan for in its
   housing element by providing “adequate sites” through general plan and zoning. As the RHNA
   represents a planning target and not a building quota, so long as the City provides sufficient sites
   and does not impose constraints to development, the City is not penalized for falling short of its
   RHNA goals.
3. In addition to providing sufficient sites to address the total RHNA, how does the City’s
   zoning translate to providing adequate sites for each RHNA income category?
   Housing Element law provides for the use of “default densities” to assess affordability when
   evaluating the adequacy of sites to address the RHNA affordability targets. Based on its population
   within Los Angeles County, Monrovia falls within the default density of 30 units per acre for
   providing sites suitable for development of housing for very low and low income households, and 10
   units/acre for sites suitable for moderate income households.
                                                                                              1|Page

4. How is affordable housing defined?
   State and Federal definitions of housing affordability are generally based on the standard of
   spending no greater than 30% of household income on housing costs, including utility payments,
   taxes, insurance, homeowner association fees, etc. Affordable housing is relative to the amount
   households of different income levels and sizes can afford to pay for housing. For example, the
   2013 maximum affordable rent for a very-low income, 2-person household (1 bedroom unit) in Los
   Angeles County is approximately $750, whereas affordable rent for a 2- person, low-income
   household is approximately $1,260.
5. What do communities do when they run out of vacant land to address their RHNA?
   In communities with little or no remaining vacant land, the Housing Element may evaluate underutilized
   sites available for intensification and/or non-residential sites for potential re-designation for housing or
   mixed-use development. Examples of land with potential for recycling may include scattered sites
   suitable for assembly, publicly owned surplus land, areas with mixed use potential, and blighted areas
   with abandoned or vacant buildings. Second units also provide a means of accommodating additional
   housing in built out communities.
6. What are Monrovia’s provisions for second units and what is required by State Law?
   State law (AB 1866, effective 2003) requires local governments to use a ministerial, non-
   discretionary process for second unit applications. In compliance with AB 1866, in 2003 Monrovia
   amended Chapter 17.44.160 of the Zoning Code to permit second units by right in all residential
   zone districts. The second unit may be attached to, or detached from the primary unit and must
   adhere to the following standards:
           The maximum floor area for a second unit is 640 square feet. Units are required to have a
              full bath, kitchen and not more than one bedroom. Attached second units shall not exceed
              30% of the floor area of the principal single-family dwelling.
           Units must meet all the applicable standards of the zoning district, including setbacks, FAR
              standards, height, lot coverage, architectural and design review.
           One on-site garage parking space shall be designated for the second unit.
           Second units located on the second level of a primary unit shall share the same
              entrance/exit as the primary unit; exterior stairs are prohibited.
           The owner of the property shall reside in either unit as a principal residence.
7. What happens if Monrovia does not have an Element certified by the State Department of
   Housing and Community Development (HCD)?
   There are several potential consequences, the greatest of which is the risk of litigation based on a
   legally inadequate General Plan. Courts can impose a range of sanctions if they rule the housing
   element invalid, including a moratorium on all development and local land use authority until the
   housing element is brought into compliance. Furthermore, the jurisdiction is responsible for paying the
   litigant’s attorney fees. Settlement agreements between the parties often include stipulations for
   mandatory rezoning and affordable housing production requirements. The “anti-NIMBY Law” prohibits
   denial of affordable projects without an HCD approved Housing Element, even where such projects are
   inconsistent with General Plan and zoning. State housing and related infrastructure funds typically
   require housing element compliance for eligibility. And where a jurisdiction’s prior housing element
   failed to identify adequate sites to address the RHNA, AB 1233 now requires this unmet RHNA carry
   over to future housing element cycles, rendering HCD compliance in future housing element cycles
   extremely difficult.
                                                                                                  2|Page

                                                        Monrovia Housing Element Workshop
                                                              Direct Notification List
Contact Type         Name                                       Address                          City             Zip   Contact Person
Non-Profit Developer San Gabriel Valley Habitat for Humanity    400 S. Irwindale Ave             Azusa            91702
Non-Profit Developer Abode Communities                          701 E. Third St., Ste. 400       Los Angeles      90015
Non-Profit Developer Mercy Housing                              1500 South Grand Ave., Suite 100 Los Angeles      90015
Non-Profit Developer National CORE                              9065 Haven Ave., Suite 1000      Rancho Cucamonga 91730 John Seymour
Non-Profit Developer Heritage Housing Partners                  834 East California Blvd         Pasadena         91106 Charles Loveman
Service Program      Meals on Wheels                            119 W. Palm Ave                  Monrovia         91016
Service Provider     Foothill Unity Center                      415 W. Chestnut Ave              Monrovia         91016 Betty McWilliams
Service Provider     Santa Anita Family Services                605 S. Myrtle Ave                Monrovia         91016
Serve disabled       San Gabriel/Pomona Regional Center         761 Corporate Center Drive       Pomona           91768 Yvonne Gratianne
Serve/House disabled Ability First                              1300 Green Street                Pasadena         91106
civic                Monrovia senior citizen organizations
              Monrovia
2014-2021 Housing Element Update
    Planning Commission Workshop
            October 3, 2013
   Presentation Overview
 Why a Housing Element?
 Monrovia’s Housing Needs
 RHNA and Residential Sites
 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Community Input
                                  2

            Housing Element 101
 Part of City’s General Plan - statutes mandate that
  local governments “adequately plan to meet existing
  and projected housing needs of all economic segments
  of the community”
• Unlike other General Plan Elements, Housing Element
  required to undergo State HCD review for compliance
  with State law.
 Unlike other General Plan Elements, Housing Element
  required to be updated according to a defined statutory
  schedule.
                                                  3

What is in a Housing Element?
      Review of accomplishments under current
      Housing Element
      Assessment of population and housing needs
      Analysis of sites and other resources
      available to provide housing
      Analysis of potential constraints to providing
      housing
      Housing Plan: Goals, Policies and Programs
                                                     4
 5th Cycle Housing Element Timing
SCAG jurisdictions – Oct 15, 2013 adoption due date +
                 120 day grace period - Feb 12, 2014
NEW - SB 375 Impact on Timing
 Penalty for being late. If Element not adopted
   within 120 days of due date, jurisdiction subject to
   update every 4 years instead of 8
     “If you want eight,
                        Don’t be late”
                                                 5


Monrovia Housing Element Schedule
Milestone                                           Time Frame
On-Line Housing Needs Survey                        Sept - Oct
Planning Commission Workshop                        October 3
Public Review Draft Housing Element                 November
HCD 60-day Review of Draft Element
                                                      November -
                 PC Hearing - SB 2 Zoning Revisions
                                                      December
                    PC/CC Study Session on Element
Public Hearing Draft Element                        Jan -
Planning Commission/City Council Hearings           early Feb
Element Adoption/Submittal to HCD                   by Feb 12
      Benefits of HCD Compliance
 Presumption of legally adequate Housing Element in courts
 If courts invalidate Element, loss of local control
   Moratorium on building permits
   Suspension of discretionary land use authority
 Potential settlement agreements with litigants
   Mandatory rezonings, affordable production requirements
 Maintain discretionary review over affordable housing projects
 Maintain eligibility for State housing and related funds
 Don’t face RHNA carry-over into next Housing Element cycle
                                                           8

     1990-2010 Demographic Trends
   Families without children (from 34% to 37%)
   Racial diversity (38% Hispanic, 11% Asian residents)
  Continuing shift towards older population
   Median age ↑ from 31.0 to 37.9 years
   Loss of young adults (age 25-44),
     ↑ in middle age & senior cohorts
HOUSEHOLDS AGING IN PLACE, HIGH
HOUSING COSTS BARRIER TO YOUNG
FAMILIES
                                                9

           Special Needs Households
Continued growth in senior population
  20% Monrovia households age 65+
   ½ of seniors age 75+
   35% seniors have one or more disabilities
   1,600 senior homeowner hh, 1,100 senior renter hh
   1/3 of Monrovia senior homeowners live alone
  HOUSING NEEDS OF MONROVIA SENIORS:
    Home accessibility/housing maintenance assistance
    Second units, shared housing to prolong independent living
    Multi-generational housing development
    Supportive living environments
                                                       10


           Special Needs Households
9% of City’s population living with disabilities
  Of these 3,300 disabled persons:
     2,100 have an ambulatory disability
     1,200 have a cognitive disability
     1,500 have difficulty living independently
     50% are seniors
San Gabriel Valley Regional Center serves 286 Monrovia
residents with developmental disabilities
HOUSING NEEDS OF CITY’S DISABLED POPULATION
    Home Accessibility Improvements
    Supportive Housing
    Community Care Facilities
                                                    12

                       2013 Los Angeles County
                             Income Thresholds
                    Extremely      Very    Low   Moderate           Above
Household                Low       Low   Income   Income        Moderate
    Size               Income    Income  (51–80% (81– 120%         Income
                        (≤30%    (31–50%   AMI)    AMI)       (>120% AMI)
                         AMI)      AMI)
3-person
Area Median            Less than   Up to   Up to   Up to              Over
  Income:              $23,050   $38,450 $61,500  $70,000          $70,000
 $58,300
       Married preschool
                                                           Married bookkeeper and
       teacher and nurses aide
                                                           retail salesperson with
       with one child.
                                                           one child.
       $58,500 annual income.
                                                           $67,000 annual income.

     Housing Costs & Affordability
Monrovia Rental Market (Aug 2013)
  $1,295 1 bdrm, $1,400 2 bdrm, $1,520 3 bdrm
  Few 3 bdrms, other than single-family ($)
   Average Rents Exceed Affordability For ALL Very Low Income
   & Most Low Income Households
   Newest Units Exceed Affordability To Moderate Income
Monrovia For-Sale Market (Aug 2012 – July 2013)
  309 single-family homes sold - $490,000 median
  91 condominiums sold - $320,000 median
   Median Sales Prices Exceed Moderate Income Affordability,
   Though Some Older Units Affordable
    85 units in various states of foreclosure (July 2013)

          In Summary, Who in Monrovia
              Needs Affordable Housing?
  People who work in town and
  cannot afford to live here
    Teachers, nurses, retail and
    hospitality workers, childcare
    providers
 Special needs households
    Senior citizens, disabled persons,
    single-parent households
 Children of long-time Monrovia
  residents
                                        15

      Regional Housing Needs (RHNA)
 RHNA = Regional Housing Needs Assessment
 Requires cities to zone for “fair share” of region’s
  housing needs
   Based on State population growth
   Mix of housing for economic segments
   Affordability linked to zoning & density
 RHNA is a planning target, not a building quota
                                             16

       Monrovia’s Two RHNA Cycles
              2013 Income   2006-2014 2014-2021 “Default
Income Level  (3 person hh)   RHNA      RHNA    Density”
Very Low                                         Min. 30
(<50% AMI)       $38,450    142 units 101 units  du/acre
Low                                              Min. 30
(51-80% AMI)     $61,500     88 units  61 units  du/acre
Moderate                                         Min. 12
(81–120% AMI)    $70,000     96 units  65 units  du/acre
Above
Moderate        > $70,000   241 units 162 units
(>120% AMI)
Total                       567 units 389 units
                                                17

         2006 -2014 RHNA Progress
                  2006-2013
                               2006-2014  Remaining
   Income Level    Building
                                 RHNA    RHNA Need
                   Permits
   Very Low           0        142 units   142 units
   Low                4         88 units    84 units
   Moderate           32        96 units    64 units
   Above Moderate    407       241 units    0 units
   Total             443       567 units   290 units
To avoid RHNA carry-over, Housing Element must
demonstrate adequate sites to address remaining need
                                               18
2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 HOUSING PRODUCTION
  MRA assistance in development of 19 moderate income, first-time
   homebuyer units within 4 mixed income projects
  Development of 13 second units/granny flats
 • Partnership with Habitat for   Income     2006-2014  2006-2013
   Humanity for development of    Level         RHNA    Progress
   4 homes affordable to low      Very Low    142 units     0%
   income families                Low          88 units     5%
                                  Moderate     96 units    33%
                                  Above Mod   241 units   169%

2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT
  MAP Neighborhood Revitalization Activities:
    Home Improvement Grants/Code Education Class - 61 homeowners
    Make a Difference Day – 24 low/mod and senior households
    Annual MAP Neighborhood Leadership Academy & quarterly meetings
    Neighborhood meetings by MAP Neighborhood Leaders - 10 per year
    Annual MAP Neighborhood Conference
  CDBG Program:
    Handyworker Grants ($7,500) – 27 homeowners
    Neighborhood Preservation/Code Enforcement
  Historic Landmark/Mills Act:
    Contracts approved for 9 homes

2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
  HOUSING CONSERVATION
   Preservation of 29 federally assisted rental units thru
    continued renewal of Section 8 contracts
   Continued provision of Section 8 rent vouchers to very
    low income households
   Implementation of Monrovia Foreclosure Assistance
    Program

       Elimination of Redevelopment
 Loss of Redevelopment elimination of
  Low-Moderate Income Housing Funds
 Effect on City’s existing housing programs
 Future funding options:
   New City Housing Asset Fund, proceeds from certain RDA
    Low/Mod assets (land, loan repayments, etc.)
   State legislation pending for permanent funding source
    (SB 391 – California Home and Jobs Act)
   HCD approved Element provides access to State funds
   Evaluate inclusionary housing ordinance and in-lieu fee
    payments

      Monrovia Housing Element Survey –
                       Preliminary Results
Characteristics of respondents (83 surveys):
    72% reside in single-family homes
    82% are homeowners
    60% have lived in Monrovia more than 10 years
Housing Conditions
     45% indicate unit in need of minor to major repairs
Type of housing most needed in Monrovia
59% single-family                32% senior housing     19% hsg for disabled
37% hsg afford to young families 22% condominiums       11% apartments
37% hsg afford to workforce      21% second units/granny flats
Second Units
     42% SF owners potentially interested in adding second unit
                                                                             23

                     Community Input –
         A Sampling of Survey Comments
     “Maintain                                    “Focus on
     Monrovia’s                                 improving the
     small town                               quality of housing
                         “Need affordable
         feel”                                    and living
                            housing for
                                                 conditions”
                          people working
                           in Monrovia”
   “Important to
 provide sufficient
  parking for new                              “Seniors and
  development to                            retirees forced to
avoid spillover onto                       move due to lack of
       street”                             affordable housing
                          “Second units
                                              in Monrovia”
                          provide a good
                        housing option for
                             seniors”
                                                                 24

      Areas for Policy Discussion
1. How can Monrovia incentivize production of units
   affordable to young families and its workforce?
      Elimination of CUP for projects with affordable units?
      Fee reductions for projects with affordable units?
      Inclusionary (or in-lieu fee) for projects > min. size?
2. Should City revisit second unit standards
   to better facilitate, while maintaining
   neighborhood compatibility?
3. Pursuant to SB 2, which zone district
   should City designate for allowance of
   emergency shelters without a CUP?

       Provide Us Your Input
 What are Monrovia’s Most Important
 Housing Needs?
What programs should the City Pursue to
Address Its Housing Needs?

              Monrovia
2014-2021 Housing Element Update
    Planning Commission Workshop
            October 3, 2013
City of Monrovia
  General Plan
 Noise Element
            Adopted
         June 12, 2002
     Resolution No. 2002-41
                                                                                                                         Noise Element
                                                                                                                       City of Monrovia
                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.   Introduction ..........................................................................................................................1
II. Evaluating Noise Impacts .....................................................................................................1
      A. Defining Noise Exposure ...............................................................................................1
      B. Developing Noise Criteria .............................................................................................3
      C. Land Use Criteria for Noise Exposure ...........................................................................4
      D. Acceptable Interior Noise Exposure ...............................................................................4
      E. Relationship to Noise Ordinance....................................................................................4
III. Sources of Noise in Monrovia ...............................................................................................5
      A. Traffic Noise on Major Arterials .....................................................................................7
      B. Industrial and Commercial Noise Activity ......................................................................8
      C. Schools, Parks, Hospitals, etc. ......................................................................................8
      D. Neighborhood Noise Sources .......................................................................................8
      E. Construction Activity ......................................................................................................8
IV. Noise Control Program .......................................................................................................18
V. Document Preparation Resources .....................................................................................21
                                                     LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. Subjective Effects of Changes in Sound Pressure Level.............................................2
Table 2. Summary of Noise Measurement Results ...................................................................7
Table 3. Traffic Data .................................................................................................................9
Table 4. Summary of Noise Contour Calculations – Year 2000 ..............................................12
Table 5. Summary of Noise Contour Calculations – Year 2010 ..............................................15
                                                    LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Typical Sound Levels From Indoor and Outdoor Noise Sources .................................2
Figure 2. Land Use Compatibility Guidelines..............................................................................5
Figure 3. Noise Measurement Locations....................................................................................6
Figure 4. North of I-210 Freeway – Year 2000 Noise Contours................................................22
Figure 5. South of I-210 Freeway – Year 2000 Noise Contours ...............................................23
Figure 6. North of I-210 Freeway – Year 2010 Noise Contours................................................24
Figure 7. South of I-210 Freeway – Year 2010 Noise Contours ...............................................25
September 2002                                                                                                                           i

                                                                                     Noise Element
                                                                                    City of Monrovia
I.   Introduction
This document updates the City of Monrovia’s 1975 Noise Element of the City's General Plan.
This Element was prepared with recognition that excessive noise levels are a significant and
costly form of environmental pollution and, consequently, Federal and State laws have been
enacted for the purpose of limiting and controlling sound generation and the amount of public
exposure to sound.
It is intended that this Noise Element satisfy the State requirement that local General Plans
contain a Noise Element. Noise Element requirements, contents, and preparation methods are
determined by Section 65302(f) of the Government Code, and by the Guidelines for the
Preparation and Content of the Noise Element of the General Plan (by the California
Department of Health Services) which are included in the State of California General Plan
Guidelines, published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research of the State of
California in 1998. It is required, as stated in the guidelines, that major noise sources and
areas containing noise-sensitive land uses be identified and quantified by preparing generalized
noise exposure contours for current and projected conditions. Contours may be prepared in
terms of either the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) or Day-Night Average Level
(Ldn), which are descriptors of total noise exposure at a given location for an annual average
day. CNEL and Ldn are generally considered to be equivalent descriptors of the community
noise environment within plus or minus 1 dB.
The Noise Element of the Monrovia General Plan is a statement of the City's policy and intent
regarding land use in relation to environmental noise and the control of noise sources within the
community. Its purpose is to provide a framework within which future planning and noise
mitigating decisions will be made and implemented.
This Element consists of a survey of the current noise environment, indicating the major
contributors of noise, and concludes with a proposed "noise control program," which includes
certain practicable City actions towards reduction of noise and mitigation of its adverse effects.
II. Evaluating Noise Impacts
A. Defining Noise Exposure
Noise is often defined as unwanted sound. Sound is easily measured with instruments, but the
human variability in subjective and physical responses to sound complicates the understanding
of its impact on people. People judge the relative magnitude of sound by subjective terms such
as “loudness” or “noisiness.”
Physically, sound-pressure magnitude is measured and quantified in terms of a logarithmic
scale in decibels (dB). Research on human hearing sensitivity has shown that a 3 dB increase
in the sound is barely noticeable and a 10 dB increase would be perceived as twice as loud.
Table 1 presents the subjective effect of changes in sound pressure level. The human hearing
system, however, is not equally sensitive to sound at all frequencies. Therefore, a frequency-
dependent adjustment called “A-weighting” has been devised so that sound may be measured
similar to the way the human hearing system responds. The A-weighted sound level is often
abbreviated “dBA” or “dB(A).” Figure 1 provides typical A-weighted sound levels of various
noise sources and the responses people usually have to such sound levels.
September 2002                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                          Noise Element
                                                                                                                        City of Monrovia
              Table 1. Subjective Effects of Changes in Sound Pressure Level
          Change in                    Change in Power                                                  Change in
      Sound Level (dB)          Decrease                    Increase                           Apparent Loudness
               3                     1/2                                2                    Just perceptible
               5                     1/3                                3                    Clearly noticeable
              10                    1/10                             10                      Half or twice as loud
              20                   1/100                            100                      Much quieter or louder
      Source: Parsons Engineering Science
Community noise levels usually change continuously during the day. However, community
noise exhibits a daily, weekly, and yearly pattern. Several descriptors have been developed to
compare noise levels over different time periods. One of the most common descriptors is the
energy equivalent sound level (Leq).
The Leq is the equivalent steady-state
                                                                         INDIVIDUAL OR
A-weighted sound level that would                   COMMUNITY RESPONSE TO                     SOUND
contain the same acoustical energy as                             CONTINOUS NOISE           LEVEL, dBA   NOISE SOURCE
the time varying A-weighted sound                                Threshold of Physical              120  Commercial Jet Takeoff
                                                                                                         (Near Runway)
                                                                                 Discomfort
level during the same time interval.
                                                                                                    110  Riveting Machine
The noise contours generated for this
document are expressed using the                                                                    100
                                                                                                         Piledriver (50’)
descriptor of “Community Noise                                                                           Ambulance Siren (100’)
                                                                                                         Diesel Bus (At Sidewalk)
Equivalent Level” (CNEL). CNEL is                           Hearing Damage Criteria
                                                                    for 8-Hour Workday
                                                                                                    90
                                                                                                         Inside Boiler Room or
defined as the average equivalent A-               Most Residents Highly Annoyed
                                                                                                    80
                                                                                                         Printing Press Plant
                                                                                                         Gas Lawn Mower (100’)
weighted sound level during a 24-hour                                                                    Inside Sports Car, 50 mph
day, obtained after addition of five                                                                70   Freight Train (100’)
decibels to sound levels in the evening                           Acceptability Limit for
                                                            Residential Development
                                                                                                         Car Passby (50’)
                                                                                                    60   Average Urban Area
from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m. and after                                   Goal for Urban Area                   Inside Department Store
addition of 10 decibels to sound levels                                                             50   Inside Business Office
in the night from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.                                                                      Light Traffic (100’)
                                                                                                         Inside Home
These adjustments to noise levels at                                                                40
separate times will account for the                       No Community Annoyance                    30   Quiet Rural Area
increased sensitivity of people to
noises in the evening and nighttime                                                                 20
                                                                                                         Inside Recording Studio
hours. Another descriptor, the Day-
                                                                                                    10
Night average sound level (Ldn), was
developed to evaluate the total daily                             Threshold of Hearing              0
community noise environment. The              Source: Parsons Engineering Science,
Day-Night Average Level is the                Inc.
average equivalent A-weighted sound                 Figure 1 - Typical Sound Levels From Indoor and
level during a 24-hour period, obtained                                             Outdoor Noise Sources
after addition of 10 decibels to sound
levels in the nighttime hours from 10
p.m. to 7 a.m. This adjustment is an effort to account for the increased sensitivity of most
people to noise in the quiet nighttime hours. Ldn has been adopted by federal agencies
including the Department of Defense, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA), and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
as the accepted unit for quantifying human annoyance to general environmental noise. CNEL
and Ldn represent daily levels of noise exposure averaged on an annual or daily basis, while Leq
represents the equivalent energy noise exposure for a shorter time period, typically one hour.
September 2002                                                                                                                      2

                                                                                    Noise Element
                                                                                  City of Monrovia
The maximum sound level (Lmax) is the highest instantaneous sound level measured during a
single noise measurement interval no matter how long this sound may persist and whether the
noise source is ambient or project related.
B. Developing Noise Criteria
An effective program of noise control must be based upon realistic noise criteria, in terms of
economic and technical feasibility and practicality of implementation. The development of these
criteria must be based on consideration of the effects of noise on man.
The effects of noise on people and people's activities are varied and extremely complex. They
can be divided into three general categories:
         1.  Physiological effects to both temporary (e.g., startle reactions and temporary
             hearing threshold shifts) and enduring (e.g., permanent hearing damage or the
             cumulative physiological effects of prolonged sleep loss or of prolonged nervous
             strain).
         2.  Behavioral effects are those involving interference with on-going activities such as
             conversation, learning, TV-watching, sleep or the performance of various tasks.
         3.  Subjective effects described by such words as "annoyance," "nuisance,"
             dissatisfaction," "disturbance," etc., as a result of behavioral and physiological
             effects.
The upper limits of noise experienced in urban areas usually are not severe enough to produce
measurable long-term physiological effects, with the exceptions of those resulting from
prolonged nervous strain or sleep loss. For example, the noise levels produced by aircraft fly-
over even at community positions relatively close to the runways are usually not intense enough
to cause permanent loss of hearing. Thus the last two categories of noise effects - behavioral
and subjective - provide the most usable guides for establishing noise criteria.
The effects of noise exposure are not easily quantifiable. However, guidelines based on:
         1.     Study of conversation and sleep interference; and
         2.     Social survey assessment of subjective response can be used to establish
                reasonable criteria for noise exposure.
Noise levels which exceed 85 dBA are generally considered to contribute to hearing loss. When
exposed to such levels for long duration during each working day, any individual may
experience severe temporary or even permanent hearing loss. State and Federal health and
safety regulations currently protect workers at levels of exposure that exceed 90 dBA for each
eight-hour work day.
Speech communication and speech intelligibility are impaired and may even become impossible
at levels from 60 to 70 dBA. Sleep interference may be experienced at noise levels in excess
of 35 dBA. By generally accepted standards, noise levels above 45 dBA are unacceptable for
sleeping spaces.
September 2002                                                                                3
                                                                                       Noise Element
                                                                                      City of Monrovia
C. Land Use Criteria for Noise Exposure
Guidelines for noise compatible land use, extracted from the State of California Guidelines for
the Preparation and Content of the Noise Element of the General Plan, are presented in Figure
2. The guidelines provides land use compatibility with different ranges of CNEL or Ldn values, in
terms of four categories of acceptability.
The compatibility guidelines given in Figure 2 are based on consideration of the type of activity
that would normally take place for a particular land use. These include the requirements of that
activity for speech communication, the typical sound insulation characteristics of buildings that
might be found in these areas, and additional requirements for freedom from noise intrusions
that might be imposed on other activities, such as sleep.
The noise exposure is such that the activities associated with the land use may be carried out
with essentially no interference, e.g., for residential areas: both indoor and outdoor noise
environments are pleasant.
D. Acceptable Interior Noise Exposure
Section 1208A of the 1998 California Building Code (Title 24, Part 2, California Code of
Regulations) establishes uniform minimum noise insulation performance standards to protect
persons within new hotels, motels, dormitories, apartment houses and dwelling other than
detached single-family dwellings from the effects of excessive noise. The regulations state
that, “Interior noise levels attributable to exterior sources shall not exceed 45 dB in any
habitable room. The noise metric shall be either … Ldn or … CNEL, consistent with the noise
element of the general plan.” Additionally, it is stated that residential buildings or structures to
be located where the Ldn or CNEL exceeds 60 dB shall require an acoustical analysis showing
that the proposed building design will limit the intruding exterior noise to an interior CNEL (Ldn)
of 45 dB.
E. Relationship to Noise Ordinance
Noise elements are directed at minimizing future noise conflicts, while noise ordinances are
intended mainly to resolve noise conflicts. A noise control ordinance addresses noise
generated by industrial, commercial, agricultural, and residential uses, which are not subject to
Federal and State noise regulations. The regulation of noise such as traffic on public roads, rail
line operations, and aircraft in flight is preempted by Federal and State regulations, meaning
that such sources generally cannot be controlled by a local ordinance. The Noise Element can
address the prevention of noise conflicts from all sources, however. The standard of a noise
control ordinance should be consistent with the Noise Element, to achieve consistency in the
implementation of noise control programs, and to provide businesses with consistent design
criteria for development and expansion. The City adopted, occasionally amends, and enforces
a noise control ordinance, which is Chapter 9.44 of the Municipal Code.
September 2002                                                                                    4

                                                                                                                     Noise Element
                                                                                                                   City of Monrovia
                               Figure 2. Land Use Compatibility Guidelines
                                          Community Noise Exposure
   Land Use Category                            Ldn or CNEL, dB
                                 55       60       65      70        75       80          INTERPRETATION:
   Residential - Low Density
   Single Family, Duplex,
   Mobile Homes                                                                           Normally Acceptable
                                                                                          Specific land use is satisfactory, based
   Residential -                                                                          upon the assumption that any buildings
   Multi-Family                                                                           involved are of normal conventional
                                                                                          construction, without any special noise
                                                                                          insulation requirements.
   Transient Lodging -
   Motels, Hotels
   Schools, Libraries,                                                                    Conditionally Acceptable
   Churches, Hospitals,                                                                   New construction or development should
   Nursing Homes                                                                          be undertaken only after a detailed analysis
                                                                                          of the noise reduction requirements is
   Auditoriums, Concert                                                                   made and needed noise insulation features
   Halls, Amphitheaters                                                                   included in the design. Conventional
                                                                                          construction, but with closed windows
                                                                                          and fresh air supply systems or air
   Sports Arena, Outdoor                                                                  conditioning will normally suffice.
   Spectator Sports
   Playgrounds,
   Neighborhood Parks                                                                     Normally Unacceptable
                                                                                          New construction or development should
                                                                                          generally be discouraged. If new
   Golf Courses, Riding                                                                   construction or development does proceed,
   Stables, Water                                                                         a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
   Recreation, Cemeteries                                                                 requirements must be made and needed noise
                                                                                          insulation features included in the design.
   Office Buildings, Business
   Commercial and
   Professional
   Industrial, Manufacturing,                                                             Clearly Unacceptable
   Utilities, Agriculture                                                                 New construction or development should
                                                                                          generally not be undertaken.
Source: State of California General Plan Guidelines. Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, 1998.
III.       Sources of Noise in Monrovia
The City assessed the existing noise environment by conducting noise measurements and
analytical procedures using a computer noise prediction model. Traffic noise levels were
evaluated using a simplified version of the Federal Highway Administration Traffic Noise Model
(FHWA-RD-77-108). Projected Year 2010 noise levels and contours were also calculated and
generated by Parsons. The major findings are included herein in the form of maps of existing
and projected CNEL contours, summary tables, and a general discussion of the noise
environment.
Noise measurements were conducted at twenty-two representative locations throughout the
city. Continuous noise monitoring was conducted at six of the twenty-two locations, and short-
term 20-minute to 1-hour measurements were conducted at the remaining sites. Measurement
locations are presented in Figure 3. A listing of the measurement locations and the noise
measurement results are included in Table 2.
September 2002                                                                                                                        5

                                                                                     Noise Element
                                                                                   City of Monrovia
                            Figure 3. Noise Measurement Locations
From the noise measurements and complimenting analytical procedures, CNEL contours were
derived for traffic noise using traffic data provided by and obtained through the City. The latest
traffic volumes that the City had available were for Year 1996 only, but through consultation
with the City’s traffic consultant, an annual increase of one percent was assumed and the
existing Year 2000 and the projected Year 2010 traffic volumes were interpolated and used in
this document. Traffic speeds, truck distributions, as well as day-, evening-, and nighttime-hour
traffic volume distributions were derived from available information and through consultation
with the City’s traffic consultant. The traffic data used for calculating the traffic noise and
generating the contours are presented on Table 3.
Noise contours are lines of equal noise exposure just as the contour lines on a topographic map
are lines of equal elevation. The noise contours are simply approximations of noise levels.
They should not be thought of as static lines because of the varying nature of noise sources
and transmission paths. Also, for the intended planning purposes of the noise contours, the
contours were calculated without taking into consideration any shielding factors for rows of
buildings.
The existing and projected CNEL contour maps illustrate the penetration of traffic noise into
adjacent neighborhoods. Each contour line represents the measured and calculated maximum
penetration of noise at each particular "Community Noise Equivalent Level" (CNEL). As
previously explained, CNEL is a time-integrated measure of noise over a 24-hour period with a
weighted average which accounts for greater sensitivity to noise in the evening and nighttime
hours. Existing Year 2000 CNEL contours are shown on Figures 4 and 5, and projected Year
September 2002                                                                                 6

                                                                                    Noise Element
                                                                                  City of Monrovia
2010 CNEL contours are shown on Figures 6 and 7. Tables 4 and 5 list the distances from
major arterial streets to various noise contours for the existing Year 2000, and projected Year
2010 conditions, respectively.
                     Table 2. Summary of Noise Measurement Results
 Rec.    Land                                            Start   Duration    Noise Levels, dBA
                        Monitoring Address       Date
 No.      Use                                            Time              Leq     Lmax    CNEL
              1
   1      SFR         1402 B Alamitas Street    6/12/00  12:00   24 hours                    74
   2      SFR        402 East Lemon Avenue      6/12/00   2:00   24 hours                    59
   3      SFR           912 South Mayflower     6/14/00  10:00   24 hours                    59
                               Avenue
   4      SFR      922 W. Colorado Boulevard    6/15/00  16:00    1 hour    60
   5      Park      Monrovia Recreation Park    6/13/00   9:11    30 min.   64      84
   6      SFR         305 Valle Vista Avenue    6/13/00  10:04    20 min.   54      69
   7      SFR        718 S. Magnolia Avenue     6/13/00  10:35    30 min.   63      85
   8     School        First Lutheran School    6/13/00  11:20    30 min.   64      66
   9      SFR         256 Canyon Crest Drive    6/13/00  15:45    30 min.   54      73
  10     School           Plymouth School       6/14/00   8:12    20 min.   51      67
  11      SFR            105 Spanner Street     6/14/00   8:45    30 min.   62      80
  12      SFR           809 W. Duarte Road      6/15/00  11:42   24 hours                    68
  13      SFR       329 W. Hillcrest Boulevard  6/14/00  12:22   24 hours                    58
              2
  14     MFR       731 West Foothill Boulevard  6/14/00  12:42    30 min.   68      75
             3
  15      MH         Ten Twenty Mobile Home     6/14/00  13:39    30 min.   68      86
                                Park
  16     School      Canyon Learning Center     6/14/00  14:23    30 min.   61      77
  17      MFR        The Gables Senior Living   6/15/00   8:07    30 min.   71      82
                             Community
  18     School        Mayflower Elementary     6/15/00   8:45    20 min.   57      71
                               School
  19      SFR         1005 Royal Oaks Drive     6/15/00   9:17    30 min.   64      81
  20      SFR          2173 S. Myrtle Avenue    6/15/00  13:00   24 hours                    62
  21      SFR              830 Alta Street      6/15/00  15:20    30 min.   59      67
  22      Park              Library Park        6/15/00  15:51    30 min.   63      72
Source: Parsons Engineering Science
     1. SFR: Single Family Residence
     2. MFR: Multi-Family Residence
     3. MH: Mobile Home
A. Traffic Noise on Major Arterial Streets
Based upon the land use compatibility guidelines shown on Figure 2, traffic noise is not a
problem at commercial and industrial locations within the city. In general, existing noise levels
at most residential locations within the city are considered acceptable. Exceptions, of course,
September 2002                                                                                7
                                                                                       Noise Element
                                                                                     City of Monrovia
exist at locations directly bordering major arterial streets and the freeway, particular in the
residential areas located just south of the I-210 Freeway, between Fifth and Mayflower
Avenues.
Freeway traffic noise can usually be effectively mitigated by erecting soundwalls. The
California State Department of Transportation, has the responsibility and jurisdiction over the
control of traffic noise generated from an interstate highway such as the I-210. The freeway
soundwalls have been erected or are under construction adjacent to all residential areas in the
City. The California State Department of Transportation does not erect soundwalls adjacent to
commercial and industrial areas.
B. Industrial and Commercial Noise Activity
In general, industrial noise-producing activity within the City is minimal. A few isolated light
industrial operations create levels of noise, which may be annoying to residential locations,
particularly if activity occurs in the late evening or nighttime hours. The allowable noise levels
at a residential property line are regulated by the City of Monrovia’s current noise ordinance.
C. Schools, Parks, Hospitals, etc.
Noise levels at public facilities throughout the City (schools, parks, hospitals, etc.) are found to
be compatible with the land use compatibility guidelines listed in Figure 2. Results of noise
measurements conducted at several schools and parks, i.e., the First Lutheran School,
Plymouth School, Canyon Learning Center, Mayflower School, the Monrovia Recreation Park,
and Library Park, show that they are all within the acceptable noise exposure range.
D. Neighborhood Noise Sources
Noise exposures allowable at a citizen's property line due to sources such as radio, television,
recreational and social activities, air conditioning equipment, swimming pool pumps, animals,
sound amplification systems, etc., vary in level, time of day, day of week, and duration. These
noise intrusions, as well as intrusion from industrial or commercial zones, are regulated by the
City of Monrovia’s current noise ordinance.             Citizen understanding, participation and
cooperation are essential for effectiveness.
E. Construction Activity
Short-term, temporary, and intermittent noise impacts associated with construction activities
may be considered minimal during daytime hours. However, late evening and weekend
disturbances related to construction activities experienced at nearby sensitive receptor locations
may cause significant impacts.
September 2002                                                                                   8

                                                                               Noise Element
                                                                             City of Monrovia
                                       Table 3. Traffic Data
                                         Avg. Daily Traffic        Truck Percentages
     LOCATION                            Volume For Year     Speed Medium     Heavy
                                         2000        2010    (mph) Trucks     Trucks
     CALIFORNIA AVE.
     South City Bndry. to Duarte Rd      6,556       7,242     35   1.5%       1.5%
     Duarte Rd. to Evergreen Ave.        7,596       8,391     35   1.5%       1.5%
     Central Ave. to Huntington Dr.      6,556       7,242     35   1.5%       1.5%
     Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.    4,891       5,403     30   0.0%       0.0%
     Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.    6,497       7,177     30   0.0%       0.0%
     CENTRAL AVE.
     Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.       11,511      12,715     30   1.5%       1.5%
     COLORADO BLVD.
     Fifth Ave. to Madison Ave.          8,429       9,311     30   0.0%       0.0%
     Madison Ave. to Mayflower Ave.      6,452       7,127     30   0.0%       0.0%
     Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.     6,151       6,794     30   0.0%       0.0%
     Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.        3,746       4,138     30   0.0%       0.0%
     Myrtle Ave. to California Ave.      3,018       3,333     30   0.0%       0.0%
     California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.    2,497       2,759     30   0.0%       0.0%
     DUARTE RD.
     Fifth Ave. to Mayflower Ave.       22,269      24,599     40   1.0%       1.0%
     Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.       18,523      20,461     40   1.0%       1.0%
     Myrtle Ave. to California Ave.     12,864      14,210     40   1.0%       1.0%
     California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.   11,030      12,184     40   1.0%       1.0%
     Shamrock Ave. to Moutain Ave.      11,045      12,201     40   1.0%       1.0%
     FIFTH AVE.
     Duarte Rd. to Huntington Dr.       12,695      14,024     35   0.0%       0.0%
     Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.    4,891       5,403     35   0.0%       0.0%
     Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.    3,850       4,253     35   0.0%       0.0%
     Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd,    940        1,038     35   0.0%       0.0%
     FOOTHILL BLVD.
     Fifth Ave. to Madison Ave.         20,444      22,583     35   1.0%       1.0%
     Madison Ave. to Mayflower Ave.     21,957      24,254     35   1.0%       1.0%
     Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.    22,581      24,944     35   1.0%       1.0%
     Myrtle Ave. to California Ave.     11,576      12,787     35   1.0%       1.0%
     California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.   18,211      20,116     35   1.0%       1.0%
     Shamrock Ave. to Mountain Ave.     13,632      15,058     35   1.0%       1.0%
September 2002                                                                           9
                                                                                      Noise Element
                                                                                    City of Monrovia
                                       Table 3 (cont’d). Traffic Data
                                               Avg. Daily Traffic           Truck Percentages
     LOCATION                                   Volume For Year      Speed Medium       Heavy
                                               2000        2010      (mph) Trucks       Trucks
     HILLCREST BLVD.
     Fifth Ave. to Madison Ave.                   2,935        3,242  30     0.0%        0.0%
     Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.              3,194        3,529  30     0.0%        0.0%
     HUNTINGTON DR.
     West City Boundary to Fifth Ave.            12,175      13,449   35     1.0%        1.0%
     Fifth Ave. to Foothill Freeway              17,274      19,081   35     1.0%        1.0%
     Foothill Freeway to Monterey Ave            15,505      17,127   35     1.0%        1.0%
     Monterey Ave. to Mayflower Ave.             28,721      31,725   35     1.0%        1.0%
     Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.             19,513      21,555   35     1.0%        1.0%
     Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.                25,495      28,162   35     1.0%        1.0%
     Myrtle Ave. to Ivy. Ave.                    27,894      30,813   35     1.0%        1.0%
     Ivy Ave. to California Ave.                 20,812      22,989   35     1.0%        1.0%
     California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.            13,861      15,311   35     1.0%        1.0%
     Shamrock Ave. to Mountain Ave.              17,932      19,808   35     1.0%        1.0%
     Mountain Ave to East City Bndry.            27,056      29,886   35     1.0%        1.0%
     MAGNOLIA AVE
     Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway               3,086        3,409  35     1.0%        1.0%
     Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr            5,931        6,552  35     1.0%        1.0%
     Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.             4,787        5,288  30     1.0%        1.0%
     Colorado Blvd. Foothill Blvd.                3,434        3,793  30     1.0%        1.0%
     Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd.            1,353        1,494  30     1.0%        1.0%
     MAYFLOWER AVE.
     South City Boundry to Duarte Rd.             6,452        7,127  35     1.0%        1.0%
     Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway               7,797        8,612  35     1.0%        1.0%
     Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr           14,986      16,554   35     1.0%        1.0%
     Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.            10,302      11,380   30     1.0%        1.0%
     Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.             6,452        7,127  30     1.0%        1.0%
     Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd.            2,073        2,290  30     1.0%        1.0%
     MONTEREY AVE.
     Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.             5,827        6,437  30     0.0%        0.0%
     MOUNTAIN AVE.
     Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway              12,383      13,679   40    1.25%       1.25%
     Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr           22,477      24,829   40    1.25%       1.25%
     Huntington Dr. to Royal Oaks Dr.            14,412      15,920   40    1.25%       1.25%
     Royal Oaks Dr. to Foothill Blvd.            11,863      13,104   40    1.25%       1.25%
September 2002                                                                                 10

                                                                                      Noise Element
                                                                                    City of Monrovia
                                       Table 3 (cont’d). Traffic Data
                                                 Avg. Daily Traffic          Truck Percentages
     LOCATION                                    Volume For Year      Speed Medium      Heavy
                                                 2000        2010     (mph) Trucks      Trucks
     MYRTLE AVE.
     South City Boundry to Duarte Rd.             21,228       23,449  40    1.25%      1.25%
     Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway               24,974       27,587  35    1.25%      1.25%
     Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr.           26,015       28,737  35    1.25%      1.25%
     Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd,             16,337       18,047  30    1.25%      1.25%
     Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.             10,822       11,955  30    1.25%      1.25%
     Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd.             3,434        3,793  30    1.25%      1.25%
     ROYAL OAKS DR.
     California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.              1,852        2,045  30    0.0%        0.0%
     Shamrock Ave. to Mountain Ave.                3,122        3,448  30    0.0%        0.0%
     Mountain Ave. to East City Bndry              7,284        8,046  30    0.0%        0.0%
     SHAMROCK AVE.
     Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway                3,850        4,253  35    1.25%      1.25%
     Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr             6,244        6,897  35    1.25%      1.25%
     Huntington Dr. to Royal Oaks Dr.              8,117        8,966  35    1.25%      1.25%
     Royal Oaks Dr. to Foothill Blvd.              3,434        3,793  35    1.25%      1.25%
September 2002                                                                                 11

                                                                                     Noise Element
                                                                                    City of Monrovia
                   Table 4. Summary of Noise Contour Calculations – Year 2000
                                              Approx. Distance from Roadway Centerline
          LOCATION                                  to CNEL Noise Contours, feet
                                              70 dBA     65 dBA      60 dBA    55 dBA
          CALIFORNIA AVE.
          South City Bndry. to Duarte Rd.        --         --        129        383
          Duarte Rd. to Evergreen Ave.           --         --        148        438
          Central Ave. to Huntington Dr.         --         --        129         383
          Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.       --         --          --       124
          Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.       --         --         51         155
          CENTRAL AVE.
          Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.           --         65        172         495
          COLORADO BLVD.
          Fifth Ave. to Madison Ave.             --         --         54         169
          Madison Ave. to Mayflower Ave.         --         --          --       129
          Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.        --         --          --        123
          Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.           --         --          --         75
          Myrtle Ave. to California Ave.         --         --          --         60
          California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.       --         --          --         --
          DUARTE RD.
          Fifth Ave. to Mayflower Ave.           --        147        425        1139
          Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.           --        125        360         981
          Myrtle Ave. to California Ave.         --         81        243         690
          California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.       --         70        210         604
          Shamrock Ave. to Moutain Ave.          --         70        210         605
          FIFTH AVE.
          Duarte Rd. to Huntington Dr.           --         --        135        399
          Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.       --         --         53         163
          Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.       --         --          --        132
          Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd.      --         --          --         --
          FOOTHILL BLVD.
          Fifth Ave. to Madison Ave.             --        108        310         856
          Madison Ave. to Mayflower Ave.         --        115        331         909
          Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.        --        118        339         930
          Myrtle Ave. to California Ave.         --         66        179         513
          California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.       --         95        272         761
          Shamrock Ave. to Mountain Ave.         --         75        208         592
          '- -' Less than 50 feet
September 2002                                                                                12

                                                                                   Noise Element
                                                                                 City of Monrovia
              Table 4 (cont’d). Summary of Noise Contour Calculations – Year 2000
                                              Approx. Distance from Roadway Centerline
      LOCATION                                      to CNEL Noise Contours, feet
                                            70 dBA       65 dBA      60 dBA      55 dBA
      HILLCREST BLVD.
      Fifth Ave. to Madison Ave.               --           --          --          --
      Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.          --           --          --          --
      HUNTINGTON DR.
      West City Boundary to Fifth Ave.         --           76        186         523
      Fifth Ave. to Foothill Freeway           --           96        254         709
      Foothill Freeway to Monterey Ave.        --           89        230         646
      Monterey Ave. to Mayflower Ave.          --          144        403         1081
      Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.          --          105        284          786
      Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.             --          130        362          981
      Myrtle Ave. to Ivy. Ave.                 --          140        392         1056
      Ivy Ave. to California Ave.              --          106        287          794
      California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.         --          80         199         559
      Shamrock Ave. to Mountain Ave.           --           70         95         467
      Mountain Ave to East City Bndry.         --          131        364          986
      MAGNOLIA AVE
      Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway           --           --          --        143
      Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr.       --           --         89         266
      Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.         --           --         57         172
      Colorado Blvd. Foothill Blvd.            --           --          --         128
      Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd.        --           --          --          --
      MAYFLOWER AVE.
      South City Boundry to Duarte Rd.         --           --         97         289
      Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway           --           --        116         344
      Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr.       --          72         216         620
      Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.         --           --        119          355
      Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.         --           --         78          234
      Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd.        --           --          --          79
      MONTEREY AVE.
      Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.         --           --          --        116
      MOUNTAIN AVE.
      Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway           --          105        300         832
      Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr.      67           179        516         1350
      Huntington Dr. to Royal Oaks Dr.         --          110        328         906
      Royal Oaks Dr. to Foothill Blvd.         --           64        134         279
      '- -' indicates less than 50 feet
September 2002                                                                              13

                                                                                    Noise Element
                                                                                  City of Monrovia
              Table 4 (cont’d). Summary of Noise Contour Calculations – Year 2000
                                              Approx. Distance from Roadway Centerline
      LOCATION                                      to CNEL Noise Contours, feet
                                             70 dBA      65 dBA      60 dBA      55 dBA
      MYRTLE AVE.
      South City Boundry to Duarte Rd.         64          170        490         1291
      Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway            --         149        430         1150
      Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr.        --         154        446         1188
      Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.          --          78        237          675
      Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.          --          --        152          448
      Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd.         --          --          --         142
      ROYAL OAKS DR.
      California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.          --          --          --          --
      Shamrock Ave. to Mountain Ave.            --          --          --          --
      Mountain Ave. to East City Bndry          --          --          --         149
      SHAMROCK AVE.
      Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway            --          --         98          293
      Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr.        --          51        156          458
      Huntington Dr. to Royal Oaks Dr.          --          63        191          554
      Royal Oaks Dr. to Foothill Blvd.          --          --         84          252
      '- -' indicates less than 50 feet
September 2002                                                                               14

                                                                                     Noise Element
                                                                                   City of Monrovia
                   Table 5. Summary of Noise Contour Calculations – Year 2010
                                              Approx. Distance from Roadway Centerline
          LOCATION                                  to CNEL Noise Contours, feet
                                              70 dBA     65 dBA      60 dBA    55 dBA
          CALIFORNIA AVE.
          South City Bndry. to Duarte Rd.        --         --        142        419
          Duarte Rd. to Evergreen Ave.           --         54        163         479
          Central Ave. to Huntington Dr.         --                   142         419
          Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.       --         --          --       136
          Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.       --         --         56         171
          CENTRAL AVE.
          Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.           --         70        189         541
          COLORADO BLVD.
          Fifth Ave. to Madison Ave.             --         --         59         187
          Madison Ave. to Mayflower Ave.         --         --          --       143
          Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.        --         --          --       136
          Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.           --         --          --        83
          Myrtle Ave. to California Ave.         --         --          --        66
          California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.       --         --          --        55
          DUARTE RD.
          Fifth Ave. to Mayflower Ave.          61         161        465        1233
          Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.           --        136        394        1064
          Myrtle Ave. to California Ave.         --         89        267         752
          California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.       --         77        231         659
          Shamrock Ave. to Moutain Ave.          --         77        231         659
          FIFTH AVE.
          Duarte Rd. to Huntington Dr.           --         --        149        437
          Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.       --         --         59         179
          Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.       --         --          --       145
          Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd.      --         --          --         --
          FOOTHILL BLVD.
          Fifth Ave. to Madison Ave.             --        118        339        930
          Madison Ave. to Mayflower Ave.         --        125        362        987
          Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.        --        129        371        1010
          Myrtle Ave. to California Ave.         --         72        196         560
          California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.       --        104        298        826
          Shamrock Ave. to Mountain Ave.         --         81        228         646
          '- -' indicates less than 50 feet
September 2002                                                                                15

                                                                                    Noise Element
                                                                                  City of Monrovia
              Table 5 (cont’d). Summary of Noise Contour Calculations – Year 2010
                                              Approx. Distance from Roadway Centerline
     LOCATION                                       to CNEL Noise Contours, feet
                                            70 dBA       65 dBA      60 dBA      55 dBA
     HILLCREST BLVD.
     Fifth Ave. to Madison Ave.                --           --          --          --
     Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.           --           --          --          --
     HUNTINGTON DR.
     West City Boundary to Fifth Ave.          --           81        203         571
     Fifth Ave. to Foothill Freeway            --          103        278          772
     Foothill Freeway to Monterey Ave.         --          95         252         704
     Monterey Ave. to Mayflower Ave.           --          157        440         1171
     Mayflower Ave. to Magnolia Ave.           --          114        311          853
     Magnolia Ave. to Myrtle Ave.              --          141        396         1064
     Myrtle Ave. to Ivy. Ave.                  --          153        429         1144
     Ivy Ave. to California Ave.               --          115        314          862
     California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.          --          85         217         610
     Shamrock Ave. to Mountain Ave.            --          102        274          762
     Mountain Ave to East City Bndry.          --          142        398         1070
     MAGNOLIA AVE
     Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway            --           --         52         157
     Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr.        --           --         98         293
     Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.          --           --         62         189
     Colorado Blvd. Foothill Blvd.             --           --          --         141
     Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd.         --           --          --          --
     MAYFLOWER AVE.
     South City Boundry to Duarte Rd.          --           --        107         317
     Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway            --           --        128         377
     Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr.        --          80         237         676
     Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.          --           --        131          389
     Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.          --           --         86          257
     Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd.         --           --          --          87
     MONTEREY AVE.
     Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.          --           --          --        142
     MOUNTAIN AVE.
     Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway            --          114        329         904
     Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr.       72           197        563         1457
     Huntington Dr. to Royal Oaks Dr.                      121        360         984
     Royal Oaks Dr. to Foothill Blvd.          --          101        301          836
     '- -' indicates less than 50 feet
September 2002                                                                               16

                                                                                    Noise Element
                                                                                  City of Monrovia
              Table 5 (cont’d). Summary of Noise Contour Calculations – Year 2010
                                              Approx. Distance from Roadway Centerline
      LOCATION                                      to CNEL Noise Contours, feet
                                             70 dBA      65 dBA      60 dBA      55 dBA
      MYRTLE AVE.
      South City Boundry to Duarte Rd.         69          187        536         1395
      Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway           62          163        470         1245
      Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr.       64          169        488         1285
      Huntington Dr. to Colorado Blvd.          --          86        260          735
      Colorado Blvd. to Foothill Blvd.          --          55        168          490
      Foothill Blvd. to Hillcrest Blvd.         --          --         52          157
      ROYAL OAKS DR.
      California Ave. to Shamrock Ave.          --          --          --          --
      Shamrock Ave. to Mountain Ave.            --          --          --         72
      Mountain Ave. to East City Bndry          --          --         54          164
      SHAMROCK AVE.
      Duarte Rd. to Foothill Freeway            --          --        107         322
      Foothill Freeway to Huntington Dr.        --         56         171          501
      Huntington Dr. to Royal Oaks Dr.          --         69         210          605
      Royal Oaks Dr. to Foothill Blvd.          --          --         92          276
      '- -' indicates less than 50 feet
September 2002                                                                               17

                                                                                      Noise Element
                                                                                    City of Monrovia
IV. Noise Control Program
The propagation of noise in a community can conceptually be considered to consist of three
interrelated components: the source of the noise itself, the path over which the noise is
transmitted, and the receiver (hearer) of the noise. Consequently, in considering the various
approaches to controlling undesirable levels of noise exposure, modifications to one or more of
these three components are required.
The most effective method of noise control involves physical or operational modifications at the
source. For example, the source may be rerouted through a less sensitive area, or restrictions
on operational speed, time of day or source type may be imposed. Elimination of night truck
traffic on certain streets and a ban on blowing horns, are examples of such operational
restrictions.
Modifications to the path along which the noise is propagated should also be considered in
dealing with problems of noise exposure. In this regard, there are a wide range of options
related to the use of barriers or shields between the source and the receiver. Often the most
effective barrier is a wall or earth-berm/wall combination. The wall must be sufficiently high to
shield the observer from all sources of noise, such as the exhaust stacks of diesel trucks, and
sufficiently long to shield from the horizontal extent of the source. Alternatively, large
commercial structures can be located in such a way as to shield single-family residential
structures from a highway, for example. Multi-story apartment houses can be similarly used if
planned so that there are no windows facing the highway, and the use of air conditioning in any
building can permit occupants to close windows and doors; however, it must be recognized that
these techniques themselves may present adverse effects. Careful attention to the acoustical
details of wall constructions and the coverings of walls and floors can also greatly reduce the
noise within any building.
As a further example, proper architectural planning can effectively limit intruding noise by
ensuring that those functions that are more compatible with noise are placed in the noisier
locations of the building, and that the noise sensitive areas are shielded by less sensitive areas.
The use of landscaping is often effective in alleviating noise problems, although it is usually
improperly implemented because the reason for its effectiveness is usually misunderstood.
Trees can provide reasonable attenuation of noise levels (on the order of 5 dB per hundred feet
of thickness, up to about 10 dB maximum) if they are dense and high enough to completely
shield the view of the noise source and the forested area is long enough to cover a wide angle
of view. However, in most urban situations there is not sufficient room to introduce a thick
enough belt of trees to yield any significant amount of attenuation, and the time involved in
growing trees of sufficient height can be a major consideration. Nonetheless, even though the
reduction in noise levels may not be significant, it has been found that the psychological benefit
of even a moderately narrow strip of trees greatly reduces complaints about noise exposure.
Usually the most practical means of noise control for the City is modification of the portion of
the path, which is closest to the receiver, namely the structure surrounding the receiver. This
involves land use planning, including control of the use for development of currently vacant
lands of all types, as well as conversion of existing land usage to usage more compatible with
the noise exposure. Land use planning includes all the technological, planning, political,
funding and operational processes essential to good management, and thereby may involve
zoning processes, negotiated acquisition and condemnation.
September 2002                                                                                 18
                                                                                     Noise Element
                                                                                    City of Monrovia
In order to protect the citizens of the City from the adverse effects of an uncontrolled noise
environment, the City of Monrovia will continue to undertake a "noise control program,"
including the control of noise at its source, and the attenuation of noise between the source and
the receiver.
Program No. 1: The City will continue to implement and enforce the City of Monrovia’s noise
ordinance for the control of unnecessary and unwanted noises.
The ordinance should be enforced by the Building and Planning Department and the Police
Department. The noise ordinance enforcement program should be provided with the necessary
funding and expertise to ensure its effective enforcement.
Program No. 2: The City will extend the California Building Code (California Code of
Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Appendix Chapter 12) requirements for noise mitigation in the
design and construction of new multi-family residential developments, hotels, motels,
dormitories, and apartment houses to include all types of residential developments.
The regulations state that:
       “Interior noise levels attributable to exterior sources shall not exceed 45 dB in any
       habitable room. The noise metric shall be either … Ldn or … CNEL, consistent with the
       noise element of the general plan.”
Additionally, an acoustical design analysis shall be required of any planned residential building
or structure which is to be located where the exterior CNEL or Ldn exceed 60 dB. The
residential design should be such that the interior living spaces are exposed to an Ldn or CNEL
of no more than 45 dB. This may be accomplished by implementing a combination of the
following:
    1.    A reduction of the exterior noise to which the dwelling is exposed.
    2.    Installing sound rated windows suitable for the noise reduction required.
    3.    Configuring and insulating exterior walls and roofing systems to reduce the interior
          noise to acceptable levels.
    4.    Locating (or eliminating) vents, mail slots, etc., to minimize sound propagation into the
          home.
    5.    Installing forced air ventilation as needed to provide a habitable living space if the
          interior Ldn or CNEL level is to be met with all or some windows closed.
Program No. 3: The City may implement a noise zoning code, defining compatible land usage
requirements based on the guidelines of Figure 2. The City would require an analysis of
whether or not the proposed development would be in compliance with this code. If the
development falls in the CNEL or Ldn range above that indicated for the normally acceptable
category, noise control design steps must be included in the project plans.
Program No. 4: The City will periodically review other elements of the General Plan for inclusion
of possible revisions giving recognition to noise level/land use relationships. To some degree,
all the elements of the General Plan are related and interdependent. The Noise Element is
closely related to a number of elements of the General Plan including Land Use, Circulation,
September 2002                                                                                19

                                                                                        Noise Element
                                                                                      City of Monrovia
Housing, and Conservation and Open Space. The City should review these related elements
and revise them where necessary to protect the noise environment of Monrovia.
Program No. 5: The California Motor Vehicle Code specifies maximum allowable noise levels
for cars and trucks under a variety of operating conditions on State highways. The City will
enforce them on City streets.
Program No. 6: Future projects within the City will reflect a consciousness on the part of the
City regarding the reduction of unnecessary noise near noise-sensitive areas such as
residences, schools, parks, hospitals, libraries, and convalescent homes.
Actions that can be taken to implement this program can include:
   1. Maintain liaison with transportation agencies such as Caltrans and the FHWA regarding
        the reduction of noise from existing facilities. The design and location of new facilities
        will also be considered.
   2. Consideration should be given to buffering noise-sensitive areas from noise-generating
        land uses.
   3. Noise monitoring within the City will be an ongoing process conducted by the appropriate
        departments.
   4. Ensure that the segment of the Pasadena Blue Line Extension project that would go
        through the City of Monrovia will be designed to meet FTA and other relevant noise
        criteria; close attention shall be paid to the potential adverse noise effects on residences
        and other noise sensitive receptors located in the vicinity of the proposed Blue Line
        station near the Myrtle Avenue / Duarte Road intersection, as well a along the transit
        route.
   5. Close attention shall be paid to the noise evaluation in environmental assessments,
        environmental impact reports and environmental impact statements.
Program No. 7: The City will consider noise control requirements for all new equipment
purchases. Noise levels produced by equipment will be considered a factor in the procurement
process. Various City departments may be involved in the procurement of noise producing
equipment such as compressors, air conditioners, and other fixed and mobile machinery. These
types of operating equipment may be purchased with the necessary noise abating equipment
installed.
September 2002                                                                                   20
                                                                                Noise Element
                                                                               City of Monrovia
V.      Document Preparation Resources
1.      Persons Contacted
        City of Monrovia
              Alice Griselle, AICP, Planning Division
              Barbara Lynch, Planning Division
        Regulatory Resources
             Section 1208A of the 1998 California Building Code (Title 24, Part 2, California
              Code of Regulations)
             City of Monrovia, Noise Control Ordinance, Chapter 9.44 of the Municipal Code.
             Land Use Compatibility, State of California General Plan Guidelines, Governor’s
              Office of Planning and Research, 1998.
2.      Document Preparers
        Parsons Harland Bartholomew and Associates Inc.
        100 West Walnut Street
        Pasadena, California 91124
        (626) 440-6224 (telephone)
        (626) 440-6201 (facsimile)
              Frank Wein, FAICP, DPDS, Project Manager
              Greg Baer, Principal Planner
              Vaidas Sekas, Associate Planner
              Thanh Luc, Noise Engineer – Parsons ES
September 2002                                                                           21

City of Monrovia
  General Plan
 Safety Element
            Adopted
         June 12, 2002
     Resolution No. 2002-40
                                                                                                                              Safety Element
                                                                                                                            City of Monrovia
                                                     Table of Contents
I.   Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 1
II. Seismic Activity ......................................................................................................................... 2
     A. Background ......................................................................................................................... 2
         1. Geologic Setting............................................................................................................ 2
         2. The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone Act ............................................................. 2
            Major Faults .................................................................................................................. 3
     B. Goals, Objectives and Policies - Seismic Activity............................................................... 9
III. Flood Control........................................................................................................................... 11
     A. Background ....................................................................................................................... 11
         1. Setting ......................................................................................................................... 11
         2. Mud and Debris Flows ................................................................................................ 12
         3. Landslide Activities ..................................................................................................... 12
         4. Dam Failure Potential ................................................................................................. 12
         5. Flood Aversion ............................................................................................................ 12
     B. Goals, Objectives and Policies - Flood Aversion.............................................................. 13
IV. Fire Safety................................................................................................................................ 17
     A. Background ....................................................................................................................... 17
         1. Fire Hazards ….. …………………………………………………………………………..17
     B. Goals, Objectives and Policies - Fire Prevention ............................................................. 21
V. Emergency Preparedness ...................................................................................................... 23
     A. Background ....................................................................................................................... 23
         1. The Regional Office of Emergency Service System .................................................. 23
         2. City Disaster Management Plan ................................................................................. 23
         3. Emergency Resources................................................................................................ 25
            a. Fire Department Fire Fighting Resources ............................................................ 25
            b. Paramedics ........................................................................................................... 26
            c. Paramedic and Fire Department Personnel Training........................................... 26
            d. Fire Department Inventory .................................................................................... 26
            e. Police Assistance.................................................................................................. 26
            f. Police Inventory..................................................................................................... 27
            g. Community Policing Programs.............................................................................. 27
     B. Goals, Objectives and Policies - Emergency Operations................................................. 28
Document Preparation Resources ............................................................................................... 29
     1. Persons Contacted ........................................................................................................... 29
     2. Other Resources ............................................................................................................... 29
     3. Document Preparers......................................................................................................... 29
Appendices ………………………………………………………………………………………………30
     A. FEMA letter of October 3, 2000 regarding National Flood Insurance Program…………..31
September 2002                                                                                                                                     i

                                                                                                                          Safety Element
                                                                                                                        City of Monrovia
                                                     List of Figures
1. Sierra Madre Fault Zone ........................................................................................................... 4
2. Raymond Hill Fault Zone .......................................................................................................... 7
3. Saw Pit Wash and Debris Basin Flood Inundation Area........................................................ 15
4. Santa Anita Wash and Dam Flood Inundation Area .............................................................. 16
5. Fire Loss Analysis ................................................................................................................... 18
6. Structure Fires......................................................................................................................... 19
7. High Fire Hazard Zone............................................................................................................ 20
                                                      List of Tables
1. Earthquake Design Magnitudes ................................................................................................ 3
2. Properties within the Alquist-Priolo Fault Hazard Zone............................................................. 8
September 2002                                                                                                                               ii
                                                                                     Safety Element
                                                                                    City of Monrovia
I. Introduction
This Safety Element updates and combines the 1983 "Safety Element” and “Seismic Safety
Element" of the City of Monrovia's General Plan. Unlike the previous document that combined these
two required elements into a single volume into a single element, this document reflects the 1984
State Planning law amendment deleting the requirement for two separate elements and instead only
requires a single Safety Element to discuss all issues related to public safety.
This document identifies and evaluates natural hazards associated with seismic activity, landslides,
flooding and fire within the City of Monrovia. The document provides the goals for each of the
relevant City departments to provide responsible planning resulting in reduction of loss of life,
injuries, damage to property and other losses associated with such disasters, and to act as a guide
to prepare for possible natural or man-caused disasters.
As such, the Safety Element is to serve as a policy document of the City Council and as a reference
for the Planning Commission and City staff in making decisions on public and private development.
The element identifies potential hazards associated with seismic, flood, landslide, and fire issues,
and provides the relevant objectives, principles, and standards to deal effectively with each.
Preparation of the Safety Element was conducted for the City's Planning Division with consultation
of the City of Monrovia's departments of Community Development, Community Services, Public
Works, Police, and Fire. Further consultation was conducted with the California State Department
of Mines and Geology regarding seismic areas and activity, and the Los Angeles County's
Department of Public Works and Department of Regional Planning to identify flood inundation areas
and relevant regional coordination associated with public safety.
September 2002                                                                                     1

                                                                                           Safety Element
                                                                                          City of Monrovia
II. Seismic Activity
1. Background
1. Geologic Setting
The City of Monrovia is located in the northern San Gabriel Valley at the southern face of the San
Gabriel Mountains. During the past two decades most single family development in the City has
resulted in new development being located in the geologically hazardous terrain of the foothills at
the northern edge of the valley.
The San Gabriel Mountains to the north of the City, as opposed to the valley basin, consists of
relatively hard, igneous, and metamorphic rocks, which support the steep slopes and major
canyons. The less steep San Rafael Hills, to the northwest of the City, are composed of the same
substance. It is this difference in terrain of the valley basin and surrounding hills suggesting the past
uplift along the front of the San Gabriel Mountains.
The western San Gabriel Valley is underlain by Holocene and Pleistocene alluvium up to 5,000 to
6,000 feet in thickness. The valley floor, south of the Raymond Hill fault, is underlain by tertiary
rocks. North of the same fault the valley floor is underlain by granite and metamorphic rocks
comparable to those in the hills to the west and north.
2. The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone Act
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone Act was passed in 1972 by the State of California to
mitigate the hazard of surface faulting to structures for human occupancy. This state law was a
direct result of the 1971 San Fernando Earthquake, which resulted in extensive surface fault
ruptures that damaged numerous homes, commercial buildings, and other structures.
The Act's main purpose is to prevent the construction of buildings used for human occupancy of the
surface trace of active faults. The Act only addresses the hazard of surface fault rupture and is not
directed toward other earthquake hazards, such as ground shaking or liquefaction.
The law requires the State Geologist to establish regulatory zones (known as Earthquake Fault
Zones) around the surface traces of active faults and issue appropriate maps. These maps are
distributed to all affected cities, counties, and state agencies for their use in planning and controlling
new or renewed construction. Local agencies must regulate most development projects within the
zones. Projects include all land divisions and most structures for human occupancy. Single family
wood-frame and steel-frame dwellings up to two stories not part of a development of four units or
more are exempt. However, local agencies can be more restrictive than the state law requires.
Before a project can be permitted, cities and counties must require a geologic investigation to
demonstrate the proposed buildings will not be constructed across active faults. An evaluation and
written report of a specific site must be prepared by a registered geologist. If an active fault is found,
a structure for human occupancy cannot be placed over the trace fault and must be set back from
the fault (generally 50 feet).1
Major Faults
1.       The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone Act, Department of Conservation, State of California,
         Division of Mines and Geology, 1972
September 2002                                                                                           2
                                                                                          Safety Element
                                                                                         City of Monrovia
The most prominent faults (see Table 1) in close proximity to the City of Monrovia are the Sierra
Madre Fault Zone (includes the Duarte Fault), the San Andreas Fault, and the Raymond Hill fault.
The former is located in the San Gabriel Mountains, while the Raymond Hill Fault is situated in the
foothills in the northern portion of the City of Monrovia. The San Andreas Fault, which is located
twenty miles to the north of the City, is also important as a major source of shaking at the base.
                               Table 1: Earthquake Design Magnitudes
             Use Category                Approximate            San            Sierra       Raymond
                                          Recurrence          Andreas          Madre        Hill Fault
                                        Interval (Years)       Fault           Fault
 Limited Occupancy
 (warehouses, automated                     50-100             8.50               -             5.0
 manufacturing, facilities, etc.)
 Normal Occupancy
 (residences, normally occupied             100-200             8.5             6.5             5.6
 factories, etc.)
 Critical Facilities (hospitals,
 fire and police stations,                  300-800             8.5             7.5             6.5
 schools, critical utilities, etc.)
Source: Safety and Seismic Safety Element, General Plan, City of Monrovia, 1983.
Sierra Madre Fault Zone
     Fault Name:                                  SIERRA MADRE FAULT ZONE
     Type Of Faulting:                            Reverse
     Length:                                      The zone is about 34 miles long; total length of main
                                                  fault segments is about 46.5 mile, with each segment
                                                  measuring roughly 9.3 miles long
     Affected Communities:                        Monrovia, Sunland, Altadena, Sierra Madre, Duarte,
                                                  and Glendora
     Most Recent Surface Rupture:                 Holocene
     Slip Rate:                                   between 0.36 and 4 mm/yr.
     Interval Between Surface Ruptures:           Several thousand years
     Probable Magnitudes:                         MW 6.0 - 7.0 (?)
     Other Notes :                                This fault zone dips to the north.
The Sierra Madre fault zone is often divided into five main segments to more easily characterize this
fairly complex system. Figure 1 shows the five segments (A to E) of the zone.
These five divisions, while simpler than the entire fault zone, should not be thought of as individual
faults, however -- some of these segments are themselves complex systems of parallel and
branching faults. It has been suggested that differing fault geometry in this zone keep each lettered
segment separate during rupture events -- thus, neighboring segments should not rupture
simultaneously. Others, however, suggest that the fault zone may rupture both in single-segment
and multiple-segment breaks. The most recent surface ruptures are seen on the B and D
September 2002                                                                                          3
                                                                                    Safety Element
                                                                                   City of Monrovia
segments. The least active segment, at least in surficial appearance, is the A segment, also known
as the Vasquez Creek fault, which runs between the San Gabriel fault and the intersection of the B
and C segments of the Sierra Madre fault zone. At the junction of the C and D segments, the
Clamshell - Sawpit Canyon fault splays off from the fault zone, toward the northeast. One of the
strands that makes up segment D is known as the Duarte fault, because of its location near that
community. Segment E represents the easternmost part of this fault zone, and at its eastern end, it
meets up with several other faults in a complex zone northwest of the town of Upland, near the
epicenter of the 1990 Upland earthquake.
                                 Figure 1: Sierra Madre Fault Zone
Source:http://www.scecdc.scec.org/madre.html5/25/2000
San Andreas Fault
While rupture on the Sierra Madre fault zone (theoretically) could be limited to one segment at a
time, it has recently been suggested that a large event on the San Andreas fault to the north (like
that of 1857) could cause simultaneous rupture on reverse faults south of the San Gabriel
Mountains -- the Sierra Madre fault zone being a prime example of such. Whether this could rupture
multiple Sierra Madre fault zone segments simultaneously is unknown.2
    Fault Name:                                 SAN ANDREAS FAULT ZONE
2
         Sierra Madre Fault Zone, http://www.scec.org/madre.html; May 25, 2000
September 2002                                                                                    4
                                                                                        Safety Element
                                                                                       City of Monrovia
    Type Of Fault:                              right-lateral strike-slip
    Length:                                     764 miles (340 miles south from Parkfield; 414 miles
                                                northward
    Affected Communities:                       Parkfield, Frazier Park, Palmdale, Wrightwood, San
                                                Bernardino, Banning, and Indio.
    Last Major Rupture:                         January 9, 1857 (Mojave segment)
                                                April 18, 1906 (Northern segment)
    Slip Rate:                                  about 20 to 35 mm per year
    Interval Between Major Ruptures:            average of about 140 years on the Mojave segment;
                                                recurrence interval varies greatly -- from under 20
                                                years (at Parkfield only) to over 300 years
    Probable Magnitudes:                        MW 6.8 - 8.0
    San Andreas Fault Zone -- San Gorgonio Pass Area
The San Gorgonio Pass area is fairly complex, geologically speaking. Here the San Andreas fault
interacts with other faults (most notably the San Jacinto fault zone and the Pinto Mountain fault) and
thereby becomes somewhat fractured, over the distance extending from just north of San
Bernardino to just north of Indio, some 70 miles. Because this deformation has been going on for
well over a million years, ancient and inactive strands of the San Andreas fault can be found here.
Other faults in this area have been "reawakened" recently after being dormant for hundreds of
thousands of years. There is even evidence to suggest that there is no active, continuous main
trace of the San Andreas fault going all the way through the pass, not even at depth -- implying that
the San Andreas fault may currently be in the process of creating a new fault path through this area!
This could also mean that a single, continuous rupture from Cajon Pass to the Salton Sea (a stretch
of the San Andreas that has not ruptured in historical times) is unlikely to occur. Fault rupture
mechanics are still not well understood, however, and the discontinuity could prove to have little
effect on tempering a major earthquake on this southern stretch of the San Andreas Fault zone
Raymond Hill Fault Zone
    Name of Fault:                              RAYMOND FAULT ( RAYMOND HILL FAULT)
    Type Of Fault:                              left-lateral; only minor reverse slip
    Length:                                     16.5 miles
    Affected Nearby Communities:                Monrovia, San Marino, Arcadia, South Pasadena
    Most Recent Surface Rupture:                Holocene
    Slip Rate:                                  between 0.10 and 0.22 mm/yr
    Interval Between Major Ruptures :           roughly 4,500 years
    Probable Magnitudes:                        MW 6.0 - 7.0
This fault dips at about 75 degrees to the north. There is evidence that at least eight
surface-rupturing events have occurred along this fault in the last 36,000 years.
The exact nature of the slip along the Raymond Hill fault has been a subject of debate for quite
some time. The fault produces a very obvious south-facing scarp along much of its length, and this
has made many favor reverse-slip as the predominant sense of fault motion. However, there are
also places along this scarp where left-lateral stream offsets of several hundred meters can be
seen.
The matter will not be conclusively resolved until the Raymond fault ruptures at the surface, but
some new light was shed on the debate in late 1988, when the Pasadena Earthquake occurred.
September 2002                                                                                        5
                                                                                             Safety Element
                                                                                           City of Monrovia
Apparently located on the Raymond fault, the motion of this quake was predominantly left-lateral,
with a reverse component only about 1/15th the size of the lateral component. Curiously enough,
this corresponds very well with a scarp height of about 30 meters (reverse slip) versus a left-lateral
stream offset of about 400 meters (lateral slip), which are found along the scarp of the Raymond
fault south of Pasadena.
If the Raymond fault is indeed primarily a left-lateral fault, it could be responsible for transferring slip
southward from the Sierra Madre fault zone to other fault systems.3 (See Figure 2 for specific areas
affected by the Raymond Hill Fault in the City of Monrovia.) All of the area affected by the Raymond
Hill Fault are all zoned R-L (Residential Low Density), R-E (Residential Estate), and R-F (Residential
Foothill) and the area is predominantly developed. Table 2 identifies the streets and properties
within the City of Monrovia that are in Raymond Hill Fault as defined by the Alquist-Priolo Fault
Hazard Zone.
3.      http://www.scecdc.scec.org/raymond.html; May 25,2000.
September 2002                                                                                             6
                                                                       Safety Element
                                                                      City of Monrovia
                    Figure 2: Raymond Hill Fault Zone
               Source: Mt. Wilson Quadrangle – Special Studies Zones,
                            st
                  January 1 ,1977, Division of Mines and Geology
                                     Table 2:
September 2002                                                                       7

                                                                                              Safety Element
                                                                                             City of Monrovia
                      Properties Within the Alquist-Priolo Fault Hazard Zone
                        Street Name                                              Properties
 Alta Vista Avenue                                              North: 315 - 444, 482, 486, 498, 518,
 Avocado Place                                                  524 528, 534
 Cloverleaf Drive                                               All
 Cloverleaf Way                                                 403 - 441
 Crescent Drive                                                 All
 El Nido Avenue                                                 232 - 315
 Fifth Avenue                                                   North: 123 - 190
 Franklin Place                                                 All
 Garfield Place                                                 163 - 183
 Heather Heights Court                                          303 - 449
 Highland Place                                                 247 - 442
 Hillcrest Boulevard                                            West: 101 - 1003
 Lincoln Place                                                  139 – 196
 Lotone Street                                                  402, 408
 Madison Avenue                                                 North: 139 - 331
 Magnolia Avenue                                                North: 306 - 347
 Mayflower Avenue                                               North: 301 - 370
 McKinley Place                                                 176 - 217
 Melrose Avenue                                                 North: 329 - 368
 Mesa Circle                                                    All
 Myrtle Avenue                                                  North: 415 - 505
 Patrician Way                                                  All
 Patterson Drive                                                All
 Primrose Avenue                                                North: 411 – 460
 Scenic Drive                                                   West: All
 Sky Way                                                        All
 Stedman Place                                                  406 - 462
 Sunset Place                                                   201 - 221
                       Gold Hills Tract
 North Alta Vista Avenue                                        536, 538
 James Town                                                     102, 106, 110
 Mill Run                                                       102, 106, 110
 North Myrtle Avenue                                            508
Source: Department of Community Development, Planning Division, City of Monrovia. May, 2000.
September 2002                                                                                              8

                                                                                         Safety Element
                                                                                        City of Monrovia
B. Goals, Objectives and Policies - Seismic Activity
The following objectives and standards were developed to protect citizens and property from seismic
hazards while taking existing and future development into consideration.
Goal 1: Reduce to a minimum the loss of life, disruption of goods and services and destruction of
        property associated with an earthquake
   Objective 1.1: Take potential fault areas into account in the General Plan.
        Policy 1.1.1   No structures for human occupancy are permitted on or across the trace of
                       the Raymond Hill Fault. Prior to approval of development of properties within
                       the Alquist-Priolo Geologic Studies Zone, as delineated by the California
                       Division of Mines and Geology, an applicant shall submit a report of the
                       geologic investigation of potential faults that may affect structures proposed
                       at the site. The Report shall be required for parcel maps, tract maps,
                       development on residential lots, and residential additions adding floor area
                       for human occupancy, and shall be prepared by a Registered Geotechnical
                       Engineer registered with the State of California.
        Policy 1.1.2   Properties located within known or potential fault areas shall be required to
                       submit a geotechnical report at the time of submittal of the parcel or tract
                       map, or for development on residential lots with single family dwellings, or
                       additions to dwellings that add floor area for human occupancy (see policy
                       1.1.4). The report shall analyze the surface and subsurface geology of the
                       site, the degree of seismic hazard and shall include conclusions and
                       recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the
                       proposed development, opinions and recommended criteria to mitigate any
                       identified geologic hazards. This investigation and report shall be performed
                       by a professional geotechnical engineer experienced in the practice of
                       engineering geology and registered with the State of California.
        Policy 1.1.3:  Modifications to the set back limits specified by the Alquist-Priolo Act may be
                       permitted at the discretion of the City, if such modifications also comply with
                       the Municipal Code, based on a geotechical report prepared by an
                       independent licensed geotechnical engineer and/or geologist, mutually
                       agreed upon between the City and developer and paid for by the developer.
                       The geotechnical report shall be reviewed and subject to the approval of the
                       City Engineer or his designee and shall be maintained on file by the City. The
                       recommendations made in the geotechical report may be approved, modified
                       or denied by the City. Setback modifications may be permitted only if the
                       developer and/or owner executes and records a restrictive covenant, in a
                       form acceptable to the City Attorney, against the title to the property.
                       Such a restrictive covenant shall specifically define and require compliance
                       with the permitted setbacks on the property and any applicable conditions
                       required by the geotechnical report. Such restrictive covenant shall run with
                       the land, be binding on successors in interest, acknowledge that the
                       applicable setbacks have been modified at the request of the property owner
                       in reliance on a geotechnical study, and further require that the property
                       owner hold harmless, indemnify and defend the City, its officers, agents and
                       employees from and against any liability or damage in any way arising out of
September 2002                                                                                         9
                                                                                     Safety Element
                                                                                    City of Monrovia
                     the construction, maintenance and use of residential structures on the
                     property.
      Policy 1.1.4:  Geotechnical reports submitted in response to the standards above shall be
                     reviewed for adequacy by a Registered Geotechnical Engineer, and a report
                     of that review submitted to the appropriate agency of the City. All costs for
                     the preparation of these required reports are to be borne by the
                     developer/applicant.
      Policy 1.1.5   A geotechnical report, prepared by a geologist registered with the state, shall
                     be provided for all projects listed below.
                     Provide reports for the following located within an Alquist-Priolo Special
                     Studies Zone:
                     1. All new buildings for human occupancy. This shall include single family
                          dwellings, guest houses and rental units.
                     2. Additions to buildings discussed in Item 1 above when the area of the
                          addition will exceed 50% of the area of the existing building.
                     3. Any conversion from a building not used for human occupancy into one
                          which is. (Authority: Section 3603(c), Title 14, CCR.)
                     No report shall be required for accessory buildings such as garages, tool
                     sheds, swimming pool dressing rooms, etc. since these buildings are not
                     normally used for human occupancy more than 2,000 person-hours per year.
   Objective 1.2: Implement programs to deal with hazardous areas or buildings.
      Policy 1.2.1:  Advocate and support state legislation that would require existing vital
                     facilities to be brought into compliance with modern seismic design and
                     construction standards.
      Policy 1.2.2:  Support legislation that provides for income tax incentives to encourage the
                     repair of potentially hazardous buildings.
   Objective 1.3: The City shall require that all development take appropriate measures to protect
                  public health and safety.
      Policy 1.3.1:  Continue to adopt and implement the most recent uniform building code (with
                     special attention to Chapter 23 and Chapter 70), and all supplements which
                     include the latest most stringent earthquake regulations for new construction.
      Policy 1.3.2:  If through an EIR, or if detailed geologic investigation confirms existence of
                     seismic hazards, the City shall require special earthquake resistant design
                     features or use limitations, as appropriate, to protect the public health and
                     safety and to reduce the exposure of individuals and property to seismic
                     risks.
September 2002                                                                                   10
                                                                                       Safety Element
                                                                                      City of Monrovia
III. Flood Control
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) informed the City on October 3, 2000 that:4
        "The entire community [City of Monrovia] has been placed in Zone D, an area of
        possible but undetermined flood hazard. There is no Federal requirement for the
        purchase of flood insurance in this zone, nor is the community required to implement
        any floodplain management regulations as a condition for participation in the
        National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). Additionally, because the entire
        community has been placed in Zone D, the Federal Emergency Management
        Agency has not printed a Flood Insurance Rate Map for the community.
        “Federally backed flood insurance is available within Monrovia at reasonable rates.
        While there are no identifiable flood hazards within Monrovia, we urge property
        owners to consider the purchase of flood insurance. Over 23 percent of all flood
        insurance claims are made by property owners outside of identified flood hazards.
        "Although there are no specific requirements for floodplain management in Monrovia,
        we recommend that the community recognize the possible existence of hazards from
        floods, mudslides, and flood-related erosion and carefully evaluate new development
        that could aggravate, or be affected by, these hazards.”
A.      Background
1.      Setting
Flood containment usually involves preparing for the Standard Project flood. This type of flood is
defined by the Corps of Engineers as follows:
        "Standard Project Flood: The flood that may be expected from the most severe
        combination of meteorological and hydrological conditions that are considered
        reasonably characteristic of the geographical area in which the drainage basin is
        located, excluding extremely rare combinations. Peak discharges for these floods
        are generally about 40-60 percent of the Probably Maximum Floods for the basins.
        As used by the Corps of Engineers, Standard Project Floods are intended as
        practical expressions of the degree of protection that should be sought In the design
        of flood control works, the failure of which might be disastrous."
The effect of any large flood on the City depends on the available capacity of the dams and debris
basins, which are located to the north (Sawpit Debris Basin) and northwest (Santa Anita Dam) of the
central business district of Monrovia. The combined capacity of the Sawpit and Santa Anita dams is
1,852 acre-feet. Therefore, the retention of some flood flow in these reservoirs could greatly reduce
the flood flow into the City. The most common flood hazard is standing water resulting from
blockage or inadequate capacity of storm sewers.
2.      Mud and Debris Flows
The effects of a fire in the hillside areas of Monrovia would be a potential for rapid downhill
movement of mud and debris flows. This would occur in hillside areas where the soil horizon is well
4
  See Appendix A to this Element for a copy of the FEMA letter of October 3, 2000.
September 2002                                                                                     11

                                                                                         Safety Element
                                                                                        City of Monrovia
developed and the soil has poor drainage characteristics. The lack of vegetation, resulting from fire,
lowers the stability of exposed soils and decreases the water-holding capacity of the local
watershed.
3.    Landslide Activity
A previous study of landslides in the Monrovia hillside areas (Monrovia Hillside Study, by Leighton
and Associates), identifies many landslides of various sizes and types within the foothills of
Monrovia. The majority of the landslides are primarily in the steep northern area, which is underlain
by granite bedrock. The reasons for this activity relate with such factors as weakened bedrock by
fracturing, faulting and weathering. Another major reason for this would be the abnormally high
seismic forces and rapid uplift of the mountain range.
Most of the previous landslides appear to be shallow rock falls. However, several of the larger slide
areas involve massive volumes of bedrock. While most of these slides may be stable at present,
they are not suitable for building unless they were stabilized or removed.
4. Dam Failure Potential
There are two upstream uses, the Sawpit Debris Basin and the Santa Anita Dam, which have the
potential for failure caused by seismic activity.
The first of these, the Sawpit Debris Basin, located in the foothills in northern portion of the City of
Monrovia, has a capacity of 476 acre-feet. If the debris basin failed at capacity, it would require a
drainage area of three square miles. The ensuing flood would last approximately 25 minutes and be
confined largely within the area bounded by Santa Anita Wash and the Santa Fe Flood Control
Basin. A flood of this type would inundate portions of the cities of Monrovia, Duarte, and Bradbury.
The second, the Santa Anita Dam, which was built in 1927, is located to the northwest of downtown
Monrovia. This dam has a capacity of 1,376 acre-feet. If the Santa Anita Dam failed at capacity the
drainage area required would be 11 square miles. Most of the flooding would occur in Sawpit
Canyon between Myrtle Avenue and Santa Anita Wash north of the Foothill Freeway. The flood
inundation areas from the Sawpit Debris Basin and Santa Anita Dam are shown in Figures 3 and 4.
5. Flood Aversion
The City of Monrovia is located in an area that has a potential for flooding due to surface water
runoff from the San Gabriel Mountains to the immediate north. However, with the appropriate flood
control measures, potential flooding can be avoided, and, as stated previously in the 2000 letter
from FEMA, the flood insurance maps have been rescinded for Monrovia. The flooding potential
which may have been realized has been successfully cycled through the Los Angeles County Flood
Control District (LACFCD) system. In addition to the infrastructure drainage system there are other
facilities which ensure the public safety in relation to flooding.
This larger scale LACFCD system consists of Sawpit Wash in the eastern section of the City and
Santa Anita Wash along the westerly boundary. These major drainage courses flow generally
southerly and converge at a point south of Live Oak Avenue.
Other LACFCD facilities include two temporary debris basins in the Buena Vista Canyon at the north
end of Norumbega Drive, and three settling basins: Ruby Canyon Debris Basin; Oak Glade Debris
Basin; and Sawpit Debris Basin.
September 2002                                                                                       12
                                                                                       Safety Element
                                                                                     City of Monrovia
The City of Monrovia has also installed a storm drain in the Hidden Valley area. This, combined with
the LACFCD system, provides the City with adequate flood control facilities for the present level of
development.
B. Goals, Objectives and Policies - Flood Aversion
Goal 2: Minimize the potential for flooding in the City of Monrovia.
    Objective 2.1: Development standards shall include flood control measures.
        Policy 2.1.1: Graded slopes, other than those constructed in rock, shall be planted or
                      otherwise protected from the effects of storm runoff erosion and shall be
                      benched or terraced as required to provide for adequate drainage. Planting
                      shall be designed to blend with the surrounding terrain and development.
                      Graded slopes in rock shall be provided with soil pockets to contain
                      landscaping where appropriate. Irrigation facilities shall be provided where
                      necessary for proper establishment and maintenance of the planted areas.
        Policy 2.1.2: Provision shall be made to prevent surface waters from eroding natural and
                      graded slopes.
        Policy 2.1.3: Within six months, or such other period established by the Director of Public
                      Works, after the commencement of grading activities, graded areas shall be
                      stabilized as approved by the City Engineer. Slope planting shall not lag
                      grading completion by more than six months.
        Policy 2.1.4: Grading on building sites shall not occur until specific house site plans and
                      elevations have been approved for the individual site except where, as part
                      of a subdivision grading and public improvements, approved after a public
                      hearing, the grading of a lot has been determined necessary for public safety
                      (and is done in accordance with the intent and purpose of these policies.)
        Policy 2.1.5: Graded slopes over three feet in vertical height and all graded slopes to be
                      maintained by a Landscape Maintenance District, or other City approved
                      maintenance agreement, shall be planted to protect against erosion. Planting
                      shall be in the ratio of at least one tree per three hundred square feet of
                      slope and one shrub per one hundred fifty square feet, with ground cover
                      sufficient to cover the bank within one year from planting.
        Policy 2.1.6: For all projects that require grading, a soils engineering report shall be
                      required to include data regarding the nature, distribution and strengths of
                      existing soils, conclusion and recommendations for grading procedures,
                      design criteria for and identified corrective measures, and opinions and
                      recommendations regarding existing conditions and proposed grading. This
                      investigation and report shall be performed by a professional soil engineer
                      experienced in the practice of soil mechanics and registered with the State of
                      California.
        Policy 2.1.7: For lots greater than 7,500 square feet, a hydrology report shall be submitted
                      at the time a grading plan is submitted to the City. The hydrology report shall
                      identify areas of possible inundation, downstream effects, natural drainage
                      courses, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effects of
September 2002                                                                                     13
                                                                                     Safety Element
                                                                                    City of Monrovia
                    hydrologic conditions on the proposed development, opinions and
                    recommendations regarding the adequacy of facilities proposed for the site,
                    and design criteria to mitigate identified hydrologic hazards. This report shall
                    account for runoff and debris from tributary areas and shall provide
                    consideration for each lot or dwelling unit site in a development. Runoff and
                    debris volumes shall be computed using Los Angeles County Flood Control
                    District criteria. This investigation and report shall be prepared by a
                    registered civil engineer experienced in hydrologic investigation.
      Policy 2.1.8: Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&R's), including but not limited to
                    development plans, common area and slope maintenance, private area
                    landscaping and maintenance, shall be submitted and approved prior to the
                    recordation of a final tract map.
      Policy 2.1.9: Hillside development shall provide all necessary sewers, storm drains, debris
                    basins and other flood control measures as specified in specific plans.
   Objective 2.2: Monitor and adopt appropriate flood management programs.
      Policy 2.2.1: Support the state-sponsored Dam Inundation Area Mapping Program and
                    consider the proximity of dams in the site selection of vital public facilities.
      Policy 2.2.2: The City Engineer will monitor the Cobey-Alquist Flood Plain Management
                    Act for application in Monrovia.
September 2002                                                                                    14
                                                                                          Safety Element
                                                                                         City of Monrovia
               Figure 3: Sawpit Wash and Debris Basin Flood Inundation Area
Source: Inundated Area – Sawpit Debris Basin, DWG No. 54-H2 (8/73), L.A. County Flood Control District
September 2002                                                                                         15

                                                                                               Safety Element
                                                                                             City of Monrovia
                  Figure 4: Santa Anita Wash and Dam Flood Inundation Area
Source: Inundated Area – Santa Anita Dam, DWG No. 55-H2 (8/73), L.A. County Flood Control District
IV. Fire Safety
September 2002                                                                                             16

                                                                                           Safety Element
                                                                                          City of Monrovia
A. Background
Fire safety in the City of Monrovia is concentrated on suppression, prevention, and emergency care.
 Fire prevention is addressed primarily through enforcement of the Uniform Fire and Building Codes
and State and City ordinances. Additionally, several other programs concentrate primarily on
avoidance or impact reduction strategies. Despite these efforts, residential, commercial, industrial,
and brush fires still remain a continual threat, particularly in times of severe drought. It is the
purpose of this section to evaluate the effectiveness of the existing prevention programs and their
potential for improvement in dealing with fire problems.
1. Fire Hazards
Fire records maintained by the Los Angeles County Fire Department between the years 1919 and
1999 indicate that large portions of the Foothill area have been subject to wild land fires of 100 to
500 acres. The major fire threat exists in the steeper slopes of the San Gabriel Mountains to the
north and their potential to sweep into the hillsides and residential foothill developments. The
Bradbury fire in the summer of 1981, and the three 1999 fires known as the Azusa Canyon fire, the
La Canada-Flintridge-Glendale-Rafael fire, and the Arcadia-Santa Anita fire, all attest to the
extensive damage that can take place from brush fires.
Residential Fires:           New wood roof coverings are prohibited throughout the City. Smoke
                             detectors are required in all residential properties at change of
                             ownership. While prevention efforts must be emphasized, the fire
                             program must be aimed at suppression. With the use of residential fire
                             sprinklers in all new housing as approved by the City Council, the staffing
                             needs in 10-30 years may be adjusted based on the number of new
                             homes constructed with fire sprinklers. Until then, to meet the current and
                             near future needs, appropriate staffing and apparatus must meet the
                             service demand.5
Hazardous Buildings:         All commercial buildings are inspected annually by fire company
                             personnel for general hazards, including electrical. Special hazards, use
                             of flammable liquids, and the storage and use of hazardous materials
                             require special inspection which are technical in nature due to the
                             complexity of the code requirements. These types of inspections require
                             personnel with specialized inspection education.
Industrial Fire Hazards:     Those occupancies classified as industrial hazards are similar in nature
                             to the hazardous buildings above and require specialized personnel to
                             conduct the necessary inspections.6
Brush Fire Hazards: The greatest fire danger to the City is from Wildland Urban Interface (WUI),
where homes meet the 30-50 year brush growth. Flying brands pose a danger anywhere in the City
where wood shake roofs exist. An aggressive 5-10 year program to reduce the fuel hazard is
critical to the safety of the public and their homes. In order to work with many owners of
undeveloped property and the nearly 800 owners of homes in the brush hazard area, a year-round
6. Strategic Planning Report, Draft report, City of Monrovia, Fire Department, May 2000, page 3.
5
  Ibid, page 4.
6
  Ibid, page 4.
September 2002                                                                                         17
                                                                                        Safety Element
                                                                                       City of Monrovia
inspection and abatement program is critical.7
Figure 5 provides data of the monetary value of both structural fires and total fire losses in the City
from 1994 through 1999. Figure 6 shows the actual number of fires from Fiscal Year 1972 through
1999, although data for years 1983 through 1991 is not available.
The High Fire Hazard Zone (Figure 7) delineates the land that presents a very high fire hazard within
the City as necessitated by AB337. Fire prevention and prefire suppression measures have been
established to help greatly reduce the potential for disaster.
                       Figure 5: Fire Loss Analysis Chart, 1994 - 1999 8
7
  Ibid, page 4.
8
  Ibid, page 13.
September 2002                                                                                      18
                                                            Safety Element
                                                           City of Monrovia
                 Figure 6: Structural Fires, 1972 - 1999 9
9
  Ibid, page 13.
September 2002                                                          19
                                                Safety Element
                                               City of Monrovia
               Figure 7: High Fire Hazard Zone
September 2002                                              20
                                                                                        Safety Element
                                                                                       City of Monrovia
B. Goals, Objectives and Policies - Fire Prevention
Goal 3:     Concentrate on the prevention of fires in the City of Monrovia.
     Objective 3.1:   Hillside development policies and standards shall include fire prevention
                      measures.
        Policy 3.1.1: Fire suppression access to natural chaparral areas shall be provided and
                      maintained.
        Policy 3.1.2: Landscape materials for the coverage and stabilization of graded slopes
                      shall be selected to be compatible with surrounding natural vegetation and
                      shall recognize climatic, soil, exposure, and ecological characteristics of the
                      site. Plant materials that require substantial water after becoming established
                      shall be avoided. Native dry climate grasses and other serephytic materials
                      shall be selected wherever feasible. (Fire Department approval required).
        Policy 3.1.3: Cantilevered construction, including stairs, balconies, porches, open
                      structure under buildings shall be fire retardant construction and shall be
                      protected by fire sprinklers, when applicable, which have been reviewed and
                      approved by the Fire Department.
        Policy 3.1.4: Eaves shall be fully boxed in with exterior stucco or its equivalent. Vents shall
                      be covered with one-quarter inch mesh or its equivalent.
        Policy 3.1.5: New roofs shall be class "All non-flammable materials.”
        Policy 3.1.6: Flammable chaparral, excluding mature trees, on a lot within 200 feet of a
                      home, shall be cleared, maintained, and replaced with vegetation to minimize
                      fire hazard.
        Policy 3.1.7: Fire hydrants shall be provided and located within 300 feet of structures
                      except where a greater distance is allowed by the Fire Chief in conjunction
                      with the installation of automatic fire sprinklers. All water main installations
                      will be "looped" with no dead-end main allowed
        Policy 3.1.8: To provide adequate Fire Department access, foothill neighborhoods shall
                      be linked with a continuous circulation system. Segments of that system may
                      consist of emergency access roads.
      Objective 3.2:  Adopt and enforce ordinances promoting fire prevention.
        Policy 3.2.1: Enforce installation of fire alarm systems and or sprinklers to provide
                      protection to life and property.
        Policy 3.2.2: Enforce regulations requiring smoke detectors in all structures.
        Policy 3.2.3: Enforce installation of chimney spark arrestors.
        Policy 3.2.4: Prohibit the use of flammable roofing materials.
        Policy 3.2.5: Continue to adopt and implement the most recent uniform fire codes and
September 2002                                                                                      21

                                                                                   Safety Element
                                                                                  City of Monrovia
                    supplements.
      Policy 3.2.6: To prevent life hazard and to protect the hillsides and residential, industrial
                    and commercial areas, enforce ban on use of all fireworks.
     Objective 3.3: Control hazardous or potentially dangerous operations or land uses.
      Policy 3.3.1: Require a conditional use permit for industrial operations involving the
                    compounding of radioactive materials, petroleum refining, manufacturing of
                    explosives, or any other operation of a dangerous nature.
      Policy 3.3.2: Enforce ordinances prohibiting the igniting or burning of flammable materials
                    on public or private property.
      Policy 3.3.3: Restrict and regulate devices or equipment that could create fire, explosion,
                    or bodily injury.
      Policy 3.3.4: Restrict storage of flammable liquids and explosives to manufacturing zones.
     Objective 3.4: Establish fire prevention programs to educate citizens.
      Policy 3.4.1: Provide programs for Monrovia's citizens to educate them in fire safety.
     Objective 3.5: Support legislation that encourages fire prevention.
September 2002                                                                                  22
                                                                                       Safety Element
                                                                                      City of Monrovia
V. Emergency Preparedness
A. Background
1. The Regional Office of Emergency Service System
The state’s regional Office of Emergency Service (O.E.S.), located in Pasadena, supervises large-
scale disasters in southern California. By pooling resources, there is an abundance of fire service,
medical supplies, and related services. In case of disaster, these assets can be systematically
assembled and utilized quickly and efficiently.
The O.E.S. reacts to disaster in a range from local to regional, depending on severity (see Table 7).
The organization of the system is based on geographic location. In California there are seven
regions. Monrovia is located in Region 1, which includes Los Angeles, Orange, and Ventura
Counties. The headquarters of Region I is the Los Angeles County Fire Department. The regions
are divided further into sections, with Monrovia situated in Area D of Region I with area
headquarters in Covina.
Advantages of the O.E.S. system are:
     •  Resources can be exercised and kept in workable order;
     •  Availability of Medic Alert Center (M.A.C.) to coordinate medical resources through a central
        facility located at UCLA Medical Center; and,
     •  The Red Cross has devised action programs to house the homeless.
2. City Disaster Management Plan
The City of Monrovia has a City Disaster Management Plan (see Figure 8), which serves to
coordinate City departments and other responsible agencies. This Plan is totally compatible and
dovetails completely with the FIRESCOPE Incident Command System Organization. The
FIRESCOPE Incident Command System Organization provides technical assistance and
professional recommendations to statewide mutual aid programs.
The "SCARAB" box constructed of interlocked triangles and rectangles represents the disaster
management matrix delegating responsibilities of the various departments and agencies.
The primary points emphasized in the SCARAB matrix are:
     •  Provide a common assembly for those responsible for coping with given parts of the
        problem;
     •  Provide opportunity for participatory management decisions to emanate from a single source
        to the operational level; and
     •  To provide an incident commander who not only represents the consensus decisions
        reached but provides efficient implementation by virtue of his local connections and his
        already established local command structure.
Within this matrix specific responsibilities are assigned to each City of Monrovia department as
follows:
     •  Administrative Services Department's responsibility is to:
        a. Prepare necessary legal documents.
        b. Provide legal services.
September 2002                                                                                     23

                                                                                      Safety Element
                                                                                     City of Monrovia
      c.  Prepare records and reports.
      d.  Monitor and assist other department's reports.
      e.  Manage and coordinate manpower needs.
      f.  Manage resources, including financial.
      g.  Serve as the primary communication line between the press, the public and central
          command.
   •  Community Development Department's responsibility is to:
      a. Conduct emergency mapping and recording.
      b. Insure structural safety.
      c. Keep apprised of housing situation and make plans for deficiencies.
      d. Evaluate information and make recommendations.
   •  Community Services Department's responsibility is to:
      a. Provide temporary shelter, food and registration for impacted persons.
      b. Direct and/or coordinate agencies involved in (a) above.
      c. Operate mass care centers during post-shelter phase for those so affected; including
          feeding, clothing, sanitation, transportation, registering, and uniting families.
      d. Set up and operate first-aid stations.
   •  Fire Department's responsibility is to:
      a. Prevent, control and suppress fires.
      b. Conduct rescue operations.
      c. Provide and coordinate medical aid efforts, including triage.
      d. Provide and coordinate radiological monitoring, as needed.
   •  Police Department's responsibility is to:
      a. Receive and disseminate warning information. The department operates a community
          notification system capable of generating 48 calls per minute through programming
          systems utilizing geo-mapping, city personnel directories, or community-wide (resident's)
          needs. Also, in the advent of a failure of normal communications systems, a four (4)
          member volunteer amateur radio system (Ham radio operators) is maintained.
      b. Direct evacuation of citizens through approved evacuation routes.
      c. Enforce laws and temporary rules.
      d. Control traffic.
      e. Provide security.
      f. Coordinate with other law enforcement agencies.
   •  Public Works Department's responsibility is to:
      a. Provide emergency electric power, sewer and water services (maximum water pumping
          capacity is 10,000 gallons a minute, amount of total storage available is 24.6 million
          gallons).
      b. Provide for transportation access lanes.
      c. Assist in rescue activities.
September 2002                                                                                    24

                                                                                        Safety Element
                                                                                       City of Monrovia
                          Table 7: Regional Office of Emergency Services
                              Order of Disaster Response Operations
           Scale of Emergency/Level of                             Responsible Agency
                  Responsibility
  Minor Damage                                        City of Monrovia
  Moderate/Major Damage                               Area “C”
                                                      Verdugo Fire Agencies to assist City of
                                                      Monrovia
  Severe Damage                                       Los Angeles County -Fire
                                                      Department-Headquarters
                                                      Los Angeles County, Orange County,
                                                      Ventura County
3.        Emergency Resources
a.        Fire Department Fire Fighting Resources
The Fire Department for the City of Monrovia is in the "Area C" region for automatic aid resource
assistance. Area C fire response is coordinated through the City of Glendale Fire Department and
comprises nine communities including Monrovia, Arcadia, San Marino, Sierra Madre, Monterey
Park, Pasadena, South Pasadena, Glendale, and Burbank.
Since 1990 the United States Forest Service (USFS), the Los Angeles County Fire Department and
the cities of Arcadia, Sierra Madre and El Monte provide fire-fighting assistance to the City of
Monrovia though a Cooperation Fire Protection Agreement, and are referred to as the Foothill Fire
Departments. These fire fighting departments have defined jurisdiction areas and boundaries,
initial response resources for wildfire protection, Initial Action Zones (IAZ) designate mutual areas
where fire would pose a threat to adjoining jurisdictions, and Special Areas assistance, e.g.,
wilderness, roadless, other modified suppression action areas.
A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) has been established between the fire departments of the
City of Arcadia and the City of Monrovia. The MOU provides for fire protection, emergency medical
services (EMS), and rescue services through automatic aid dispatch between the two cities. The
MOU defines how communication is coordinated to responding units, that joint training exercises are
to be carried out, the assignment of Incident Command when units arrive on scene, and for the
sharing of information to complete reports.
Another MOU, first established on July 17, 1985, exists between the Consolidated Fire Protection
District of Los Angeles County and the City of Monrovia. This MOU outlines the procedures for
carrying out an automatic aid/initial action response between the District and the City. The MOU is a
guide for day-to-day operations and is not intended to replace or adjust any Uniform Mutual
Assistance Agreement which may be in effect. The MOU defines the methodology for
communications and dispatching of response services, defined limitations of service when
departments are temporarily not available, scheduling of joint training exercises, incident command
September 2002                                                                                      25

                                                                                       Safety Element
                                                                                      City of Monrovia
authority at the scene, cooperation in fire incident reporting, and a provision of MOU revision or
amendment.
b.       Paramedics
The two (2) Monrovia Paramedic Squads of twelve (12) paramedics ---the City of Monrovia has
authorized a total of fifteen (15) paramedics--- work under a written mutual aid agreement with the
Arcadia Paramedic Squad of two (2) rescue ambulances. Both cities share their combined four (4)
squads working out of three (3) full service hospitals, Arcadia Methodist Hospital in Arcadia, Santa
Teresita Hospital in Duarte, and Huntington Memorial Hospital in Pasadena as the trauma
catchment area facility. 100% of all requests for emergency care for sick and injured are answered
by paramedic level service through the mutual automatic air response between the cities of
Monrovia and Arcadia.
Monrovia's paramedics answer the entire spectrum of requests for aid and are also firefighters who
maintain journeyman skill levels in this area as well. The squad is recognized as being one of the
finest in the state.
c.       Paramedic and Fire Department Personnel Training
Periodic drills are conducted to ensure quality control, and urban search and rescue (USAR)
procedures are coordinated, and a necessary degree of standardization is maintained between
companies. There is specialized training in fire hydraulics hazardous materials, and fire tactics. In
addition, special classes are conducted periodically by gas representatives, County Fire and United
States Forestry officers. Personnel are also sent to outside schools in arson investigation,
cryogenics, and breathing apparatus repair.
Department personnel have participated in ongoing training for citizens in CPR, fire prevention and
safety. Operational safety is heavily stressed and the basic safety advisory is that the safest
firefighter is one who is fully trained in his profession.
To keep mutual aid operations at maximum efficiency, multi-city (quarterly training activity is
conducted with the City of Arcadia), multi-company drills were conducted to test communications
and the ability of firefighters from seven different cities to function together.
d.       Fire Department Inventory
The Monrovia Fire Department is staffed by forty-one full-time safety personnel ---of which ten are
constantly on duty, and one clerical personnel. Major fire-fighting equipment includes three major
engines and an aerial unit in reserve, and two paramedic rescue squads, plus one reserve unit.
Over the past two decades emergency calls number average approximately 3,000 per year, a
capacity workload for the present staff to manage.
e.       Police Assistance
In addition to its everyday duties, the Police Department plays a pivotal role in public safety in
emergency situations. The Department's primary concern is public safety, and to take a proactive
approach to minimizing criminal activity through community policing resources. However, its main
duty is responding to police calls throughout the City of Monrovia.
The Department maintains the same responsibilities in the event of disaster. The only difference is
that the effectiveness of police activity in this situation is a prerequisite for efficient disaster
September 2002                                                                                     26
                                                                                        Safety Element
                                                                                       City of Monrovia
response. The Department, along with Fire and National Guard personnel, assumes the
responsibility of crowd control, crime prevention and general recovery operations when tragedy
strikes.
The Monrovia Police Department is a member of "Area-D" (with headquarters in Covina) in providing
mutual aid with the following thirteen cities: Arcadia, Azusa, Baldwin Park, Claremont, Covina, El
Monte, Glendora, Irwindale, La Verne, Pomona, San Marino, Sierra Madre, and West Covina.
In March of 2000 the City of Monrovia, together with the cities of Arcadia, Azusa, Covina, West
Covina and Pasadena, approved the establishment of the Foothill Air Support Team (F.A.S.T.) to
maintain and operate one helicopter to provide air support for the F.A.S.T. member communities.
f.       Police Inventory
The Monrovia Police Department accomplishes the above responsibilities with a staff of sixty-four
regular policemen and eleven reserves. The Police Department maintains a fleet of fourteen radio
patrol vehicles and another seventeen support vehicles, utilized for detective, community policing
and tactical response. The department has two Tactical Response Teams, each comprised of eight
(8) personnel. Additionally, the department draws upon resources from the residents of Monrovia
with twenty-three volunteer support personnel for citizen patrol, crowd control, and other services as
needed.
g.       Community Policing Programs
The Monrovia Police Department conducts twenty-four proactive community oriented programs to
curb criminal activity at businesses, schools and the residential areas.
The Department's "Criminal Analysis" training program of officers enhances their abilities to identify
potential suspects and problem areas.
The department has initiated a "Cost Recovery Program" when officers are required by State law to
keep juvenile offenders separate from adult prisoners. This program allows the department to
recover the cost of an officer's time to process and supervise the juvenile when the parent or
guardian fails to respond within one hour to take custody of the juvenile.
The "High Risk Offenders Officer" program, initiated in 1998, focus is to minimize the impact of
parolees living in the community.
Youth and parent and community-wide programs conducted by the Monrovia Police Department
include:
         •       D.A.R.E. - Students are given instruction in drug and gang awareness, anger
                 management, violence alternatives, strengthening personal values and promoting
                 self-esteem.
         •       Parenting Classes - The program (in English and Spanish) promotes a healthy family
                 environment.
         •       Healthy Start Program - The provision of assistance for medical and counseling
                 services.
         •       Partnership programs with schools for students and parents include:
                 -       Safe City Safe School Steering Committee
                 -       Parents On Campus
                 -       School Attendance Review Board (SARB)
September 2002                                                                                      27

                                                                                       Safety Element
                                                                                      City of Monrovia
               -       Project C.A.R.Y. (Cooperation for At Risk Youth)
               -       School Security Inspection Program
               -       Emergency Communication System
               -       Daytime Curfew Program
               -       Boy's and Girl's Club liaison between the police and youth
               -       Student Art Program
        •      Community-wide intervention to involve citizens in awareness programs include:
               -       Citizen Police Academy - acquaints citizens with law enforcement issues and
                       procedures.
               -       Cul-de-sac Program - a traffic reduction program to create a safer
                       environment by blocking-off through streets in residential areas.
               -       Graffiti Removal Program - contracted service to remove graffiti within 24
                       hours of being reported.
               -       Business Watch Program - Initiated in 1998 to form an alliance and support
                       group among businesses to share information such as emergency phone
                       numbers, and alert each other regarding suspicious persons and shoplifters.
               -       Volunteer Program - Citizens have varied assignments ranging from Records
                       to assisting the Detective division with missing persons.
               -       Citizen Patrol Program - A program initiated in 1997 with volunteers assisting
                       with traffic control, subpoena service and vacation checks.
               -       Neighborhood Partnership Program - Initiated in 1990, the Community
                       Activist Program (C.A.P.) places an officer in an area of the community to
                       establish open lines of communication.
               -       Stop Gun Violence Bounty Program - This program is designed to encourage
                       responsible citizen to call the police when guns are seen in public places.
               -       Cell Watch - Initiated in 1999, the program is designed to provide an
                       effective communication link between community members using cellular
                       phones to report emergencies and crimes directly to the Police Dispatch
                       Center.
B.      Goals, Objectives and Policies - Emergency Operations
Goal 4: Maximize the efficiency of City's Disaster Program.
        Objective 4.1: Maximize the efficiency of City's O.E.S. System
               Policy 4.1.1:    Require the O.E.S. system to be exercised periodically on less
                                severe disasters, or mock disasters in order to enlighten emergency
                                personnel and keep equipment functional.
               Policy 4.1.2:    Expand fire safety programs to include earthquake safety.
               Policy 4.1.3:    Sponsor earthquake disaster drills at public schools including a
                                community awareness program outlining a procedure where students
                                would be reunited with their parents, after the disaster.
               Policy 4.1.4:    Require preparation of internal emergency response plans for
                                medium and high-rise buildings.
               Policy 4.1.5:    Enact an ordinance requiring the preparation of internal emergency
                                response plan for all facilities housing dependent population such as
                                elderly.
September 2002                                                                                     28

                                                                                    Safety Element
                                                                                   City of Monrovia
              Policy 4.1.6: Promote expansion of disaster recovery program to Include
                            assurance of maximum citizen awareness.
      Objective 4.2: Enact Ordinances to Aid in Prevention of Disasters.
              Policy 4.2.1: In hillside areas, home sites must be planned, designed, and
                            developed to provide maximum safety with respect to fire,
                            earthquake faults, geology, drainage, erosion, and siltation hazards.
              Policy 4.2.2: Give primary emphasis to the alleviation of the most critical hazards
                            affecting existing populations and development.
              Policy 4.2.3: Give greater emphasis to abatement strategies for dealing with
                            critical hazards.
              Policy 4.2.4: Employ incentives to encourage private actions aimed at reducing
                            safety hazards.
      Objective 4.3: Enact Ordinance to Aide in Evacuation of /or Access to Areas of Disasters.
              Policy 4.3.1: Designate evacuation routes for all areas of the City.
              Policy 4.3.2: In hillside areas, no cul-de-sac street shall have a length exceeding
                            one thousand feet unless provided with an emergency access
                            connector.
              Policy 4.3.3: Hillside streets shall have minimum widths as specified in hillside
                            development policies and standards.
September 2002                                                                                  29
                                                                              Safety Element
                                                                             City of Monrovia
Document Preparation Resources
1.    Persons Contacted
      City of Monrovia
              Alice Griselle, AICP, Planning Division
              Barbara Lynch, Planning Division
              Peter Bryan, Chief, Fire Department
              Sgt. Steve Cofield, Community Policing, Police Department
              April Soash, Deputy City Manager, Director, Community Services
              David Fike, Deputy Director, Public Works
      Los Angeles County Department of Public Works
              Alan Moss, Survey Division
              Esther Diaz, Water Resources Division
              Rodney Brown, Water Resources Division
              Ramil de Guzman, Design Division
2.    Other Resources
      http://www.scec.org - earthquake information
      http://www.consrv.ca.gov - earthquake information
3.    Document Preparers
      Parsons Harland Bartholomew and Associates Inc.
      100 West Walnut Street
      Pasadena, California 91124
      (626) 440-6241 (telephone)
      (626) 440-6201 (facsimile)
              Frank Wein, FAICP, DPDS, Project Manager
              Greg Baer, Principal Planner
              Vaidas Sekas, Associate Planner
              Bryan Ferguson, Graphics
September 2002                                                                            30
                                             Safety Element
                                            City of Monrovia
                                    APPENDICIES A
               Federal Emergency Management Agency
September 2002                                           31
                Safety Element
               City of Monrovia
September 2002              32
  PUBLIC SERVICE/CONSER   V A TION ELEMENT
             CITY OF MONROVIA
               GENERAL PLAN
                 Prepared by
         VICTOR GRUEN ASSOCIATES
.
            Adopted January 4, 1966
r INTRODUCTION
  improvement and extension of water and sewer facilities within the city. It is based on a
  detailed analysis of existing systems, their condition and capacity for future service.
  Future needs have been projected, based on population increases in five-year increments.
  The capability of the City in providing additional capacities will, along with topographic
  conditions, determine to some extent 1:he rate of future growth. For this reason it is
  imperative that the City and public utility companies have a general idea of the utilities
  required for the future, when they will be needed and where they will be located. The
  accompanying Utilities Plan indicates those areas not served by utilities. Areas which can
  be served in the fut1Jre should be dete:rmined by a detailed engineering study. In this
  connection, locations of storage and pumping facilities have not been indicated.
                                  Conservation Element Page 1
     OBJECTIVES
     The following have been established as general objectives, or Boals, of the Utilities Plan:
     1.   Protection against potential public health dangers through the provision of adequate
         facilities.
     2.  Determine areas requiring utilities  ir11
                                                 the future.
     3.  Determine City pc)licy in extending utilities into undevelopedmountainous areas.
     4.   Expansion of existing water supply and sewer system to accommodate future             city
         growth.
          Stimulation of planned growth throug;h the expansion of utilities.
     6.   Determination of fut1;J:eutility needs in terms of plant and distribution facilities.
                                                                                    ..
                                          .~
         .
                                    Conservation Element Page 2
.',.
~  -j,
.,!"l. ~                    -.
                                                                      .
       Planning of long-range utility      development should be accompanied by consideration of the
       following principles: ".
       1.    The utility service area is recognized as the developed portion of the city and that
             mountainous portion which can be economically served.
       2.    Coordination of utility planning with thoroughfares, community facilities,       revitaliza-
             tion, densities, population and general land use planning.
       3.    Encouragement       of concentrated     land development     through   density control    and
             subdivision regulations to minimuze utility extension costs.
       4.    Revision and implementation       of zoning controls to achieve proposed land uses.
       .5.   Realization   of the need for more detailed    engineering  studies to determine  economic
             feasibility of .certain .proposals.
                                           Conservation Element Page 3
       -
   STANDARDS
   Specific standards involved in design and construction of utility systems are implemented
    in detailed engineering feasibility studies. However, general broad standards are needed
    by Council and the Commission prior to engineering studies since line sizes and capacities
   are related to proposed land use patterns and densities:
    1.   Normal water consumption, 200-210 gallons per day per capita.
         Minimum water mains, six inches.
    3.   Minimum sanitary' sewer mains, eight inches.
   4.    Minimum storm sewers, 12 inches.
   .5.   Fire dydrants @ 1/2.0.5 commercial-industrial acres; 1/2.7.5 residential acres.
                                     Conservation Element Page 4
2.
      Water:      Although the existing water system is in excellent condition from the standpoint
      oreqUJipment,         operation,    maintenance,    and administration,    additional   capacities   to serve
      future     population     must" be considered.
      The    following      table   indicates    these water   requirements    based    on per capita    population
      projections:
                                                   WATER REQUIREMENTS
                                                                1970          197.5            1980             198.5
      Daily Consumption (MGD)                     6.3            7.2            7.2             9.9             12.1
      Ext. Max. Daily Use (MG.D)                12.9            14.6          16.0             20.1            2.5.0
      Storage (MG)                              20.3           24.8           27.8             39.0            43.0
      la-hr. Fire Flow (GPM)                    3.500          3'00           4000             4000            5000
      Fire Storage (MG)                           2.1            2.1            2.4             2.4               3.0
      Hydrants                                    80.5
      Population (000)                          .31.0          3'.7           #0.1             .50.6           60.7
      Production: Future production demands can easily be met by the addition of wells in the
      Monrovia well farm area. A well is presently being planned that will add approximately
      4.0 (MGD) to production capacity. Future wells can be added to meet increasing demands.
      Although the source of water appear~i adequate for future needs, there could be a
      potential problem through the lack of a general adjudication of water rights in the upper
      valley area with municipalities and private water companies. Early settlement of these
      rights, although considerable legal and engineering expense might be involved, is deemed
      necessary to assure long-range water availability.
      Further protection for continuous water supply to the city as a standby, auxiliary, or
      emergency measure should be considered by coMection of the system to the Metropolitan
      Water District upper feeder lines. This MWD line, located east of Canyon Road, should be
      connected to the Ridgeside facility with a 24-inch main by 1970.
      Storage: Storage facility requirements for domestic water consumption as well as fire
      protection       will    increase approximately        in proportion to population increases.          These
      additional facilities are listed below in five-year increments.
                                                Conservation   Element Page .5
196.5
  ~                                                                                          SizeM.G.
       1980
      Since location of land for reservoirs cannclt be determined on a long-range basis, they are
      not shown. In many cases reservoirs can be located on land currently owned by the City.
       Part of the 1970 storage requirements will be met by one new 2.' MG reservoir being
      planned on May Avenue.
      Distribution:   Additional major capital ou'tlaws are not anticipated   for distribution  mains
       with exception of the upper feeder line to MWD mains.
      Pumping stations will need to be provided as production and storage requirements
      increase.     Consideration should be given to expansion of the Cloverleaf Booster Station
      by 197.5 to increase its capacity.
       Additional Service: Should consideration be given to the annexation of the Mayflower
       District to the city in whole or in part, 1:he cost of water service to the area should be
      calculated.     Current :service to the are~a is provided by the Southern California and
  a.. Duarte Water Companies. Should annexcLtion occur, the City could probably serve the
  lU  a.rea only if it purchased the private system. Purchase of the entire system of 2,.500+
      c:ustomers would probably involve an expenditure in excess of one million dollars.
      Sanitary Sewers: Gradual replacement of lines in the 1912 sanitary sewer system has
       taken place over the past, however the rTlajority of the system is basically comprised of
      older lines. From a practical standpoin1:, the entire system cannot be replaced at one
      time,
      critical but the City should budget funds for an annual gradual
                areas.                                             .    replacement of facilities in
      Flood Control: As indicated in the analysis of existing facilities, there exists a number of
      areas deficient in storm drainage and floc>d control facilities.   These areas, shown on the
      accompanying Conservation Map, have been studied for improvement and were scheduled
      in 1964 bond issues as Project Numbers .5601 and 1118. The priority of need is also
      indicated on the Conservation Map.          With the completion of these improvements,
      conservation facilities should be adequate unless major development of the hillside area
      should be carefully examined for effect Of'lthe existing system.
      The Los Angeles Flood Control District indicates that no major projecu of regional scope
      are planned or deemed necessary in the Monrovia area.
      Refuse:, Refuse collection and disposal is currently under a private contract.         The local
       contractor has provided outstanding service in the past, and it is estimated by the City
      that he has the ability to provide adequlate service throughout the projected planning
       period.
  l
                                       Conserva"tic.n Element Page 6
197.5
198.5


Adopted 01/15/2008
  Updated 4/2015

City of Monrovia
Land Use Element
                 Monrovia General Plan
Contents
                                                                             0
  CONTENTS                                                                   1
INTRODUCTION TO THE LAND USE ELEMENT                                         2
  PURPOSE OF THE LAND USE ELEMENT                                            2
  RELATED PLANS, PROGRAMS, AND OTHER PUBLIC POLICIES                         3
  SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE ELEMENT                                           5
LAND USE ELEMENT ISSUES, GOALS AND POLICIES                                  5
  COORDINATED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS                                          5
  LAND USE COMPATIBILITY                                                     7
  REVITALIZATION AND RECYCLING OF EXISTING COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL AREAS       8
  ECONOMIC EXPANSION                                                         9
  PRESERVATION OF CHARACTER OF RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS AND HISTORIC AREAS  9
  ENVIRONMENTAL SENSITIVITY                                                 11
  COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DESIGN QUALITY                                      13
  PUBLIC PARTICIPATION                                                      13
  CONSISTENCY WITH OTHER ELEMENTS                                           14
THE LAND USE PLAN                                                           15
  LAND USE DESIGNATIONS                                                     15
  LAND USE INTENSITY/DENSITY                                                15
  RESIDENTIAL DESIGNATIONS                                                  16
  COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DESIGNATIONS                                        17
  OPEN SPACE DESIGNATIONS                                                   18
  SPECIFIC PLAN OVERLAY/PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DESIGNATION                     18
  COMMUNITY FACILITY DESIGNATIONS                                           19
  LAND USE POLICY CONSIDERATIONS                                            22
SOUTH MYRTLE AVENUE CORRIDOR                                                23
  OLD TOWN EXTENSION DISTRICT                                               24
  CROSSROADS DISTRICT                                                       26
  SOUTH MYRTLE CORRIDOR                                                     26
  LAND USE                                                                  27
  URBAN DESIGN                                                              30
  CREATING A PLAN FOR SOUTH MYRTLE AVENUE                                   33
WEST HUNTINGTON DRIVE CORRIDOR                                              42
  LAND USE                                                                  42
  URBAN DESIGN                                                              45
  PUBLIC REALM                                                              45
  PRIVATE REALM                                                             47
  PLANNING OBJECTIVES                                                       48
STATION SQUARE TRANSIT VILLAGE: VISION STATEMENT AND OBJECTIVES             52
  PLANNING OBJECTIVES                                                       53
  LAND USE OBJECTIVES                                                       54
  URBAN DESIGN OBJECTIVES                                                   56
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT AREAS                                                   59
Land Use Element                                     -1 -
Introduction to the Land Use Element
Nestled against the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains, Monrovia is a charming, progressive city with
the amenities and characteristics of a small town. It has a strong sense of neighborhood and a desire to
preserve its small-town character, enhanced by its concentration of Craftsman, Victorian, and Spanish-
style homes constructed in the first quarter of the 20th century.
Today, Monrovia is an ethnically and socio-economically diverse city. It has 13,750 households and an
average household income of $45,000 dollars. Its population is growing about 1 percent per year, and the
current estimated 2007 population is 39,309. The local economy remains prosperous, providing the city
with moderate revenue growth. Annual sales tax growth is a respectable 2 to 3 percent, while the
property tax is rising 3 to 5 percent. Revenue growth is bolstered by new retail businesses and by the
creation of new office space on the city’s high-tech corridor along Huntington Drive. Monrovia is largely
built out so residential construction consists mainly of the conversion of one or two-lot home sites into
planned unit developments of four to 12 detached units.
Monrovia is passionate about preserving the hillsides and historic neighborhoods. In 2000, an
overwhelming 77 percent of Monrovia citizens voted to impose a tax generating $10 million to purchase
the hillsides to create the Hillside Wilderness Preserve. Monrovia has used those revenues as matching
funds to obtain state money, and the preserve is to be completed in the next few years. With regards to
historic preservation, in 2005, the Monrovia City Council passed an ordinance requiring the review of pre-
1940 homes prior to the demolition of the unit. The purpose of the ordinance was to protect the City’s
historic homes which many feel define Monrovia.
This Land Use Element has been developed to build upon the success of the past 30 years. It will establish
land use policy and land use patterns that will govern growth in the City until 2030. This Element
designates future land use patterns and specifies the appropriate density and intensity of development.
The Land Use Element is the central element of the General Plan, and the goals and policies it contains
have a common link to the other elements. The Land Use Policy Map provides a graphic depiction of the
General Plan's development policies and indicates the land use designations for which relevant goals and
policies have been developed.
Purpose of the Land Use Element
The Land Use Element and the Land Use Policy Map represent the two most important components of the
General Plan. Together these two parts of the General Plan establish the overall policy direction for land
use planning decisions in the City. The Land Use Policy Map displays graphically the location and
distribution of various types of planned land use in Monrovia, whereas the element text describes the
form these uses will take, as well as the programs the City will pursue to implement the land use goals.
Goals and policies set forth in the Land Use Element shape and reflect the policies and programs
contained in the other General Plan elements. For example, the street system and circulation
improvements described in the Circulation Element are designed to accommodate the intensity of use
allowed by land use policy. In the Housing Element, the call for additional housing opportunities requires
that an adequate amount of residential acreage be shown on the Land Use Policy Map. The City intends
to achieve a number of objectives through implementation of the goals and policies contained in this
Element. These objectives include:
        To attain a balanced mix of land use within the City, thereby providing residents with ready access
Land Use Element                                  -2 -

          to housing, employment, and commercial services;
         To work toward regional jobs/housing balance goals;
         To encourage private investment in the City;
         To ensure that residents from all income levels have access to decent, affordable housing;
         To revitalize specific areas of the City which could benefit from public and private redevelopment
          efforts;
         To create a City environment which makes Monrovia a pleasant place to live, work, shop, and do
          business;
         To ensure development in Monrovia is sensitive to the City's existing architectural and
          natural/open space resources.
Related Plans, Programs, and Other Public Policies
The scope and content of the Land Use Element are primarily governed by the State of California General
Plan Guidelines and the Planning, Zoning, and Development Laws for the state. In addition, other plans,
programs, and public policies are considered in the formulation, adoption, and implementation of land
use policy. Relevant plans and programs are described below.
City Ordinances
The Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances, Title 16 and 17 of the City's Municipal Code, provide additional
development and performance standards for development of land uses and related activities. The City
intends to adopt a revised Title 17, following adoption of this General Plan. The revised Zoning Ordinance
will include the creation of additional zoning categories to correspond to the Land Use Element's land use
designations. The revised Zoning Ordinance will serve as the primary implementation tool for the Land
Use Element and the goals and policies it contains. A revised Zoning Map, consistent with the General
Plan Land Use Policy Map, will also be adopted to identify the zoning categories applied to each parcel of
land within the City. Together, the Zoning Ordinance and Map are used to identify the specific types of
use, intensity, and development standards applicable to given parcels or areas of land.
Southern California Association of Governments
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) assists cities, counties, and other agencies by
reviewing local government plans and individual projects for consistency with the regional plans,
including the Regional Comprehensive Plan and Guide (RCPG), the Regional Mobility Element/Regional
Transportation Plan (RTP), the Growth Management Plan, and the federally mandated Air Quality
Management Plan (AQMP).
All regional plans are interrelated and work in tandem to manage Southern California’s growth and
development while meeting federal and state air quality standards. To be in conformance with regional
growth and air quality plans, a plan should:
      Be consistent with the sub-region's jobs/housing balance performance ratio (i.e., the ratio of
          employment to housing units within a sub-region, as defined by SCAG).
         Reduce vehicle trips and vehicle miles traveled to the maximum extent feasible by implementing
Land Use Element                                    -3 -

         transportation demand management strategies or other measures.
        In the environmental document, include an air quality analysis which demonstrates that the
         project will not have a significant negative impact on air quality in the long term.
SCAG Regional Comprehensive Plan and Guide
The Regional Comprehensive Plan and Guide (PCPG) was developed with active participation from local
agencies, elected officials, the business community, community groups, private institutions, and private
citizens to improve regional transportation services, minimize traffic congestion, improve air quality and
quality of life, and protect environmental quality throughout the six-county SCAG region. The RCPG
provides a framework for decision making by local governments, assisting them in working together
through their subregional organizations to meet federal and state mandates consistent with regional
goals. Monrovia is one of 30 member governments that form the San Gabriel Valley Council of
Governments, a SCAG sub-region.
Air Quality Management Plan
The AQMP is prepared for any region designated as a non-attainment area. A non-attainment area is a
geographic area identified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and/or California Air
Resources Board (ARB) as not meeting federal or state standards for a given pollutant. The AQMP,
updated on a three-year cycle, contains policies and measures designed to achieve federal and state
standards in the South Coast Air Basin (Basin) and portions of the surrounding area, which is a non-
attainment area for ozone (O3), particulate matter less than 10 microns in diameter (PM10), and particulate
matter less than or equal to 2.5 microns in diameter (PM 2.5). The most recent AQMP was adopted on June
1, 2007.
Congestion Management Program
The County of Los Angeles prepares a Congestion Management Program (CMP) to address the impact of
local growth on the regional transportation system and the County’s mobility needs. The CMP is required
by statute (Section 65089 of the California Government Code) to have the following six elements: (1) a
system of highways and roadways with minimum level of service performance measurements; (2) a
performance element that includes performance measures to evaluate multi-modal system; (3) a travel
demand element promoting alternative transportation; (4) a program to analyze the impacts of local land
use decisions on the regional transportation system, including an estimate of the cost of mitigating those
impacts; (5) a 7-year capital improvement program of projects that benefit the CMP system; and (6) a
deficiency plan.
The CMP is incorporated into a 20-year RTP, contained in SCAG’s RCPG, to establish the magnitude of
congestion problems that face the entire region and the types of solutions that will be necessary to
maintain mobility. The CMP relates these long-term regional mobility goals to specific actions at the
County and local level, defines implementation strategies, and establishes a system to monitor the
effectiveness of transportation improvements. Under the County’s CMP, local jurisdictions are required to
evaluate impacts of development on the CMP routes and intersections, and mitigate adverse impacts of
development within their jurisdictions through other physical and non-physical improvements, including
transportation demand and system management programs and measures.
Los Angeles County Solid Waste Management Plan
The County of Los Angeles prepares and administers solid waste management plans to project the
capacity of the county landfills and other facilities to accommodate future demand generated by county-
Land Use Element                                   -4 -

wide growth. Local jurisdictions, including the City of Monrovia, need to assess the effect of new
development on county facilities and in response and must develop and implement programs to reduce
the amount of solid waste within their boundaries to be disposed of at these facilities. The Land Use
Element must anticipate, and be compatible with, the above-mentioned regional plans.
Scope and Content of the Element
The Land Use Element consists of both text and diagrams. The following section of this Element titled
"Land Use Element Goals and Policies" presents the City's general goals and policies for the long-term
growth and development of the community. These goals are defined further in the "Land Use Plan." The
Land Use Plan consists of: 1) the General Plan Land Use Policy Map; 2) land use policy considerations; 3)
the descriptions of land use designations indicated on the policy map; and 4) a discussion of the
implications of the Land Use Plan.
Land Use Element Issues, Goals and Policies
The goals and policies contained in this Element have been developed in response to issues identified as
part of the extensive background research conducted for the General Plan, as well as issues identified by
City staff, the Planning Commission, City Council, and City residents as reflected in community and
neighborhood meetings. These goals and policies address preservation of major areas of the City,
revitalization of selected areas, and guidance of new development. The Land Use Element goals and
policies focus on maintaining a balance between residential, commercial, and industrial land use,
promoting high-quality development, and minimizing existing and potential land use conflicts.
Coordinated Development Standards
Development goals and policies should be established that create and maintain an attractive and
functional environment. These goals and policies include provision for a mix of land uses; refinement of
existing standards; evaluation of existing density; and assurance that adequate infrastructure is available
before approving additional development.
 GOAL 1: Provide for a mix of land uses (residential, commercial, industrial) which
 provides a balanced community.
Policy 1.1: Establish population density standards for all land use categories.
Policy 1.2: Refine standards for building intensity on an ongoing basis, including standards for lot
coverage, setbacks, public and private open space, landscaping, maximum dwellings per acre, floor area
ratios (FAR’s), and height restrictions.
Policy 1.3: Establish maximum development intensities (i.e., dwelling unit densities for residential uses
and floor area ratios for non-residential uses) for each land use category.
Policy 1.4: Encourage the location of new high density residential development in close proximity (i.e.,
within walking distance) of the downtown, other major retail commercial areas, and/or transit facilities.
Policy 1.5: Allow the development of mixed use projects consisting of residential, retail, and office uses
Land Use Element                                  -5 -

along existing and future transit corridors such as Myrtle Avenue and the Station Square Planning Area.
Policy 1.6: Promote a variety of housing types ranging in size, density, and price.
Policy 1.7: Provide for location of commercial uses offering goods or services necessary to support
office, industrial, and research and development uses.
Policy 1.8: Develop higher density residential areas in close proximity to employment centers.
Policy 1.9: Provide for the development of a mix and balance of housing opportunities, commercial
goods and services, and employment opportunities to support the City's business community and to
satisfy the demands of the City's resident population.
Policy 1.10: Encourage large employers, the Chamber of Commerce, and major commercial and
industrial developers to inform the City of new employment opportunities in the City, so that the City can
encourage housing developers to match income levels of jobs created to the types of housing available.
Policy 1.11: Develop residential areas with densities and housing types related to existing and proposed
public facilities and services.
Policy 1.12: Consider the potential impact on housing opportunities when reviewing petitions to rezone
properties from residential to non-residential.
  GOAL 2: Provide adequate infrastructure for all development.
Policy 2.1: Ensure that land use intensities are consistent with the capacities of existing and planned
infrastructure and public services.
Policy 2.2: Encourage the coordination of new development with the provision of adequate schools.
Policy 2.3: Require that new development pay it’s pro rata share of the costs of services required to
support that development.
Policy 2.4: Explore the feasibility of providing land or in lieu fees for park or recreational facilities.
Policy 2.5: Where appropriate, require developers to pay the cost of studies needed to determine
infrastructure capacity in conjunction with a proposed project.
  GOAL 3: Preserve the integrity of residential neighborhoods.
Policy 3.1:     Ensure adequate on-site parking for all residential developments.
Policy 3.2: Where feasible, preserve the integrity of a block frontage by providing alley access where
alleys can support the traffic.
Land Use Element                                  -6 -

Policy 3.3: Blend new medium and high density development with existing neighborhoods by
encouraging Planned Unit Developments (PUD).
Policy 3.4: Evaluate neighborhoods designated Medium Density and High Density Residential that are
developed at a lower density use for the appropriateness of a change to a lower density designation.
Policy 3.5: Provide for landscaping on vacant undeveloped lots to preserve the quality of
neighborhoods.
GOAL 4: Promote land use patterns and development which contribute to
community and neighborhood identity.
Policy 4.1: Require new developments in established neighborhoods to consider the established
architectural styles, development patterns, building materials, and scale of buildings within the vicinity of
the proposed project.
Policy 4.2: Require all new development to consider existing uses in terms of neighborhood disruption,
buffering, architectural styles, building materials, development patterns, and scale of buildings within the
vicinity of the proposed project.
Policy 4.3: Analyze the feasibility of incorporating the unincorporated areas of the County south of the
City limits to better provide a coordination of services.
Land Use Compatibility
Land use compatibility is an issue that impacts residential, commercial, and industrial areas. The potential
for incompatibility between single-family and multiple-family uses, light and heavy industrial uses,
proximity of residences to freeway noise, and segregation of residential uses from non-residential uses are
land use compatibility issues that can be addressed by the following goals and policies.
  GOAL 5:             Encourage new           development       that    is   compatible       with     and
  complements existing land uses.
Policy 5.1: Consider the impacts of new development on infrastructure.
Policy 5.2: Include the Railroad Avenue area in a Planned Development Area in order to address the
compatibility between existing residential and industrial uses and the relationship between this area and
the potential future rail station.
Policy 5.3: Provide land use categories that distinguish adequately between commercial and industrial
uses with different functions and impacts in order to provide adequate separation of these uses.
  GOAL 6: Reduce the impact of noise on residential uses.
Land Use Element                                  -7 -
Policy 6.1: Residences constructed near the Foothill Freeway (I-210 Freeway) or near the railroad tracks
shall be designed to reduce the intrusion of sound into the dwelling.
Policy 6.2: Assess the impacts of freeway noise upon existing and possible future residential uses and
develop a strategy for any needed noise attenuation.
Policy 6.3: Assess the impacts of railroad track noise upon existing and possible future residential uses
and develop a strategy for any needed noise attenuation.
Policy 6.4: Evaluate the location of new industrial uses on residential uses. Require noise reduction
strategies for industrial uses such as block walls, restricting hours of operation, and other measures as
appropriate.
Policy 6.5:      Evaluate the location of new and existing commercial uses on residential uses. Require
noise reduction strategies for commercial uses such as block walls, restricted hours of operation, and
other measures as appropriate.
Revitalization and Recycling Of Existing Commercial/Industrial Areas
Over time, circumstances in the City change making it necessary to develop new goals and policies to take
into account the changing circumstances. For example, goals and policies should address the Railroad
and Pomona Avenues area to take maximum advantage of the planned extension of the Gold Line light
rail system. New office, commercial residential, hospitality and mixed use uses by the 210 Freeway should
be designed and oriented to take advantage of this location. The following goals and policies address
changing circumstances for office, commercial and industrial uses
  GOAL 7:           Provide     for   the     revitalization     of   deteriorating     land  uses    and
  properties.
Policy 7.1: Encourage and continue the use of redevelopment activities, including the provision of
incentives for private development, joint public-private partnerships, and public improvements, in those
redevelopment areas designated in Monrovia.
Policy 7.2: Promote vigorous enforcement of City codes, including building, zoning, and health and
safety, to promote property maintenance and parking enforcement.
Policy 7.3: Create design guidelines for all Myrtle Avenue facing properties between Olive Avenue and
the Foothill Freeway (210 Freeway).
Policy 7.4: Consider appropriate future uses in the vicinity of the Santa Fe Depot, including uses in the
Railroad and Pomona Avenue areas that will take maximum advantage of access to light rail. Such uses
may include high density residential, office, retail, commercial, and research and development uses.
Policy 7.5: Encourage future commercial land uses along West Huntington Drive that are compatible
with the newer, sub-regional commercial uses that have been recently developed in the area.
Policy 7.6: Encourage the location of clean industrial uses in the City and more aesthetic design solutions
Land Use Element                                  -8 -
to traditional industrial uses.
Policy 7.7: Encourage the development of light industrial, offices, and warehouses on Myrtle Avenue
between Duarte Road and the southern city limits. Homes on Novice Lane should transition to Light
Industrial land uses, but new development shall provide adequate landscaping, setbacks and walls to
buffer negative impacts on the existing residential uses.
Policy 7.8: Review and update as needed development guidelines for all the Planned Development areas
to guide their future growth.
Economic Expansion
The following goal and policies are intended to encourage economic expansion in Monrovia.
  GOAL 8: Promote expansion of the City's economic base.
Policy 8.1: Capture an appropriate share of the region's demand for service industries, research and
development type businesses, office space, and regional retailers through redevelopment incentives and
land use regulatory incentives.
Policy 8.2: Use access to rail transit to promote new office, retail, hospitality, and service-type uses in the
City.
Policy 8.3: Encourage regional uses such as large retailers, hotels and restaurants on West Huntington
Drive.
Policy 8.4: Support and strengthen the economic vitality of the auto mall.
Policy 8.5: Provide a mix of housing, commercial, and industrial uses to encourage jobs/housing balance.
Policy 8.6: Implement the redevelopment plans for adopted project areas.
Policy 8.7: Work closely with the San Gabriel Valley Economic Partnership to attract new businesses to
the City.
Policy 8.8: Develop an economic strategy to attract new businesses to the City.
Policy 8.9: Continue to implement the Development Review Committee’s fast track review and process
for new businesses or expansion of existing businesses.
Policy 8.10: Develop appropriate public relations information that highlight the city's positive aspects.
This information will be made available to potential new businesses.
Preservation of Character of Residential Neighborhoods and Historic Areas
Monrovia's incorporation was the product of the real estate boom of the 1880s that set the stage for the
enormous growth patterns for the Los Angeles area. Incorporated in 1887 by a group of investors led by
William Newton Monroe, Monrovia is the fourth oldest city in the county. The City's built environment
Land Use Element                                -9 -

today is the product of Monrovia's early days. Historic preservation is desired in Monrovia to ensure the
maintenance and continuation of the many important and notable structures that create the unique sense
of place that defines Monrovia. Historic preservation is an integral part of land use planning that can have
other benefits as well, such as: affordable housing; revitalization of neighborhoods; diversification of
housing opportunities; increase in economic incentives to rehabilitate housing; and conservation of
resources. Numerous historic residences from the turn of the century lend charm and character to
Monrovia. The community values the small-town historic atmosphere of Myrtle Avenue and feels that it
should be maintained. The City adopted a Neighborhood Compatibility Ordinance that seeks to preserve
homes built before 1940 if they have historic value and contribute to the historic nature of a particular
neighborhood. The following goals and policies address historic resources in Monrovia.
 GOAL 9:              Preserve the character of existing neighborhoods and historic
 residences.
Policy 9.1: Continue to implement the historic preservation ordinance for designating, preserving,
safeguarding historic structures, and creating historic districts in the City.
Policy 9.2: Facilitate the use of state and federal funds for the preservation of historic buildings by
seeking to qualify as a Certified Local Government (CLG).
Policy 9.3: Continue to monitor development standards in single family and multi-family residential
districts, including setbacks, height, density, and required open space, in order to ensure that new
development is compatible with the scale and character of existing development.
Policy 9.4: Continue to refine as needed, design guidelines for new multiple-family residential
development in order to promote consistency and compatibility with the City's older development.
Policy 9.5: Restore the Santa Fe Depot, preferably as a facility open to the public. (e.g., rail station,
restaurant, shopping facility).
Policy 9.6: Encourage the continued effort in the downtown to preserve its historic quality.               New
development shall be designed in harmony with existing buildings.
Policy 9.7: Through the existing Planned Development (PD) designations control the architecture and
site design of residential developments for compatibility with the existing neighborhood.
Policy 9.8: Continue the street tree and sidewalk pattern in new development where Medium Density
and PD neighborhoods have an established street tree and sidewalk pattern.
Policy 9.9:     Complete the City-wide survey and prepare a City-wide inventory of potentially historic
structures.
Policy 9.10: Assist and encourage other public agencies or private organizations in the purchase and/or
relocation of sites, buildings, and structures that have been identified as historically significant that are in
danger of demolition or alterations which could jeopardize their status as historic resources.
Land Use Element                                 -10 -
Policy 9.11: Consider the adoption of special development standards for properties surrounding
identified historic sites and structures to ensure compatibility of new development with the old. Such
development standards could include requirement of a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) for development of
properties surrounding identified historic sites and structures.
Policy 9.12: Consider providing restoration assistance to owners of historic sites and/or structures in
return for agreements or deed restrictions prohibiting their destruction or alteration inconsistent with
their historic character.
Environmental Sensitivity
The foothills are an important natural resource to the City which should be protected. In other parts of
Monrovia, open space is needed, and some streets lack parkway trees. The following goals and policies
address the foothills, open space and tree planting in the City of Monrovia:
  GOAL 10:              Ensure that new development is sensitive to the City's natural
  and open space resources and constraints.
Policy 10.1: Adhere to the Hillside Development Policies and Standards designed to regulate
development in the foothills so as to maximize preservation of open space and ridgelines and minimize
disruption of plant and animal life.
Policy 10.2:    Develop a tree-planting program to provide trees in all unplanted parkways throughout the
City.
Policy 10.3:     Study the need for additional on-site open space in new multiple family development.
Policy 10.4: Encourage public parks within a reasonable distance of residences. The concept of
neighborhood parks should be explored in the Recreational Element of the General Plan.
Policy 10.5: Prevent location of major population centers, other than open space or agricultural uses,
near any known or suspected earthquake faults, or in potential flood hazard or landslide areas.
Policy 10.6: Encourage the conservation of water and energy resources in order to reduce the need for
expansion of water reservoirs and distribution facilities, as well as energy generating plants and
distribution facilities.
Policy 10.7:      Require, where feasible, additional hiking trails and horse trails along washes and in the
hillsides.
Policy 10.8: Develop landscape guidelines to preserve existing trees and maximize new tree planting in
new developments.
Policy 10.9:     Require water efficient landscaping in regard to plant selection and irrigation.
Policy 10.10:      Review existing bike routes and determine the need for additional routes.
Land Use Element                                 -11 -
Policy 10.11:      Consider establishing landscape design criteria/guidelines that require the exclusive use
of native California and drought resistant vegetation in all proposed developments.
Policy 10.12: Consider the issue of noise on the existing and future environment when planning the
location of residential areas and other noise sensitive land uses in Monrovia.
Policy 10.13: Continue to implement the Oak Tree Preservation Ordinance.
  GOAL 11:            The City of Monrovia shall provide its residents with a high
  quality        urban         environment            through          the       development           and
  conservation           of      resources        such         as        land,     water,         minerals,
  wildlife, and vegetation.
Policy 11.1: Require major commercial and industrial development and redevelopment projects to
integrate open space uses (such as plazas, courtyards, and landscaped areas) into each project.
Policy 11.2: Review existing park dedication and park and recreation fee schedules and policies to
provide adequate facilities.
Policy 11.3: Study the feasibility of prohibiting development in areas identified or designated as
significant habitat areas and restoring such areas to their original state.
Policy 11.4: Consider requiring that proposed development integrate existing mature landscaping into
the site plan.
Policy 11.5: Refine the City-wide, voluntary, single-family residential curbside recycling/yard waste
collection program by further formulating education/information efforts and other ways to reduce
residential solid waste.
Policy 11.6: Develop a commercial and industrial recycling/waste diversion program. The program shall
be designed to: 1) Provide an incentive to recycle as much as possible and achieve maximum waste
diversion, 2) Provide a recycling service charged on a variable rate basis, i.e. container size, frequency of
service, material separation needs (commingled or separated), and special requirements.
Policy 11.7: Comply with the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System regarding storm water
management to reduce impacts from storm water run-off.
  GOAL 12: Expand recreational and park use opportunities.
Policy 12.1: Explore means to acquire additional parkland, especially south of Huntington Drive, by
purchase or lease.
Policy 12.2: Maintain or increase multiple-family residential recreation space development standards as a
supplement to park space.
Land Use Element                                -12 -
Policy 12.3: Explore development of joint use of school district properties for park and recreation use.
Policy 12.4: Provide parks in the Station Square Transit Village based upon the development standards
outlined in the Station Square Planning Area.
Commercial/Industrial Design Quality
Monrovia should provide its citizens with an attractive urban environment through the encouragement of
the high quality design of commercial and industrial development. The following goals and policies
address commercial and industrial design quality:
 GOAL 13:             Promote      high     quality    design     in    all   new     commercial      and
 industrial development.
Policy 13.1: Continue design review for all commercial and industrial areas. These guidelines should
address architecture, access, setbacks, building articulation, materials, landscaping, pedestrian amenities,
and linkages with nearby activity centers.
Policy 13.2: Discourage strip commercial development, including mini-malls especially by clustering
uses, encouraging placement of parking to the rear of buildings, and requiring landscaping.
Policy 13.3: In commercial and industrial areas designated Planned Development, develop architectural,
site design, and landscape guidelines.
Policy 13.4: Encourage increased landscaped setbacks by using a portion of City parkway as determined
by the Public Works Department.
Policy 13.5: Encourage "pedestrian friendly" designs for office and retail commercial uses.
Policy 13.6: Encourage strict sign control for new development.
Policy 13.7: In specified zones permitting outside storage, an aesthetic combination of decorative block
wall and landscaping should be required.
Public Participation
The public is encouraged to participate in development and policy decisions that shape the City. The
following goal and policies are designed to encourage public participation in Monrovia:
 GOAL 14:         Maximize public participation in the planning and development review
 process.
Policy 14.1: Utilize existing neighborhood groups such as homeowner associations and neighborhood
watch, and organizations such as the Chamber of Commerce and the Downtown Merchants to
disseminate information about planning and development proposals.
Land Use Element                                -13 -
Policy 14.2: Continue to provide timely, straightforward noticing of all hearings and meetings on
planning and development proposals. Noticing shall include Spanish speaking contact information.
Policy 14.3: Consider utilizing videos to disseminate information to the public about the planning and
development review process as well as special planning projects.
Policy 14.4: Use cable KGEM to inform citizens about planning activities.
Policy 14.5: Use neighborhood meetings and community forums to solicit public participation.
Policy 14.6: Use multimedia methods to inform the public about planning activities, such as video
presentations, posters, banners, and the City’s Web Site.
Policy 14.7: Where appropriate, continue to utilize citizen advisory committees to resolve issues facing
the City.
Consistency with Other Elements
The Land Use Element is the key element of the General Plan. Land Use goals and policies direct
circulation and housing goals, policies and programs. The following goals and policies ensure that all
General Plan elements are consistent with each other.
  GOAL 15:        Ensure consistency with goals and policies of other elements of the
  general plan.
Policy 15.1: Ensure sufficient residential development potential in the City to accommodate future
housing needs.
Policy 15.2: Coordinate the planning of future residential and employment corridors and/or centers with
transportation and transit facilities.
Policy 15.3: Development shall provide adequate open space, parks and recreational facilities in
accordance with the City’s Open Space Element.
Policy 15.4: Provide for adequate infrastructure such as sewer, street, and water capacity in accordance
with the City’s Conservation Element.
Policy 15.5: Provide for adequate schools for future residential growth.
Policy 15.6: Coordinate historic preservation with City Council goals and direction.
Land Use Element                                -14 -

The Land Use Plan
The Land Use Element describes the location and extent of future development in Monrovia and identifies
standards for that development. The geographic locations of land uses are presented on the Land Use
Policy Map which is a part of this Element. The Element focuses on the following specific characteristics of
the City:
    1.    Existing development within the City and its long-term maintenance and preservation
    2.    Revitalization or redevelopment of existing development within the City where rehabilitation is
          necessary and/or desired: and
    3.    Vacant parcels available for new development
Through the use of text and diagrams, the Land Use Element establishes clear and logical patterns of land
use as well as standards for future development. An important feature of this Element is the Land Use
Policy Map (see Figure 1). This map indicates the location, density, and intensity of development for all
land uses City-wide. Combined with the goals and policies the Land Use Element establishes a
constitutional framework for future land use planning and decision making in Monrovia.
Land Use Designations
Land use designations are necessary to identify the type of development that is allowed in a given
location. While terms like "residential," "commercial," and "industrial" are generally understood, state
general plan law requires a clear and concise description of the land use categories shown on the land use
policy map. The City of Monrovia Land Use Element provides for 18 land use designations. Five of these
designations are established for residential development, ranging from very low-density to high-density
development. six commercial, one industrial, four open space designations, one community facilities
category, and one designation for planned development are part of the land use plan.
Land Use Intensity/Density
The land use designations, or categories, in this Element are described in terms of intensity and density as
required by State law. The term "intensity" refers to the physical characteristics of a building - such as
height, bulk, floor-area ratio, and/or percent of lot coverage - and the building's proportional relationship
to the land on which it is situated. Intensity is most often used to describe non-residential development
levels, but in a broader sense, is used to express overall levels of all development types within a planning
area. For most non-residential development categories (e.g., commercial and industrial), the measure of
intensity known as "floor-area ratio" (FAR) provides the most convenient method of describing
development levels.
Simply stated, the floor- area ratio is the relationship of total gross floor area of all buildings on a lot to
the total land area of that lot. For example, a 21,780 square-foot building on a 43,560 square-foot lot
(one acre) yields an FAR of 0.5:1 (21,780  43,560 = 0.5). A 0.5:1 FAR can yield a building of one story in
height covering one-half of the lot area, or a taller building which covers less of the lot and provides for
more open space around the building. The term "density," in a land use context, is a measure of the
population or residential development capacity of the land. Density is explained either in terms of
number of dwelling units per acre (du/ac) or persons per acre and is usually described as a range (e.g., 4-7
du/ac) or maximum (e.g., up to 8.7 du/ac). For example, the density of a residential development of 100
dwelling units occupying 20 acres of land is 5.0 du/ac.
Land Use Element                                  -15 -

Floor-area ratio often is used in calculations of development potential because the ratio can be applied
more uniformly City-wide than can other factors; however, FAR typically is not the variable analyzed in the
evaluation of maximum allowable building intensity for a particular parcel of land. Variables analyzed may
include parking and loading requirements, setbacks, fire department emergency access, height limits, and
other factors applied directly to the project site. The application of such factors usually precludes the
development of a site at maximum allowable FAR.
Floor-area ratio can be applied in two ways: 1) as a maximum allowable intensity on a parcel of land; and
2) as an overall level of development on a City-wide basis (average intensity), accounting for the fact that
not every parcel will be developed at maximum intensity. In accordance with State General Plan law, this
Land Use Element and the Land Use Policy Map provide the maximum density/intensity permitted on a
parcel of land within a given land use designation. Table L-1 lists each of the land use designations for the
City and provides its corresponding measure of maximum density/intensity. Land use designation
descriptions, shown on the Land Use Policy Map (see Figure 1), identify the general types of uses allowed
and their corresponding maximum densities or intensities. These use descriptions will be defined further
as specific uses within the City's Zoning Ordinance.
Residential Designations
Residential Foothill: Areas designated with this use classification generally have relatively steep slopes
or are environmentally sensitive, allowing residential development at only very low densities. This
designation allows the construction of a maximum of one dwelling unit per acre of land.
Residential Estate: The Estate Residential land use classification allows for large lot single-family
dwellings. This designation allows for 2 dwelling units per acre of land.
Low Density Residential: This land use classification is intended for application to areas that are or are
to be developed primarily with single family dwellings. This designation allows for the construction of a
maximum of 5.8 dwelling units per acre of land. Other uses such as parks, schools, and churches which
are determined to be compatible with and oriented toward serving the needs of low density detached
single family neighborhoods shall also be allowed.
Residential-Medium Density: This land use classification permits low density multiple family structures
such as apartments and condominiums at a maximum density of 17.4 dwelling units per acre of land. This
designation will be applied to areas that are now primarily a mixture of single family dwellings, duplexes
and small, low-density apartment and condominium complexes. Other uses, such as churches, schools,
and parks, which are determined to be compatible with and oriented toward serving the needs of low to
medium density detached and attached single family neighborhoods, shall also be allowed.
Residential-High Density: This land use classification is intended primarily for application where
moderately high density multiple family structures are existing or planned. This designation allows for the
construction of a maximum of 54 dwelling units per acre of land. However, in actual practice, the average
density for this land use designation is 19.4 dwelling units per acre. Other uses, such as churches, schools,
and parks, which are determined to be compatible with and oriented toward serving the needs of medium
and higher density neighborhoods, shall also be allowed.
Land Use Element                                -16 -
Commercial/Industrial Designations
Neighborhood Commercial:             The Neighborhood Commercial designation includes smaller-scale
business activities which generally provide a retailing or service-oriented function. Neighborhood
commercial uses serve the needs of local residents who live nearby. Typical business uses include food
and drug stores, clothing stores, professional and business offices, restaurants and hardware stores,
restaurants and specialty retail. New development within the Neighborhood Commercial designation,
typically occurs on less than 5 acres of land and include 25,000 square feet or less of building floor area.
The maximum intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.5:1.
Historic Downtown Commercial: This land use classification is intended for application to the City's
downtown shopping area along Myrtle Avenue between Olive Avenue and Foothill Boulevard. One of the
main purposes of this designation is to preserve the historic role of the commercial downtown. Well-
designed, pedestrian-oriented commercial uses, such as small shops, banks, and restaurants are permitted
by this land use classification on the ground floor. Office uses are allowed on the second floor. Large
undivided single owner buildings can be reviewed for the possibility of office use. The maximum intensity
of development is a floor area ratio of 2:1.
Commercial-Regional/Sub-regional: This designation is intended for large-scale retail, entertainment,
hotels, and office facilities serving both the local and sub-regional markets. The maximum intensity of
development is a floor area ratio of 0.75:1.
Retail Corridor Commercial: This designation allows for large-scale retail, entertainment, hotels, and
office facilities serving both the local and sub-regional markets. The maximum intensity of development
with surface parking is a floor-area ratio of 2.0. New developments are encouraged to implement shared
parking, providing they meet the City’s parking requirements, provide parking away from the street
frontage (i.e., structured, subterranean, behind street-facing retail stores). Retail Corridor Commercial
land use classification provides a floor area ratio bonus for the removal of surface parking lots and
relocation to a subterranean parking structure.
The maximum intensity of development with subterranean parking is a floor-Area ratio of 3.0. Facing
Huntington Drive, new development must incorporate ground-level retail uses and can extend up to three
stories in height. Where adjacent to single-family residential development, building and site design must
be sensitive to these neighborhoods, avoiding multi-story buildings and appropriately locating loading
docks and other service areas.
Retail Corridor Mixed Use: This designation allows a mix of high-density residential, office, and retail
uses that will accommodate multiple-family dwellings, large-scale retail, entertainment, and office facilities
serving both the local and sub-regional markets. The scale and character of new development is intended
to support and reinforce the image of West Huntington Drive as a retail corridor. Buildings shall be at
least two stories, oriented to streets and pedestrians with subterranean parking lots.
The maximum intensity of development for commercial uses is a floor-area ratio of 2.0. This designation
also permits residential developments at a maximum density of 54 du/ac. Developments should
emphasize ground-level retail uses along Huntington Drive and pedestrian connections throughout.
Surface parking is discouraged.
Land Use Element                                  -17 -

Office/Research and Development/Light Manufacturing: This land use classification is intended to
encourage high quality development of office, research and development uses, and support uses.
Support uses may include restaurants, health clubs, and banks. The maximum floor-area ratio for this
designation is 0.75:1.
Business Enterprise: The Business Enterprise designation provides an environment to promote new
development. This classification permits retail, office, research and development, and light industrial uses.
These uses shall be permitted if: 1) they do not cause or produce a nuisance to adjacent sites; 2) they are
performed or carried out entirely within an enclosed building that meets high quality building design, site
layout and landscape standards, and will harmonize with other surrounding land uses.
For properties fronting Myrtle Avenue, new development must incorporate ground-level commercial uses
and can extend up to three stories in height. Where adjacent to single-family residential development,
building and site design must be sensitive to these neighborhoods, avoiding multi-story buildings and
appropriately locating loading docks and other service areas. In addition to the permitted uses listed
above, public pocket parks, courtyards, and other public recreational facilities intended to provide areas
that meet recreation needs for employees of local businesses and residents and that buffer and prevent
cut-through traffic through residential neighborhoods will be permitted with approval from the City’s
Development Review Committee The maximum intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.75:1.
However, as an incentive to provide underground and/or parking structures as part of a development, the
City will allow an increase in FAR to 2.5:1
Manufacturing: This designation allows for light and heavy manufacturing. The maximum intensity of
development is a floor-area ratio of 0.75:1.
Open Space Designations
Hillside Wilderness Preserve: This classification is designated for preserving open space left in its
natural state including preservation of endangered habitats and species, wildlife habitats, and wildlife
corridors; open space for passive recreation uses such as hiking and nature studies; utility easements and
reservoirs; and nature centers and educational facilities.
This Hillside Wilderness Preservation designation is only assigned to land owned by or conveyed to a
public agency, Public Trust or conservancy, and for lands with irrevocable offers to dedicate to the City.
Hillside Recreation: This classification is designated for public wilderness parks and private recreational
camp facilities. Recreational uses such as hiking and riding trails, nature centers, educational and
incidental facilities associated with outdoor recreation are permitted. Monrovia Canyon Park, Arcadia
Wilderness Park, and Trask Boy Scout Camp are currently within this designation.
Specific Plan Overlay/Planned Development Designation
Planned Development
Each of the areas receiving this classification is unique in character. For example, it could be a residential
area with a historic flavor, an area developed with a mixture of uses or an area in need of improvement.
Some of the areas are suitable for more than one type of land use. Where this is the case, no specific land
use classification is applied. In other areas, a specific land use classification is applied. In both types of
areas, development will be subject to City review and approval, in order to preserve the orderly
Land Use Element                                  -18 -

development of the area and promote needed area improvements. Each PD area is the City is described at
the end of the Land Use Element.
Specific Plan/Planned Development Overlay
The intent of the Specific Plan/Planned Development Overlay (SP/PD Overlay) is to continue the
pedestrian orientation of Myrtle Avenue south from Old Town and to create new housing opportunities
and compatible office uses between Olive and Maple Avenues. The SP/PD Overlay designation allows a
mix of residential and office uses to be built as integrated, cohesive developments with approval of a
Specific Plan.
Development proposals will be reviewed block by block to ensure integration with established uses and
compatibility with adjacent lower-scale residential neighborhoods. All lots fronting Myrtle Avenue must
have ground-floor commercial uses, office, service, or retail facing Myrtle Avenue, with either office uses
or residential units on the floors above. Parcels without Myrtle Avenue frontage may be developed
exclusively with residential uses. Developments fronting Myrtle Avenue will be limited in height to three
stories; all other buildings may have a maximum height of four stories.
The goal of the SP/PD Overlay is to allow established office and research/development businesses to
remain while providing opportunities for development of uses complementary to Downtown Monrovia.
The pedestrian amenities provided in Old Town included decorative street lights, benches, landscaping,
paving, bulb-outs, and sidewalk widening along Myrtle Avenue will be extended south of Olive Avenue to
Maple Avenue. The architectural style of these amenities will be different but complementary, to define
the Old Town Extension as separate from the downtown.
Proposed mixed-use development will require a Specific Plan or similar entitlement process that includes
community input. Important building and urban design considerations to be reviewed and incorporated
into the entitlement documents include building height, sensitivity to adjacent lower-scale residential
neighborhoods, location and proportions of windows and doors, relationship of building masses and
spaces, roof shape, landscaping, scale, and architectural detail. As with the Business Enterprise zone, an
incentive to provide underground and/or parking structures will be provided. The FAR will be incto 2.0 if
parking is provided in a structure or underground.
Floor-Area Ratio: 0.75 Maximum
Floor-Area Ratio: 2.0 maximum (Incentive for underground and/or parking structures)
Maximum Residential Density: 54 dwelling units per acre
Community Facility Designations
Recreation: This designation is intended for City-owned areas used for public parks and other public
recreational facilities.
Angeles National Forest: This designation is assigned to all property, both publicly and privately owned,
within the boundaries of the Angeles National Forest.
Public/Quasi Public: This land use classification is intended for application to all public uses such as
schools, and government offices and facilities, as well as quasi-governmental offices and facilities such as
those for the telephone company and other utilities.
Land Use Element                                -19 -
                 Figure 1 – General Plan Land Use Map
Land Use Element                -20 -

                            Table 1 – Land Use Designations
                                                      Maximum Development
            Land Use Designations
                                                           Density/Intensity
Residential
   Residential Foothill                       Up to 1 du/ac
   Residential Estate                         Up to 2 du/ac
   Low-Density Residential                    Up to 5.8 du/ac
   Medium-Density Residential                 Up to 17.4 du/ac
   High-Density Residential                   Up to 54 du/ac
Commercial
   Neighborhood Commercial                    0.5:1 FAR
   Historic Downtown Commercial               2:1 FAR
   Commercial-Regional/Subregional            0.75:1 FAR
   Office/Research and Development            0.75:1 FAR
   Retail Corridor Commercial                 2:1 FAR
                                              3:1 FAR w/Incentive
   Retail Corridor Mixed Use                  2:1 FAR
                                              54 du/ac
   Business Enterprise                        0.75:1 FAR
                                              2.5:1 FAR w/Incentive
Manufacturing                                 0.75:1 FAR
Open Space
   Hillside Wilderness Preserve               NA
   Hillside Recreation                        NA
Specific Plan Overlay                         0.75:1 FAR
                                              Up to 54 du/ac
                                              2:1 FAR w/Incentive
Planned Development                           Determined per Planned Development Area
Community Facilities
   Recreation                                 NA
   Public/Quasi Public                        NA
   Angeles National Forest                    1 du/80 ac
Land Use Element                        -21 -

Land Use Policy Considerations
Monrovia is one of the oldest cities in Los Angeles County, and its basic pattern of development is well
established. There is little vacant land suitable for development is available. Therefore, future
development, like current development patterns, will involve either the intensification of already existing
uses or recycling to similar uses. Growth issues in Monrovia revolve around the questions of where and to
what extent growth should be allowed and where it should be encouraged to occur. The following Land
Use issues identified in the 1993 General Plan are still appropriate today and are summarized below:
        Development Standards: All new development should bear the full cost of providing additional
         services necessary to serve that development, including fire, police, schools, parks, and
         infrastructure in order to ensure that service levels are adequate. There is a need to prepare an
         impact analysis on a cumulative basis.
        Revitalization and Recycling of Existing Commercial/Industrial Areas: Because of its direct
         access to a possible future light rail line, the Santa Fe Depot is among the most logical choices for
         a future transit station. Convenient regional transit is a critical future planning issue.
        Preservation of existing residential neighborhoods and historic areas: Numerous historic
         residences from the turn-of-the-century establish the character of Monrovia. These older, historic
         residences should be preserved.
        Environmental Sensitivity: The foothills represent a precious natural resource to the City.
         Foothill development should be sensitive to the environment. In addition, a review of the need
         for more open space and parks for aesthetic and recreational/play purposes, particularly in high
         density residential areas, should be prepared.
        Commercial/Industrial Design Quality: Consistent design standards are needed in commercial
         and industrial areas.
        Natural Constraints: The City of Monrovia is traversed by an Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone,
         which means there is an active earthquake fault that traverses the City (the Raymond Hill Fault).
         Cities which have Alquist-Priolo zones must regulate certain development projects within the
         zones.
The 1993 Land Use Plan Also identified the following areas that should be addressed in the 2030 land use
plan:
     On Myrtle Avenue between Olive Avenue and Huntington Drive, a variety of industrial uses are
         currently allowed. However, the type and character of these uses has the potential to clash with
         the pedestrian-oriented character of the adjacent old downtown and the campus-like character of
         the uses along East Huntington Drive.
     Myrtle Avenue between Huntington Drive and the freeway provides a high visibility entrance to
         the City. The current industrial uses in this area, however, may not present the most attractive
         entryway to the City. Design considerations should be a major determinant for all future
         approvals.
     The allowable uses along West Huntington Drive should be re-evaluated in light of the fact that
         uses on this corridor are trending toward upscale, sub-regional retail uses.
In 2002, The City Council brought in the Urban Land Institute to study the success of Monrovia and to lay
Land Use Element                                    -22 -

the framework for future development of the City. The Urban Land Institute study concluded that
Monrovia has done a remarkable job in promoting economic vitality while preserving the small town
atmosphere so many residents have come to associate with living in the City. The Urban Land Institute
Study also concurred with the 1993 plan that growth in Monrovia will occur in the three specific areas
addressed above. The recommendations of the Urban Land Institute study were that future development
adjacent to the major transportation corridors would allow the City to coordinate growth, while preserving
the rest of the community. The following Area Plans have been prepared to fully address the Urban Land
Institute Study and the issues identified in the 1993 General Plan Land Use Element: the South Myrtle
Avenue Corridor, West Huntington Drive, and Station Square Transit Village.
South Myrtle Avenue Corridor
Connecting the City’s historic downtown, on Myrtle              SOUTH            MYRTLE        AVENUE
Avenue, to the 210 Freeway and areas of Monrovia to the         CORRIDOR VISION STATEMENT
south, the South Myrtle Avenue Corridor provides an
opportunity to develop a unique pedestrian-oriented             Create a Vibrant Pedestrian Orientated
street of mixed use, office, and commercial uses.               Office, Commercial and Mixed use
Currently, the South Myrtle Avenue Corridor between Old         Corridor.
Town and 210 Freeway is a combination of unrelated uses
that lack a unifying configuration or theme. As the City’s main street, Myrtle Avenue displays Monrovia’s
community character and this character should extend the length of South Myrtle Avenue. South Myrtle
Avenue currently functions primarily as a roadway to channel vehicular traffic back and forth between the
vicinity of Old Town and the freeway. The following plan has been created to allow for the redevelopment
of this corridor expanding the Old Town environment and create a proper gateway into the City of
Monrovia. The corridor will serve as a key entry into the City and will offer the following:
           Places for development of technology, research and development, and office uses
           Pedestrian-friendly surroundings
           Transit connections to surrounding neighborhoods
           Tree-lined streets and well-planned open spaces
           Integration of landscaped open spaces and courtyards within the street frontage fabric
           Mixed uses adjacent to Old Town that will consist of residential and commercial uses that
            support businesses in the downtown
In accordance with the Urban Land Institute study, the South Myrtle Avenue Corridor (illustrated in Figure
1) will be divided into three distinct areas: Old Town Extension, Crossroads District, and South Myrtle
Corridor. Creating three distinct neighborhoods will enliven the street and address the issues related to
that particular neighborhood. The following provides a more descriptive explanation of each planning
area that provides a framework for their future development.
Land Use Element                                -23 -

Figure 2 – South Myrtle Avenue Corridor Planning Area
          SOUTH MYRTLE AVENUE
              PLANNING AREAS
                 OLD TOWN EXTENSION
                 DISTRICT
                 CROSSROADS DISTRICT
                 SOUTH MYRTLE AVENUE
                 DISTRICT
Old Town Extension District
With careful incremental planning and development, Monrovia can expand on the success of Old Town by
expanding its ambience and vitality south of Olive Avenue to Maple Avenue. The Old Town Extension
District and Specific Plan/Planned Development Overlay is bounded by Olive Avenue on the north, Maple
Avenue on the south, Ivy Avenue on the east, and Primrose Avenue on the west and includes six full
blocks.
A safe and attractive pedestrian district will be created by removing traffic lanes from Myrtle Avenue and
using the extra room to expand the pedestrian zone and provide angled parking where appropriate. The
Old Town extension district will have a distinct streetscape plan consisting of street lights, trees, benches,
trash receptacles, public art and paving which, when implemented, will be different from Old Town yet
complimentary. An overhead “Old Town” sign is recommended at Olive and Myrtle to signal the entry to
Land Use Element                                 -24 -

“Old Town”.
New developments on the southeast
or southwest corners of Myrtle and
Olive Avenues must provide for a
plaza area with a corner retail
component in the building.          The
development at the southeast corner
shall      include       public      art
commemorating the Red Car station
that once occupied that site. As
development takes place through
specific plans on the balance of the
area, pedestrian plazas and pocket
parks should be integrated in to the                            Old Town Extension District
design.
                                           The Old Town Extension will expand the pedestrian zone and create new
New development along Myrtle               mixed-use developments that support the historic downtown.
Avenue in this District should be a
maximum of four stories with the
fourth story setback from the first three stories an appropriate distance based on the architecture design.
Uses shall consist of live-work and office on the ground floor with residential units and lofts above.
Specialty food, coffee and juice shops and small cafes will be permitted. Office buildings will also be
allowed up to three stories in this area. The buildings do not need a front yard setback on Myrtle
Avenue, but the architecture should serve as the background and vertical element for public spaces. It
should be contextual and based on regional and local historical architectural precedents. Front doors and
entrances must face the street on Myrtle Avenue or on the side streets face the street or a semipublic
courtyard oriented toward the street.
Buildings should be composed of
bases, middles and tops with the bases
having the greater vertical dimension
and include the use of a mix of
traditional building materials such as
brick, wood siding, stucco and have
modulation in the form of inset front
doors, bay windows, building plane
separation,     awnings,   and     other
architectural relief.
New development shall be regulated
by the provisions of the Specific
Plan/Planned Development Overlay
and/or the applicable development
                                                                      Old Town Entry Sign
guidelines in the Zoning Ordinance.
                                            An overhead sign at the entry to Old Town is recommended to announce
                                            arrival to Monrovia’s Historic downtown, similar to this one that was installed
                                            for the City of Pleasanton.
Land Use Element                                   -25 -

Crossroads District
(bounded by Maple on the north, Cypress on the south, Primrose on the west and Ivy on the east)
The intersection of Myrtle Avenue and
Huntington Drive is the busiest intersection
in town. It is highly accessible from the
freeway       where      the      Old      Town
extension meets the high-tech corridor. For
this reason, a focal point should be created
to stress this important relationship. Trees,
street furniture, signal design, lighting,
public art, and interesting paving designs
should enhance this intersection. Office and
research and development buildings can be
up to four stories in height. Specialty
restaurants are encouraged at the ground
floor. Structured and/or podium parking is
encouraged which will maximize the use of
the property.        Residential on Cypress                                    Crossroads District
Avenue       can    be     incorporated      into
Huntington Drive projects if contiguous, so           Trees, street furniture, signal design, lighting, public art and interesting
                                                      paving designs should enhance this intersection.
no islands of residential are left behind. If
residential     uses    remain,     the      new
development shall be sensitive to the residential uses across the alley.
South Myrtle Corridor
(Cypress Avenue to freeway )
An important outcome of the redevelopment of this section of
South Myrtle should be to unify the neighborhoods split by Myrtle
Avenue. Myrtle Avenue corridor’s new uses should add to the
livability of the two neighborhoods. The buildings can be office
and research and development and two stories in height when
interfacing the neighborhood, and up to three stories facing Myrtle
Avenue. Many lots are too shallow to accommodate this height,
but the property currently occupied by Southeast Concrete could
likely accommodate the three story height along South Myrtle
Avenue.
New buildings shall be built oriented to Myrtle Avenue with
podium/subterranean or parking in the rear. The buildings shall be
setback 10 feet from the front property line to provide landscaping
and hardscape entrances. On the west side of Myrtle Avenue,
residential lots adjacent to Myrtle Avenue lots may be incorporated
into the development if the findings for a Conditional Use Permit
are made and adequate measures and conditions are applied to                        South           Myrtle         Corridor
safeguard the remaining residential uses. Since this section of
Myrtle is critical for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, it is                      Since this section of Myrtle Avenue is
recommended that there be an adopted street improvement plan                        critical for vehicular and pedestrian traffic,
                                                                                    it is recommended that there be an
with landscaping next to the street with street trees and                           adopted street improvement plan.
shrub/ground cover pockets, lighting, benches, and street
Land Use Element                                    -26 -

furniture.
Cypress and Montana Avenues should be provided with a cul-de-sac to protect the residential
neighborhoods to the east and west. This will provide for the opportunity to enhance the pedestrian
experience by providing a pocket park or small plaza area with landscaping, lighting, and benches.
Land Use
In response to the City’s desire to create a dynamic, high-tech, pedestrian-friendly office environment
along South Myrtle Avenue, the Land Use Plan, illustrated in Figure 3 and described below, guides the
development, maintenance, and improvement of land and properties. The Land Use Plan Map graphically
represents the planned categories of use and the distribution and intensity of land use for parcels within
the South Myrtle Avenue corridor planning area.
Commercial Designations
The Commercial designations include categories representing the commercial uses appropriate for South
Myrtle Avenue: Business Enterprise and Office/Research and Development/Light Manufacturing.
Business Enterprise: The Business Enterprise designation provides an environment to promote new
development. This classification permits retail, office, research and development, and light industrial uses.
These uses shall be permitted if: 1) they do not cause or produce a nuisance to adjacent sites; and 2) they
are performed or carried out entirely within an enclosed building that meets high-quality building
design, site layout, and landscape standards.
Facing Myrtle Avenue, new development must incorporate ground-level commercial uses and can extend
up to three stories in height. Where adjacent to single-family residential development, building and site
design must be sensitive to these neighborhoods, avoiding multi-story buildings and appropriately
locating loading docks and other service areas. In addition to the permitted uses listed above, public
pocket parks, courtyards, and other public recreational facilities intended to provide areas that meet
recreation needs for employees of local businesses and residents and that buffer and prevent cut-through
traffic through residential neighborhoods will be permitted with approval from the City’s Development
Review Committee. As an incentive to provide underground and/or parking structures as part of a
development in the Crossroads District, an increase in FAR to 2.5 will be allowed in this District
Floor-Area Ratio: 0.75 maximum
Floor-Area Ratio: 2.5 maximum (Incentive for underground and/or parking structures in Crossroads
District only)
Office/Research and Development/Light Manufacturing: The Office/Research and Development/Light
Manufacturing designation encourages high-quality development of office, research and development
uses, and support uses. Support uses may include restaurants, health clubs, and banks.
Floor-Area Ratio: 2.0 Maximum
Manufacturing: This designation allows for light manufacturing and limited heavy manufacturing uses.
Light manufacturing is defined as industrial businesses engaged in manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling, packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products in a fully-enclosed
building and in a manner that does not produce adverse noise, vibration, air quality, or similar
environmental effects.      Heavy manufacturing is defined as industrial operations involving the
Land Use Element                                 -27 -

compounding of radioactive materials, petroleum refining, manufacturing of explosives, or any other
operation of a dangerous nature or with potentially adverse effects.
Floor-Area Ratio: 0.75 maximum
Within both the Business Enterprise and Office/Research and Development/Light Manufacturing
designations, retail or service-oriented functions are also permitted. Neighborhood commercial uses serve
the needs of local residents and business population. Typical uses include food and drug stores, clothing
stores, professional and business offices, restaurants, hardware stores, restaurants, and specialty retail.
Mixed Use Designations
Specific Plan/Planned Development Overlay
The intent of the Specific Plan/Planned Development Overlay (SP/PD Overlay) is to continue the
pedestrian orientation of Myrtle Avenue south from Old Town and to create new housing opportunities
and compatible office uses between Olive and Maple Avenues. The SP/PD Overlay designation allows a
mix of residential and office uses to be built as integrated, cohesive developments with approval of a
Specific Plan.
Development proposals will be reviewed block-by-block to ensure integration with established uses and
compatibility with adjacent lower-scale residential neighborhoods. All lots fronting Myrtle Avenue must
have ground-floor commercial uses, office, service, or retail facing Myrtle Avenue, with either office uses
or residential units on the floors above. Parcels without Myrtle Avenue frontage may be developed
exclusively with residential uses. Developments fronting Myrtle Avenue will be limited in height to three
stories; all other buildings may have a maximum height of four stories.
The goal of the SP/PD Overlay is to allow established office and research/development businesses to
remain while providing opportunities for development of uses complementary to Downtown. The
pedestrian amenities provided in Old Town, decorative street lights, benches, landscaping, paving, bulb-
outs, and sidewalk widening along Myrtle Avenue will be extended south of Olive Avenue to Maple
Avenue. The architectural style of these amenities will different, but complementary to Old Town, to
define the Old Town Extension as separate from the downtown.
Proposed mixed use development will require a Specific Plan or similar entitlement process that includes
community input. Important building and urban design considerations to be reviewed and incorporated
into the entitlement documents include building height, sensitivity to adjacent lower-scale residential
neighborhoods, location and proportions of windows and doors, relationship of building masses and
spaces, roof shape, landscaping, scale, and architectural detail. As with the Business Enterprise zone, an
incentive to provide underground and/or parking structures will be provided. The FAR will be increased
to 2.0 if parking is provided in a structure or underground.
Floor-Area Ratio: 0.75 Maximum
Floor-Area Ratio: 2.0 maximum (Incentive for underground and/or parking structures)
Maximum Residential Density: 54 dwelling units per acre
Land Use Element                                  -28 -
Figure 3: South Myrtle Avenue Land Use Plan
Land Use Element              -29 -
Urban Design
Good urban design creates community character that people associate with quality development. Efforts
to design, plan, and maintain community character must account for all of the community’s desired
physical aspects: the sounds and smells of the environment, and the temperature, colors, and textures that
create a sense of place. Good design and maintenance of public and private spaces produce attractive
and clean places we can enjoy. These places are valued and engender human behaviors that treat the
surrounding environment with respect. As the City’s main street, Myrtle Avenue displays Monrovia’s
community character and this character should extend the length of South Myrtle Avenue. The following
urban design guidelines for South Myrtle Avenue promote high-quality development that focuses
amenities and attractions at activity nodes, encourages outdoor rooms and public spaces, and promotes
street-oriented buildings. Figure 4, Urban Design Plan identifies urban design features to be implemented
along the South Myrtle Avenue Corridor. Monrovia’s community character and this character should
extend the length of South Myrtle Avenue. The following urban design guidelines for South Myrtle
Avenue promote high-quality development that focuses amenities and attractions at activity nodes,
encourages outdoor rooms and public spaces, and promotes street-oriented buildings. Figure 4, Urban
Design Plan identifies urban design features to be implemented along the South Myrtle Avenue Corridor.
Appreciating the Design Qualities of Myrtle Avenue
Good design has always been an integral component of the City of Monrovia. Being the fourth oldest City
in Los Angeles County, Monrovia’s development has a rich historic fabric. Landscaping, architecture,
design of public spaces, site planning, and other elements that were important when Monrovia was
founded, influence design today. Good architecture still matters in Monrovia. Many buildings in
downtown that were built during the first 50 years of the City’s existence still stand today. Architectural
styles that reflect classic California architecture are all represented in Monrovia and reflected in many of
the buildings fronting Myrtle Avenue.
Landscaping and tree planting have always been important for Monrovia and Myrtle Avenue as well.
Large, mature trees and landscaped parkways are the result of past actions and policies. The beautifully
landscaped streetscapes along Myrtle Avenue have created a highly walkable, pedestrian-oriented,
business-friendly environment in downtown. South Myrtle Avenue will continue this tradition.
Community Character Concepts
Places that evoke emotions, places that provide
spaces for incidental events or activities, and locations
that tell stories are the type of places that attract
people and make the visit to the place memorable,
this is placemaking.              Placemaking involves
recognizing the needs of pedestrians, creating
outdoor rooms for events, and catering to the
experiences of users. The components that make up
such areas in Old Town Monrovia are vibrant activity
nodes, connections, architecture, and design
elements. The City is dedicated to creating and
sustaining places that distinguish our community. The
following concepts include components that create              Activity along Myrtle
“place” and connections. Incorporating elements such
as gateways, landscaping, parks, plazas, and other             A family festival and farmers market draws Monrovia and San
enhancements into public and private development               Gabriel Valley residents to Myrtle Avenue on a weekly basis.
Land Use Element                                   -30 -

will help maintain the community’s values of “a diverse and interesting small town, safety, friendliness, and
green outdoor spaces.”
Activity Nodes
Vitality and vibrancy in a city can be felt at activity nodes. Whether these nodes originate from
commercial or recreational uses, they are major destinations, often at compact areas, and serve as the hub
of the neighborhood. Along South Myrtle Avenue, compact development patterns and integration of
landscaped open spaces such as courtyards, plazas, and pocket parks will provide opportunities for
activity nodes. Mixed-use projects and transit-oriented development also provide potential for nodes.
Activity nodes contain elements that strengthen and communicate Monrovia’s community identity
because they accommodate pedestrian uses and allow gathering spaces where people feel comfortable.
Activity nodes include focal intersections and places to gather, courtyards, plazas, and parks.
Focal Intersection
Intersections can become focal centers when they are accompanied by public art, paving at crosswalks,
and landscaping. These intersections serve as destinations, especially when corner buildings are used for
busy commercial uses. Special surface treatments, such as stamped or colored-brick crosswalks, give
preference to pedestrians and encourage walking. Abundant landscaping at intersections enhances
aesthetic quality and provides garden-like space in an urban setting. Trees create a visually pleasing
streetscape and provide a comfortable walking environment.
Public Places - Places to Gather
Public gathering places can include plazas, squares, parks, sidewalks and paseos. Private development
can include public spaces as well, with arcades, fountains, and well-designed paseos. The City encourages
developers to incorporate public spaces such as courtyards and plazas within most intensely active places.
Plazas may be provided by public and/or private sector initiative, but should accommodate public use.
Public spaces should be located at or near the same grade as adjacent sidewalks, and the dimensions
must match their surroundings. Courtyards, plazas, and pocket parks should be defined spaces that
enhance the street environment without harmful interruptions in commercial and pedestrian continuity.
These spaces should accommodate comfortable human occupation and use, with art and fountains, as
well as seating and shade.
Creating Connections – Access and Linkages
A city with vibrant activity nodes cannot be successful if these areas are not accessible to all community
members. South Myrtle Avenue should connect seamlessly to Myrtle Avenue and accommodate
automobile, bike, and pedestrian traffic. Properly located and designed gateways along Myrtle Avenue
can identify the boundaries where these connections meet. Preserving the small-town feel of Monrovia
involves preserving a pedestrian-friendly environment. Residents value well-landscaped, secure, clean,
and human-scaled neighborhoods and business districts that accommodate walking. It is important to
provide linkages that connect neighborhoods to commercial services, mass transit, parks and open
spaces, and community centers. Development along South Myrtle Avenue should be pedestrian-oriented
to preserve this small-town environment and encourage pedestrian access along all of Myrtle Avenue.
Architecture
Myrtle’s charm is in its high-quality architecture that gives each building distinction. New development
along South Myrtle should reflect high quality design and use of materials, as well as human scale and
use.
Land Use Element                                -31 -

         Figure 4 - South Myrtle Avenue Corridor Urban Design Plan
Building Design
The community is proud of the diversity of architectural styles found in Monrovia’s buildings. To create a
distinctive South Myrtle Avenue that continues the tradition of high-quality design and distinctive
architecture, the City will require building facades and signage to reflect a human scale rather than auto
orientation. Architectural treatments should be extended to all elevations of the buildings (e.g., shutters,
multi-paned windows, belt courses, rock/brick/stone veneers, etc.).
Design Elements
Design elements help create identity and place. Design elements currently in use along Myrtle Avenue
include public art, street furniture, and landscaping. These elements should continue down to South
Myrtle Avenue to provide connection and creation of an attractive pedestrian environment.
Public Art
Public art should enhance the aesthetic and cultural quality throughout the community, provide
opportunities for public exposure to the visual arts, acknowledge our local artistic community, and inspire
pride and identity among community residents.
Land Use Element                                 -32 -

                                                   Street Furniture
                                                   Furnishing the public realm with street furniture can provide
                                                   moments of rest for pedestrians and allow room for passive
                                                   activities. Just as the furniture in interior spaces of our
                                                   homes and offices allows us to carry on activities, street
                                                   furniture on our streets will encourage more pedestrian
                                                   activity and add to the vitality of places like Myrtle Avenue.
                                                   Myrtle Avenue has an abundance of street furniture:
                                                   benches, street lamps, and water fountains, especially in the
                                                   downtown. Transit shelters and benches, trash enclosures,
                                                   and similar features should be placed along South Myrtle
                                                   Avenue consistent to those currently along the balance of
 Public Art                                        the corridor.
 Public Art can enhance the aesthetic and cultural
                                                   Landscaping and Landscaped Corridors
 quality throughout the community like the Mark    Landscaping within commercial areas and parking lots can
 Twain statue in Library Park.                     change the character of otherwise bland, asphalt-dominated
                                                   environments.            Requiring all new development to
incorporate thoughtful landscaping will make South Myrtle Avenue pedestrian-friendly, attractive, and
consistent with the landscaped character of Myrtle Avenue. Curb extensions, such as bulbouts at
intersections, can calm traffic and provide landscaping that beautifies our streets. In addition to bulbouts,
street crossings should have visible markings, appropriate curb-cuts for handicap access, and crossing
signals that allow ample time for crossing. Use of native plants and other drought-tolerant planting is
encouraged as part of public and private development. The undergrounding of utility lines also enhances
street aesthetics. Street trees offer many benefits: they provide shade and cooling effects, create beautiful
canopies, and soften the hard edges of urban development. Trees and landscaping have been a
significant part of Monrovia since its founding. The careful attention given to trees and landscaping over
the years is evident today in the appearance of streetscapes such as Myrtle Avenue. Mature trees line the
sides of the street and provide identity for the area, and indeed for the City as a whole.
Creating a Plan for South Myrtle
Avenue
Huntington Drive, east of Myrtle Avenue,
through thoughtful redevelopment has become
a major source of jobs to the City with office
business park environment. The City desires to
continue office development along South Myrtle
Avenue, but with emphasis on traditional
commercial design that would accommodate
professionals needing smaller office spaces.
This office environment will be enhanced by
landscaped open spaces such as courtyards,
plazas, and pocket parks, as well as ancillary
                                                            Street Trees
neighborhood commercial uses and limited, low-              Street trees offer many benefits: they provide shade and
                                                            cooling effects, create beautiful canopies, and soften the hard
intensity mixed-use housing for specific use by
                                                            edges of urban development. Trees and landscaping have
those working in the area.                                  been a significant part of Monrovia since its founding.
Land Use Element                                     -33 -
The Plan will allow for a transition of South Myrtle Avenue to a pedestrian-oriented environment that
connects residents from South Monrovia to the Downtown and to the business parks along Huntington
Drive. Goals and policies provide for these land uses, high-quality design and development, and
pedestrian orientation for South Myrtle Avenue
Planning Objectives
The following objectives are designed to achieve goals for South Myrtle Avenue:
         Encourage high-quality land use and compact development
         Encourage mixed-use development where appropriate
         Encourage a walkable environment that connects all portions of Myrtle Avenue
         Ensure the plans objectives are achieved by land use and urban design policy
Land Use and Neighborhood Creation
These objectives establish and define land use for the South Myrtle Avenue corridor and promote its
creation as a distinct neighborhood within the broader context of Myrtle Avenue.
Business Enterprise and Office/Research and Development/Light Manufacturing
Provide innovative offices spaces in proximity to transit and supporting retail to attract creative, incubator
businesses that benefit City residents and provide employment. Require creative and attractive open
space to be incorporated into development projects, as appropriate.
Neighborhood Commercial
Promote integration of ancillary neighborhood commercial development for use of office employees and
adjacent residents.
Mixed Use Commercial/Residential
Utilize limited mixed-use and ancillary commercial development to create unique and varied housing,
where appropriate.
Regional/Subregional Commercial
Plan for commercial uses that accommodate ground-floor restaurant and office development, enhance
the urban image of the Huntington/Myrtle intersection, and provide for public gathering spaces.
Recreation
Investigate and identify potential street closures along South Myrtle Avenue to provide pocket parks,
courtyards, and landscaped open spaces to be utilized by local employees and residents.
Distinct Neighborhood
Make South Myrtle Avenue a distinct neighborhood. Work with property owners and developers and the
Monrovia Chamber of Commerce to promote, preserve, and revitalize South Myrtle Avenue.
Land Use Element                                 -34 -

Urban Design
These objectives encourage the use of design elements throughout the public and private realms to
enhance the experience of those working along and visiting South Myrtle Avenue. The City values its
small-town character and seeks to enhance this by encouraging pedestrian-friendly design integrating the
elements described earlier in this section.
Community Character
Maintain and enhance South Myrtle Avenue’s unique character. Insist on excellence in architectural
design of new construction. Require public art as part of new development projects. Provide pedestrian
amenities; street trees and landscaped open spaces such as courtyards, plazas, and pocket parks;
pedestrian-scaled lighting; and transit shelters along South Myrtle Avenue.
Activity Nodes
Create activity nodes as important destination areas, with an emphasis on public life within the
community. Provide pedestrian amenities, traffic-calming features, plazas and public areas, attractive
streetscapes, shade trees, lighting, and neighborhood commercial uses at activity nodes.
Corridor/City Gateways and Entrances
Create distinctive gateways at all entry points into Monrovia. Encourage the use of public art, paved
crosswalks, and landscaping to mark entries into the City. Enhance and provide signage on South Myrtle
Avenue to promote way-finding along all of Myrtle Avenue. Establish thresholds and entryways to South
Myrtle Avenue that makes a positive impression of the neighborhood. Encourage the use of a variety of
native materials to demarcate thresholds and boundaries through a change in color, material, and texture.
Creating Connections and Linkages
Create a pedestrian and transit-friendly environment through urban design. Provide a minimum ten-foot
area for sidewalks. Require off-street parking to be located behind buildings. Provide street amenities
such as benches, waste receptacles, street lighting, street trees and landscaping in coordination with
transit stops to encourage pedestrian
activity. Provide vertical elements such as
street lighting and street trees to define
pedestrian space and the pedestrian
corridor to encourage movement along
South Myrtle Avenue.               Promote
walkability along South Myrtle Avenue to
and from transit centers and the
Downtown.        Provide pedestrian-safe
crossings through intersections with
traffic-calming    measures      such     as
flared/bulb-out sidewalks. Provide way-
finding signage to direct movement
along Myrtle Avenue toward Downtown
from the transit center. Provide pocket-
park, courtyard, and landscaped open            Connection under the I-210
spaces at potential street closures along
                                                Lighting and decorative treatments can provide a safe and aesthetically
Myrtle Avenue. Visually connect Myrtle
                                                attractive connection for pedestrians along Myrtle Avenue above and
Avenue above and below the 210                  below the I-210.
Freeway. Provide an aesthetic treatment
Land Use Element                                  -35 -

of the underpass that encourages pedestrian movement and safety. Make South Myrtle Avenue
comfortable, safe, accessible, and attractive for use day and night. Provide crosswalks and sidewalks that
are accessible for people with disabilities and people who are physically challenged. Encourage designs
and building layout that promote defensible spaces; discourage lengthy, blank walls. Provide lighting for
walking and nighttime activities, where appropriate. Provide transit shelters that are comfortable,
attractive, and accommodate transit riders.
Architecture
Promote community identity by encouraging context-sensitive design and development. Encourage a
variety of architectural styles for new and renovated structures that reflect local architectural traditions.
Require that new construction, additions, renovations, and infill developments be sensitive to the
neighborhood context and building forms and scale. Prohibit new and large structures that compromise
neighborhood quality.
Design Elements
Create distinctive places along Myrtle Avenue. Provide attractive street furniture and other public
improvements to communicate the City’s identity and pride. Provide benches, streetlights, public art, and
other amenities in public areas to attract pedestrian activities. Encourage new developments to
incorporate drought-tolerant and native landscaping that is pedestrian-friendly, attractive, and consistent
with the landscaped character of Monrovia.
Maintain design and development standards for signs including areas adjacent to the freeways that
recognize the main purpose of signs is to identify the establishment on the site. Encourage artistry,
human scale, and innovation in signs that improve the appearance of the buildings and on which they are
placed. Encourage a streetscape design program for building frontages along South Myrtle Avenue that
create vibrant places which support walking, bicycling, transit, and sustainable economic development.
Encourage the design and placement of buildings on lots to provide for pedestrian orientation. Ensure
that all new development projects are positive additions to Myrtle Avenue’s community setting, provide
amenities for the comfort of the employees such as outdoor seating area for breaks, lunch, and meetings,
and have adequate landscape buffers. Enhance Myrtle Avenue’s streetscapes by pursuing initiatives that
will facilitate the undergrounding of utilities.
Urban Form
The following standards apply to urban form for both private and public development along South Myrtle
Avenue. Standards for the private realm address building height, setback, modulation, street frontage,
and parking. Standards for the public realm identify a potential street width, right-of-way, street parking,
and street amenity scenario to maximize pedestrian access, linkage, and orientation.
                           South Myrtle Avenue Urban Form Standards – Private Realm
                          Intensity/       Building                          Setbacks
Land Use
                           Density          Height          Street                     Interior
                                           3 stories
                          0.75 to 2.0
Business Enterprise                      maximum or          10 ft                   0 ft to 20 ft
                             FAR
                                             50 ft.
Land Use Element                                    -36 -

Office/Research and                       2 stories
Development/Light        0.75 FAR      maximum or            10 ft                   0 ft to 20 ft
Manufacturing                               35 ft.
                                          2 stories
Neighborhood
                          0.5 FAR      maximum or            10 ft                   0 ft to 20 ft
Commercial
                                            35 ft.
                                          4 stories
Mixed-            Use     2.0 FAR
                                       maximum or            10 ft                   0 ft to 20 ft
Office/Residential      54 DU/AC
                                            60 ft.
Table 2 -South Myrtle Avenue – Private Realm Typical Block
South Myrtle Avenue – Public Realm Streetscape
South Myrtle Avenue – North of Huntington Drive to Olive Avenue
Providing a safe and attractive pedestrian corridor along South Myrtle Avenue to Old Town Monrovia and
the northern portion of Myrtle Avenue is a major objective. Streetscape improvements for South Myrtle
Avenue should include an expanded sidewalk with landscaping and street amenities that provide a buffer
from automobile traffic to create a safe, attractive environment that encourages pedestrian movement
along the entire length of Myrtle Avenue. Reflecting this change from a heavy auto-traveled thoroughfare
of South Myrtle Avenue to the pedestrian-focused environment of Old Town Monrovia, the number of
traffic lanes has been reduced to one 12-foot lane and one 8-foot parking lane in each direction. A 20-
foot sidewalk and buffer zone on the western side of the street will have trees planted at 30 feet on
center. Buildings are required to front the right-of-way with little to no setbacks.
Land Use Element                                 PAGE 40

       Section Drawing of South Myrtle Avenue Conceptual Streetscape Improvements North of
                                            Huntington Drive
South Myrtle Avenue – South of Huntington Drive
With a right-of-way of 94 feet and connecting Huntington Drive to 210 Freeway, South Myrtle Avenue is a
heavily traveled thoroughfare. Each side will have two 12-foot travel lanes and an eight-foot parking lane.
A 15 foot sidewalk and buffer zone will have trees planted at 30 feet on center. Buildings are required to
front the right-of-way with minimum 10 foot setbacks. To encourage pedestrian movement in a safe and
attractive environment along South Myrtle under the 210 Freeway, special underpass design features are
recommended utilizing wall artwork, such as murals, mosaics, and/or frescos with enhanced lighting, to
create an attractive environment that encourages pedestrian movement.
                     Conceptual Drawing of Typical Block for South Myrtle Avenue
 Section Drawing of South Myrtle Avenue Conceptual Streetscape improvements South of Huntington Drive
Land Use Element                              PAGE 41

West Huntington Drive Corridor
Huntington Drive’s proximity to the Foothill Freeway and
its function as a commercial corridor creates an ideal                   WEST HUNTINGTON DRIVE
location to expand commercial, retail, restaurants, and                           CORRIDOR
other regional and sub-regional commercial uses (see
                                                                              VISION STATEMENT
Figure 5, Project Site Map). The commercial businesses
along West Huntington Drive extend from the city of
                                                                   Expand the Commercial Corridor while
Arcadia to Monrovia’s Myrtle Avenue, where development
                                                                   preserving the character of the adjacent
transitions to business parks east of Myrtle Avenue.
                                                                   residential neighborhoods.
This commercial corridor draws local and regional
customers to a mix of retail stores, service businesses, hotels, and restaurants. The range of parcel sizes
along West Huntington Drive allows for regional, large-scale (“big box”) retailers on larger, deeper parcels,
as well as local neighborhood-serving retail on shallow lots. Expanding the development potential along
West Huntington Drive will create new retail opportunities in Monrovia while increasing tax revenue for
the City. Renovated commercial centers will enhance the public realm. Although this four-lane arterial
road is used primarily by motor vehicles, the sidewalks are lined with landscaped buffers and bus shelters
to accommodate transit users and pedestrians. The street has well-landscaped medians and a promenade
of street trees. The West Huntington Drive Corridor protects the north/south residential neighborhoods
from the negative impacts of a busy arterial roadway. Objectives to be achieved include:
          Maintain long-term economic viability by increasing commercial development opportunities
           along the corridor
          Preserve the character of adjacent residential neighborhoods
          Strive for high-quality architecture that reflects the City’s heritage
          Accommodate mixed use and higher density land use designation in specific areas along the
           corridor to accommodate large-scale retail users and to revitalize commercial shopping
           centers
          Integrate gathering areas with retail and commercial uses
Land Use
West Huntington Drive has served as a key retail corridor in Monrovia for many years. This is mainly due
to efforts of the Monrovia Redevelopment Agency, which assembled properties to create the Huntington
Oaks Shopping Center, Restaurant Row, and the newer hotel/retail uses that exist along West Huntington
Drive. There is no anticipated change in land use intensification with these developed parcels, which are
identified as sub-regional commercial uses. Development density will remain consistent with the
Commercial-Regional/Subregional land use classification for these parcels. However, the remaining
underutilized parcels have constraints to continued upgrades and redevelopment, including the shallow
depth on some parcels and ownership patterns.
To encourage a broader mix of uses along West Huntington Drive and to encourage private, quality re-
Land Use Element                                 PAGE 42

investment in properties, the land use designations within the Corridor allow for higher intensities of use.
Also, this section establishes design guidelines for new development. Provisions to encourage street-
oriented development, lot consolidation, and high-quality design have been added. The Land Use Plan
(see Figure 6) illustrates the land use designations for parcels within the Huntington Drive Corridor.
                                              Figure 5 – West Huntington Drive Planning Area
Land Use Element                                PAGE 43

                 Figure 6 – West Huntington Drive Land Use Map
Land Use Element                  PAGE 44

Urban Design
Urban design encompasses the scale, orientation, and architecture of site and building design in the
private and public realms. The following urban design guidelines for West Huntington Drive promote
high-quality development that focuses amenities and attractions at activity nodes, encourages outdoor
rooms and public spaces, and promote street-oriented buildings. Figure 7, Urban Design Plan identifies
urban design features to be implemented along West Huntington Drive.
                                                                                               Figure 7
Public Realm
People experience the public realm along Huntington Drive as pedestrians and drivers when they view the
street trees, wait in a bus shelter, walk along the sidewalk, and see how buildings relate to streets and
parking areas. Design elements within the public realm include activity nodes, City and corridor gateways,
enhanced pedestrian accommodations, landscaped corridors, pedestrian linkages and enhancements, and
open space opportunities.
Land Use Element                               PAGE 45
Activity Nodes
Activity nodes are areas where concentrated commercial, retail, and entertainment activities take place.
Successful activity nodes serve as major destinations that provide public gathering spaces and walkable
environments. The purpose of activity nodes is to strengthen the City’s economic vitality by attracting a
high volume of customers. Introducing strong activity nodes along West Huntington Drive will require
integration of public amenities and gathering spaces with commercial and retail uses. The following
elements will strengthen activity nodes along Huntington Drive:
         Outdoor seating at restaurants and retail stores
         Public art and street furniture
         Pavement and hardscape treatments to identify public plazas
         Outdoor plazas surrounded by retail and commercial uses
Gateways
Gateways announce arrival and create an immediate impression of the community. In Monrovia,
gateways are appropriate where major streets cross municipal boundaries and at freeway ramps. Corridor
gateways announce transition from the retail uses west of Myrtle Avenue to high technology uses east of
Myrtle Avenue. The City’s Art in Public places ordinance could be used along the Corridor to express local
history and improve the gateway design.
Landscaped Corridors
Landscaped corridors are highly visible components of the cityscape. Attractive street medians and
landscaped commercial edges along Huntington Drive enhance the visual quality of an otherwise auto-
dominated corridor and function as an extension of the community open space network. While West
Huntington Drive functions as a heavily traveled, automobile-oriented street, pedestrian amenities such as
covered bus stops and landscaped commercial edges contribute to a walkable and human-scale
environment. Use of native plants and other drought-tolerant planting is encouraged as part of public
and private development. The undergrounding of utility lines also enhances street aesthetics. Unifying
street trees offers many benefits: they provide shade and cooling effects, create beautiful canopies, and
soften the hard edges of urban development.
Linkages
Just behind the commercial development along West Huntington Drive are many residential
neighborhoods, and local residents should have the ability to walk to shops and services along the
boulevard. Pedestrian linkages from the neighborhoods and between/among uses along West
Huntington Drive can create easy access to sidewalks, outdoor spaces, building entrances, and parking
facilities. Linkages are an especially important component of urban villages and activity nodes, where a
well-connected and engaging pedestrian environment can encourage people to walk rather than make
short car trips. Require connections providing visual cues to pedestrians and drivers such as colorful and
well-marked crosswalks and pathways, and signage scaled for walkers. Pedestrian linkages can be
enhanced through change in materials along pedestrian paths, physically defined boundaries, proper
nighttime lighting, entryway design, and buffers from vehicular traffic. Specific access and linkage
elements along West Huntington Drive may include wider sidewalks, separate and distinct entryways and
paths for pedestrians from parking areas to commercial stores and on-site signage. All new development
will be reviewed to ensure such features are incorporated.
When people walk, they should feel safe and comfortable and be provided with places to rest. Street
furniture such as benches and street lamps are easy but critical enhancements. All street furniture —
Land Use Element                               PAGE 46

including trash receptacles — can exhibit an integrated design that incorporates local architectural styles
and neighborhood-specific features. Examples of great street furniture can be found along Myrtle Avenue
in Old Town and within the City’s parks. A broader-based, consistent theme can be established to tie
together the blocks between the western City boundary and Myrtle Avenue.
Bus/transit shelters encourage transit use and provide an opportunity to enliven the streetscape through
design. Integration of design with elements of public art, landscaping, and architecture will enhance the
district. Landscaped containers and shelters planted with clinging vines accent both the bus shelter and
the street.
West Huntington Drive – Public Realm
With a right-of-way at 100 feet and four lanes of travel for vehicles, Huntington Drive is a heavily used
arterial road. While changes are not proposed to the lanes, a minimum building setback of 10 feet is
recommended to accommodate wider sidewalks and outdoor rooms. Built structures, instead of surface
parking are encouraged along West Huntington Drive.
Private Realm
Urban Spaces
Urban spaces include publicly accessible plazas, courtyards, and similar outdoor spaces where people can
gather formally or informally. These spaces are especially appropriate within identified activity nodes. As
well-defined outdoor rooms, they may accommodate public gatherings and celebrations, or serve as
retreats from urban activity.
Landmarks
Landmarks are highly recognizable buildings, structures, and landscape features. As such, they become
powerful orienting devices that help define the City, a district, or a neighborhood. Key elements such as
the tall hotel buildings or architecturally unique new developments function as landmarks along
Huntington Drive.
Uses along Frontage
To encourage pedestrian activity and maintain a strong retail tax base, the City will require retail and
dining uses along the ground level of all parcels fronting West Huntington Drive. Street facades that
incorporate transparent windows and doors with variations in elevation will be encouraged.
Buffer from Residential Uses
All development adjacent to or facing residential neighborhoods shall be designed to preserve the quality
of life in these neighborhoods through site and building design, with buffer as necessary to mitigate any
negative impacts. Incompatible or unattractive ancillary uses such as loading, storage, and parking shall
be bordered or screened with landscaping, fencing, or decorative walls. Residential yard privacy shall be
protected.
Mixed Use
Mixed-use designation at the westernmost end of West Huntington Drive will create a small “village”.
Mixed-use development will support the principal activity nodes along West Huntington Drive and aid the
transformation of warehouses and storage uses and underutilized parcels to unique entertainment, retail
commercial and residential opportunities. Special consideration of the 210 Freeway, the Gold Line rail
line, and access must be paid attention in site design. Also, to link this mixed use area to uses to the east,
Land Use Element                               PAGE 47

the pedestrian experience must be enhanced through the 210 Freeway underpass.
Building Form
The scale of buildings along Huntington Drive consists of groups of large, boxy structures set back
substantially from the street – typical of commercial construction approaches of the 1980s and 1990s.
Smaller, individual buildings dating to the 1950s are pulled to the front and side lot lines, with parking
provided to the rear. Addressing architecture from a scale of the arterial
road includes analysis of not only the architectural style, material, and
color, but the site plan, scale, landscape design, and the building’s overall
appropriateness to the urban fabric.
For properties designated Retail Corridor Commercial, the scale of the
buildings will consist of one- to three-story buildings that step down to
match height and width of buildings in residential neighborhoods. For
                                                                                       Landscaped Walls
properties designated Retail Corridor Mixed Use, the scale of new
development will be based on compatibility with surrounding                    Landscaped walls and fences screen
development factors such as building height and massing. Building              parking and loading areas from public
design facing West Huntington Drive can consist of either smaller,             view.
pedestrian-scale structures or larger structures. However, any new large-
scale buildings must be designed to allow visual penetration into the building through the use of windows
and entryways, and facades must be articulated with functional design elements, entrances with awnings,
and other defining features clearly visible from West Huntington Drive. Buildings will be set back to the
extent needed to allow wider sidewalks and adequate parkways between sidewalks and building frontage.
Wherever possible, public plazas and gathering spaces will be provided to attract customers.
Walls and Fences
Walls and fences generally are used to define boundaries and provide security. In developments located
along and near West Huntington Drive, fences and walls will serve more limited functions, such as
retaining walls and to distinguish private properties from public areas. Any new walls separating
commercial and residential areas must consist of decorative materials and landscape screening that
integrates with the overall design theme of the site.
Planning Objectives
Land Use Objectives
New Commercial Uses
Encourage the establishment of new commercial businesses that complement established large-scale
retail developments, hotels, and restaurants along West Huntington Drive.
        Encourage clustered approaches to development that incorporate extensive landscaping and
         subterranean parking or parking located behind buildings.
        Require design review for commercial uses to ensure appropriate architecture, access, setbacks,
         building articulation, materials, landscaping, pedestrian amenities, and linkages with nearby
         activity centers.
        Require new construction to fully fund any construction or expansion of supporting infrastructure.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 48

       Encourage specialized commercial stores on shallow lots, and require new developments to
        consider the scale and architectural of adjacent residential parcels.
       Improve visibility and street presence to strengthen commercial viability of retail businesses along
        Huntington Drive.
       Facilitate development of commercial uses between Primrose and Myrtle Avenues that provide
        destinations for local employees and residents, and that incorporate outdoor gathering places.
       Create an activity node by redesign of Alta Vista Avenue between Cypress Avenue and
        Huntington Drive.
Protect Residential Neighborhoods
     Preserve the character of residential neighborhoods behind the West Huntington Drive corridor
        by ensuring that new development respects privacy, avoids traffic intrusion, and mitigates any
        anticipated adverse effects.
       Promote neighborhood identity and conservation of individual neighborhood character.
Mixed Use Development
     Utilize mixed-use development approaches to create varied housing types and densities at Fifth
        Avenue and Huntington Drive.
       Accommodate a range of housing densities and residential building types, including non-
        traditional forms such as housing over retail, lofts, and live-work accommodations.
       Facilitate the transition of aging industrial properties and underutilized into horizontal or vertically
        mixed use development, with emphasis on commercial uses on parcels fronting Huntington Drive.
       Develop and apply standards specific to areas designated on the Land Use Plan as mixed-use to
        ensure compatibility among different land uses.
Industrial Uses
     Allow the development of light industrial uses that provide jobs and do not cause negative
        impacts in terms of noise, odor, traffic, hazardous materials, and pollution.
Urban Design Objectives
Residential
     Facilitate the development of residential developments that may buffer commercial uses from
        adjacent low-density residential neighborhoods.
       New residential developments facing established residential neighborhoods shall match the
        dominant scale, entryway orientation, setback, and fenestration patterns to preserve the character
        of the residential neighborhood.
Retail Corridor Commercial
Land Use Element                                PAGE 49

       Maximize utilization of commercial sites along West Huntington Drive by encouraging compact
        site design and street-oriented buildings.
       Parking structures within public view shall be aesthetically enhanced with landscaping and
        architectural details that blend with the design features of other buildings on site. Large blank
        walls are specifically prohibited.
       Shared parking shall be encouraged to provide the most efficient use of space. Shared parking
        shall be considered as long as it meets current parking requirements.
       Require that public gathering spaces and outdoor rooms be integral parts of retail development
        at activity nodes along West Huntington Drive.
Retail Corridor Mixed Use
    Require that buildings be organized around courtyards and open spaces with abundant
        landscaping and pedestrian linkages.
       Provide prominent visual and physical pedestrian connections between the retail, office,
        residential, and parking components of mixed-use developments.
Urban Design Objectives – General
    Ensure safe and convenient pedestrian movement and connections along West Huntington Drive
        and within commercial developments.
       Require that new developments and substantial renovation of developments provide for well-
        marked, well-lit, attractive, and safe pedestrian walkways from parking areas to buildings and
        between buildings on the site.
       Require pronounced entryways for cars and pedestrians along West Huntington Drive.
       Encourage the use of public art, rest stops,
        and public gathering spaces as part of
        new development projects.
       Encourage the use of varied native
        materials to demarcate thresholds and
        boundaries through change in color,
        material, and texture.
       Encourage artistry and innovation in signs
        that improve the appearance of the
        buildings and neighborhoods in which
        they are placed.
       Reduce vast surface parking lots by
        encouraging shared parking, structures          Encourage Public Open Space
        and subterranean parking.
                                                        Create public gathering spaces as part of new development
                                                        projects.
Land Use Element                               PAGE 50

Urban Design Objectives - Public Realm
      Revitalize and enhance the West Huntington
       Drive corridor into a place that supports
       walking and transit.
      Provide crosswalks and sidewalks that are
       accessible for people with disabilities and who
       are physically challenged.
      Encourage designs and building layout that
       promote defensible spaces.
      Provide bus shelters at all transit stops along
       Huntington Drive.
      Improve design elements within the public            Benches
       realm to strengthen local identity and enhance
                                                            Sheltered benches become valuable rest stops and
       overall aesthetic quality.                           gathering places for pedestrians.
      Provide attractive street furniture and other public improvements to communicate the City’s
       identity and pride.
      Facilitate the widening of sidewalks and landscaped setbacks by using a portion of City parkway
       and by increasing building setbacks.
      Create a distinctive gateway at the City’s western entry point.
      Provide a gateway sign to announce the entrance to the high-technology corridor east of
       Primrose Avenue.
      Use of public art, paved crosswalks, and landscaping to mark entries into the City.
Urban Design Guidelines - Private Realm
      Promote community identity and local history by encouraging context-sensitive design and
       development.
      Strengthen neighborhood identity with new development that is architecturally compatible with
       surrounding structures and that reflect local architectural characteristics.
      Require all new developments to incorporate high-quality design in terms of architectural styles,
       building materials, development patterns, and scale of existing buildings.
      Do not permit blank walls: require ample use of windows and doors to make building fronts
       “permeable”.
Land Use Element                              PAGE 51

Station Square Transit Village: Vision Statement and Objectives
In anticipation of the arrival of the Metro Gold Line light rail,
the City identified the area south of the 210 Freeway as an                   STATION SQUARE
opportunity to encourage transit-oriented development that                    TRANSIT VILLAGE
could serve as a model for transit development in southern
California. Station Square Transit Village boundaries are
                                                                            VISION STATEMENT
Magnolia Avenue to the west, Evergreen Avenue to the north,            A Dynamic,     Mixed-Use, Transit-Oriented
Shamrock Avenue to the east, and Duarte Road to the south              Community
(see Figure 8, Project Site Map).
                                       Figure 8 – Project Site Map
South Myrtle Avenue serves as a gateway to the Station Square Transit Village planning area and also
connects the proposed development with Old Town Monrovia and the West Huntington Drive retail
corridor and the High Tech Corridor on East Huntington Drive. Over time, Station Square Transit Village is
envisioned to become a mixed use district designed to encourage strong pedestrian connections, ground
floor commercial, open space, high density office, research and development, hospitality and a mixture of
residential uses.
The City’s General Plan is the primary planning document that will implement the vision outlined for the
Station Square Transit Village. The City’s key objective in establishing the Station Square Transit Village is
to provide flexibility in land use types, location, and intensities that will allow development to respond to
changes in the marketplace over time.
These provisions establish land use mechanisms and urban design principles that will allow individual
development projects to move forward consistent with goals and objectives established for Station
Square Transit Village.
Land Use Element                                 PAGE 52

 The site’s proximity to the 210 Freeway provides visibility and accessibility, a condition highly suitable for
various types of uses and development. The Land Use Plan (see Figure 9) establishes the Planned
Development-Area 12 (PD-12) as the land use designation for the Station Square Transit Village.            The
development guidelines for PD-12 (“PD-12 Development Guidelines”) are designed to be flexible to
respond to the market demands for both commercial and residential. The PD-12 Development Guidelines,
which begin on page 78, provide specific direction within a neighborhood context.
                   Figure 9 – Station Square Transit Village Land Use Map
Planning Objectives
All uses and buildings proposed for Station Square Transit Village at the time of development must be
designed in conformance with the General Objectives, Land Use Objectives, and Urban Design Objectives
below (collectively, the “Planning Objectives”), and the PD-12 Development Guidelines. The combination
of the Planning Objectives and the PD-12 Development Guidelines provide a flexible design framework
and general criteria that will guide designers and developments, and which the City of Monrovia will use
to evaluate development proposals within the Station Square Transit Village.
Land Use Element                               PAGE 53

General Objectives
      Encourage transit-oriented development, but not transit-dependent development.
      Create comprehensive public improvements that enhance the public right-of-way with landscaping and
       where appropriate or possible, median strips, bike lanes, pedestrian ways, and other modes of transportation.
      Maximize the use of roadway infrastructure to the maximum extent possible and provide new roadways as
       needed to enhance internal circulation.
      Encourage a diverse mix of housing in terms of affordability, tenure, density range and architectural styles
       that responds to changing market demands over time and that meets the needs of all income groups.
      Encourage much-needed space for the growth of incubator business enterprises.
      Encourage a range of uses that do not compete with businesses and the economic success of Old Town
       Monrovia. Encourage uses that meet the needs of local residents and employees.
      Position Monrovia as a competitive market for hotel demands.
      Create parks and open spaces that serve as outdoor gathering spaces for passive and active recreation for
       residents and visitors and ensure that the Transit Village includes parks, plazas, and community gathering
       places that complement the inter-modal facility and the surrounding land uses. Public open space shall be
       maintained at a ratio of at least 3.0 acres per 1,000 residents.
      Rehabilitate the historic Santa Fe Depot to complement the Metro Gold Line light rail station and Station
       Square.
      Provide adequate parking in attractive structures that complement the architecture and landscaping of
       accompanying development. Coordinate with developers and explore shared parking and other creative
       parking solutions to provide adequate parking that meets the needs of residents, employees, and visitors in
       this transit-oriented area; results in successful developments; and does not create parking impacts in
Land   Use Objectives
       surrounding   residential neighborhoods.
The City’s key objective in establishing the Monrovia Station Square Transit Village Planned Development
Area is to provide flexibility in land use types and intensities that will allow future development to respond
to changes in the marketplace over time. The PD-12 Development Guidelines identify the following
neighborhoods of Station Square Transit Village and provide guidelines responding to the existing
development patterns.
      Residential Neighborhoods. These two neighborhoods on East Evergreen Avenue and East
         Pomona Avenue, and West Evergreen Avenue are primarily developed as single family. The
         PD-12 Development Guidelines allow for graduated residential densities based on lot size.
      Hamby Park. An industrial condominium complex at the southeast corner of Pomona and
         Primrose Avenues that will continue to provide space for small businesses and also allow for
         opportunities for incidental retail of products produced on site.
      Station Square North. This area includes the Park and Ride Lot, Station Square open space
         (including the historic depot), Metro Gold Line parking structure and a site for high density
         residential directly adjacent to Gold Line station.
      Station Square South. This area (south of the Gold Line ROW) is a mix of commercial and
         industrial uses. The PD-12 Development Guidelines encourage the transition of the area to mixed
         use, high density residential and/or commercial uses.
Land Use Element                                    PAGE 54

        Western and Eastern Gateways. Flanking either side of Myrtle Avenue, just south of the Foothill
         Freeway (I-210), this area is a mix of commercial and light industrial buildings. As the northern
         entry point into Station Square Transit Village, the PD-12 Development Guidelines encourages a
         mix of commercial uses and “signature architecture” to provide an entry statement at the north
         anchor of Station Square.
        Industrial Neighborhoods. This area is primarily on the east side of Myrtle Avenue, but includes
         the industrial block on the north side of West Pomona Avenue, and consists of mostly older but
         established industrial uses. The PD-12 Development Guidelines reinforce the importance of
         industrial uses in maintaining a varied economy by identifying legal industrial in these
         neighborhoods as conforming. Incentives for commercial/industrial densification are provided to
         encourage redevelopment. Mixed uses that include a residential component may occur in
         appropriate locations.
        Gold Line Operations Campus. This area is the easternmost block of Station Square Transit
         Village that contains the Gold Line facility as well as a remaining privately owned industrial parcel.
Through the use of specific plans and other zoning entitlement mechanisms, future development in
Station Square Transit Village will be based on the following development parameters, which establish
maximum caps and minimum requirements for various types of development in Station Square Transit
Village (Area PD-12) on an area-wide basis:
       Table 3 Summary of Station Square Transit Village Land Uses
       Table 3 Summary of Land Uses
       Land Use                                      Maximum/Minimum Parameters
       Residential                                   1,400 units – minimum
                                                     3,600 units - maximum
       Commercial                                    150,000 square feet - maximum
       Office; Light Manufacturing; Research         The combined square footage of all four potential
       & Development; METRO Gold Line                uses is not to exceed 850,000 square feet.
       Support Facilities
       Hospitality
       - Hotel Rooms                                 271 hotel rooms – maximum
       - Ancillary Facilities                        45,800 square feet
       Open Space                                    4.35 acres minimum area-wide;
                                                     Ratio of 3.0 acres per 1,000 new residents
       Transit Station Parking                       Parking to be provided per Gold Line Agreement
       Parking – All Others                          Per Municipal Code or shared parking
                                                     agreements and/or parking demand analysis
Land Use Element                                PAGE 55

Urban Design Objectives
The Urban Design Objectives address the visual quality of future development within the Station Square
Transit Village planning area.
Urban Spaces
Urban spaces include publicly accessible plazas, courtyards, and similar outdoor spaces that form a vital
component of a community’s public life. As well-defined outdoor rooms, they may accommodate public
gatherings and celebrations, or serve as retreats from urban activity. Urban spaces will be provided as
part of the transit station and surrounding uses, as well as integral to hotel development and larger
attached residential developments.
Landmarks
Landmarks are highly recognizable buildings, structures, or landscape features. As such, they become
powerful orienting devices that help define the City, a district, and a neighborhood. Historically significant
buildings and structures such as the Santa Fe depot serve as community landmarks and will be preserved
and protected from incompatible development. New buildings along Myrtle Avenue and directly visible
from the 210 Freeway must include architectural elements and design approaches to create future
landmarks.
Residential Buffer
All development located adjacent to or facing residential neighborhoods shall be designed to preserve
quality of life in neighborhoods through site and building design, and shall provide buffers to mitigate
any adverse impacts. To protect the visual quality of residential areas and guard against noise,
incompatible or unattractive uses such as loading, storage, and parking shall be bordered or covered with
landscaping, fencing, or decorative walls.
General Design Guidelines
New development shall be designed to minimize massing and provide for articulation and design variety
through elements such as:
   Buildings that include pedestrian-scaled detail, articulation and craftsmanship of the façade
   Rooflines that emphasize and accentuate significant elements of the building such as entries, bays,
    and balconies
   Building planes, facades, and architectural details that create visual interest at the street level (e.g.,
    staggering the frontage of the building, recessing doors and windows, providing awnings and
    canopies for weather protection and scale, and visually extending interior spaces outside through
    paving and glazing to create the concept of an indoor/outdoor room, etc.)
   Provide relief and variation in both the vertical and horizontal plane with recessed and/or projected
    areas
   Windows on upper floors shall be recessed and proportioned and placed in relation to grouping of
    storefronts or other windows or elements of the base floor
   Support a street-oriented development pattern with buildings located at or near the sidewalk edge.
    Mixed-use structures should be a component of main street commercial development and other
Land Use Element                              PAGE 56

    areas where pedestrian activity is strongly encouraged.
   Development should provide easily identifiable pedestrian access to structure entrances and key areas
    within the site from the street, sidewalk, parking areas, and bus stops.
Urban Design Objectives: by Land Use
In addition to the above Urban Design Objectives, the following provide more detailed direction based on
specific land uses.
Mixed Use
        Rely on neighborhood-serving ground floor commercial space with frequent sidewalk entrances
         to promote pedestrian activity along the street.
        Include communal and private open space areas for the residents in the Station Square Transit
         Village.
        Make ground floor commercial uses visually distinct from the residential or office space above.
        Dwelling units should exhibit a residential character, and residential entrances should present
         differently than entrances to ground-floor commercial uses.
        Residential components should incorporate upper floor balconies, bays, and windows that
         overlook the street and enliven the street elevation.
Residential Multi-family
        Require developers to reduce the bulk of multi-family buildings by introducing variation in façade
         and height.
        Building facades should be articulated to portray a domestic scale and give identity to individual
         dwelling units.
        Encourage inclusion of private outdoor space be provided for each dwelling unit. Private open
         space may include patios, terraces, and well-sized balconies.
        Building entrances should be well-defined and oriented towards the street.
Office
        Organize office developments around shared courts, quadrangles, and greens. Multiple paths
         should connect on-site buildings and uses, transit stops, and public sidewalks.
        Office buildings should provide ground-floor interest, transparency, and openness, especially
         views into lobbies.
        Require building design to display individual character and identity, including a highly visible
         main entrance. Architecture must be of the highest quality in terms of materials and design.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 57

Commercial
      Establish an especially strong relationship between buildings and the street.
      Encourage incidental outdoor uses such as outdoor seating at restaurants.
      Achieve overall architectural coherence by requiring minimal setbacks at storefronts, matching
       window and door patterns, and a frequent rhythm of store entrances along the street.
Parking
    Parking structures and lots will be built to match the architecture and landscape design provided
       in accompanying development.
      Parking structures, where provided, shall have other uses wrapped along the ground level, or shall
       be extensively treated with architectural and landscape elements to disguise the actual use.
       Where street level uses are not economically feasible at parking structures, or where location
       would limit viability of such uses, the ground-level façade shall be designed with articulated
       fenestrations and landscaped to enhance the level of architectural interest along ground-level.
      Parking areas shall be designed to minimize conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      Surface parking shall be limited. However, where surface parking lots are provided, they shall be
       located away from the main street, or screened with extensive landscaping such as rows of trees
       and landscaped along property edges with raised planters. All surface parking shall provide
       special paved areas for pedestrian circulation and canopy trees provided throughout the lot for
       shade. Podium, subterranean, or parking behind buildings shall be strongly encouraged to
       minimize the visual impact of parking and to maximize a street-oriented development pattern.
      Where surface parking occurs, landscaped islands shall be provided to reduce the parking lot
       expanse. Such islands shall be large enough to accommodate tree growth. Extensive plantings
       shall be provided to screen views of the parking lot from sidewalks and adjacent properties.
Land Use Element                              PAGE 58

Planned Development Areas
In 1980, the first Planned Development (PD) Areas were established throughout the City. These were
areas that for a variety of reasons were in need of special development guidelines. Areas that receive the
PD designation generally have a mixture of land uses and/or conditions that make it difficult to apply the
more general development standards in the Zoning Ordinance. Over the past few decades, PD areas have
proven to be a very effective planning tool. This section provides a description of the PD areas in
Monrovia. A list of the PD areas is provided below.
Planned Development Areas
PD Area 1          Mountain View/Ocean View/Valley View Area
PD Area 2          East Foothill Boulevard/Wildrose Area
PD Area 3          Monterey/Chestnut Area
PD Area 4          Highway Esplanade/Parker Neighborhood
PD Area 5          Downtown
PD Area 5a         Colorado Commons
PD Area 6          Royal Oaks Drive
PD Area 7          Area Northeast of Huntington Drive/Mountain Avenue
PD Area 8          West Huntington Drive/Southside
PD Area 9/9a       California Avenue between Cypress and Central
PD Area 10/10a     Auto Center
PD Area 11         Diamond St./El Dorado/Encino/Alamitas Avenues
PD Area 12         Station Square Transit Village
PD Area 13         Shamrock to Mountain/Manufacturing Area (Home Depot)
PD Area 14         El Norte Avenue
PD Area 15         Area southwest of Peck Road/Duarte Road Intersection
PD Area 16         Peck Road/Myrtle Avenue
PD Area 17         El Sur/Atara Street Area
PD Area 18         Jeffries at Peck Road
PD Area 19         Novice Lane Area
PD Area 20         Valley Circle
PD Area 21         Peck Road Specific Plan
PD Area 22         Peck Road Dump Site
PD Area 23         Walnut/Royal Oaks Double Frontage Lots
PD Area 23a        805 South Shamrock Avenue
PD Area 24         Poppy/Shamrock
PD Area 25a/b      Monrovista/California/Duarte Road
PD Area 26         311 West Foothill Boulevard-Aztec Hotel
Land Use Element                               PAGE 59
AREA PD-1: Mountain View/Ocean View/Valley View Area:                      This residential area represents
predominantly single-family development on larger than the average sized lot. Most of the lots are 50
feet x 200 feet (10,000 square feet) and several are improved with older period homes. These homes are
well-maintained, mostly Craftsman and Mediterranean Spanish style, and add to the overall ambience of
the area. In addition, there are also several very mature oak trees throughout the neighborhood.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 1:
1.  The RM development standards shall apply with a maximum density of one unit per 4,000 square feet
    of land area and an F.A.R. of 35%.
2. Oak trees 10 inches in diameter or greater measured at 2 feet above the level ground shall not be
    removed without the permission of the approving body, Development Review Committee
    (DRC)/Planning Commission (PC), and shall be depicted on all site plans submitted.
3. A licensed arborist shall be required when new development occurs adjacent to oak trees and shall
    recommend appropriate measures for adequate protection..
4. If a new unit(s) is added to an already improved property, the new construction shall be architecturally
    compatible with the residence(s) on the lot. This review shall include, but not be limited to: siding,
    roof pitch and overhang, window sizes and shapes, and predominant architectural details, such as
    porches, cornices, and bay windows.
5. Preservation and retention of the older period homes (pre 1940s) shall be encouraged and slight
    deviations from development standards (i.e.; yard size, building separation, unit size) may be used by
    the DRC/PC to help establish minor exemption and/or variance findings. The DRC/PC must determine
    that the preservation and retention of the older period home outweighs its elimination and the
    deviations do not make a less desirable development.
6. Minimum lot size and dimensions shall be as follows:
     South side of Ocean View Avenue– 9,000 square feet, 50 feet x 180 feet
     All other lots – 10,000 square feet, 50 feet x 200 feet
7. No lot consolidations shall be allowed if lot size is increased to allow more than two units on a lot.
8. Older period homes (pre 1940s) which demonstrate the architectural style of a specific period, if
    substandard in size shall not be required to be increased to the minimum unit size if it is retained as
    part of a development.
9. Front-loading and side-loading attached garages visible to the street shall be considered only if it is
    determined that the quality of design outweighs any negative impact and there is no other location
    on the site a garage could be better located.
10. The “Maximum House Size” chart in the Zoning Ordinance for the RL (Residential Low Density) and RE
    (Residential Estate) Zone may be used if a single-family residence is constructed or an existing single-
    family residence is enlarged. This will allow a larger house in place of adding units on a lot.
11. Except for second units approved pursuant to Chapter 17.44.160, of the Monrovia Municipal Code, all
    units shall be detached. Rear units shall be restricted to single-story construction.
12. All new single-family homes and in multiple residential projects units closest to the street shall have
    street facing entries.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 60

Land Use Element PAGE 6
AREA PD-2: East Foothill Boulevard Area including Wildrose between Canyon Boulevard and
Shamrock Avenue: This area has an old Monrovia atmosphere although there is multiple-family, non-
conforming offices, a church parking lot, and mortuary intruding into a predominantly residential area.
Since the neighborhood was mainly built before 1930, there is a predominance of Craftsman structures in
addition to some examples of Spanish Colonial Revival, Mediterranean, Colonial Revival, cottage, and
vernacular architecture.
The following development standards apply to PD Area 2:
1.  For the area along Foothill Boulevard the RM development standards shall apply with a maximum
    density of one unit per 2,500 square feet of land area and an F.A.R. of 40%.
2.  For the area along Foothill Boulevard, the existing non-conforming businesses shall be permitted one
    wall-mounted sign or one awning sign, and one monument sign subject to the following
    specifications:
    a. A wall-mounted sign shall not exceed 3% of the total wall face.
    b. An awning sign shall be restricted to the business name and street numbers on the valance, and
         shall not exceed 50% of the valance width and the lettering shall not exceed 66% of the valance
         height, and limited to a maximum of 18 inches.
    c. A monument sign shall have a maximum height of 4’ (maximum base height, if proposed, shall
         not exceed 1’ and shall be included as part of the overall 4’ height limit) and a maximum sign face
         of 3’ high by 4’ wide.
    d. Materials shall be wood, wrought iron, or materials that are determined to be compatible with the
         historic nature of the neighborhood.
    e. Signs shall not be interior lit and indirect lighting may be considered based on potential impact to
         neighboring residential properties.
3.   The DRC shall review and approve all signs.
4.  The area along Wildrose Avenue between Canyon Boulevard and Shamrock Avenue the RM
    development standards shall apply with a maximum density of 3,500 square feet per unit and an
    F.A.R. of 40%.
5.  Oak trees 10 inches in diameter or greater measured at 2 feet above the level ground shall not be
    removed without the permission of the approving body DRC/PC and shall be depicted on all site
    plans submitted.
6.  A licensed arborist shall be required when new development occurs adjacent to oak trees and shall
    recommend appropriate measures for adequate protection.
7.  If a new unit(s) is added to an already improved property, the new construction shall be
    architecturally compatible with the residence(s) on the lot. This review shall include, but not be
    limited to: siding, roof pitch and overhang, window sizes and shapes, and predominant architectural
    details, such as porches, cornices, and bay windows.
8.  Preservation and retention of the older period homes (pre 1940s) shall be encouraged and slight
    deviations from development standards (i.e.; yard size, building separation, unit size) may be used by
    the DRC/PC to help establish minor exemption and/or variance findings. The DRC/PC must
    determine that the preservation and retention of the older period home outweighs its elimination
Land Use Element                                PAGE 62

    and the deviations do not make a less desirable development.
9. The houses on Foothill Boulevard and Wildrose Avenue between Canyon Boulevard and California
    Avenue exemplify the architecture and historical flavor that is being encouraged. New construction
    shall incorporate some features of these houses, for example, similar roof pitches, siding, window
    detail, the use of river rock or other typical masonry techniques, or large beam construction. The
    new buildings shall sufficiently blend with these homes to enhance and reinforce the integrity and
    feeling of the neighborhood.
10. No lot consolidations shall be allowed if lot size is increased to allow more than two units on a lot.
11. Front-loading and side-loading garages visible to the street shall not be permitted.
12. Older period homes (pre 1940’s) which demonstrate the architectural style of a specific period, if
    substandard in size shall not be required to be increased to the minimum unit size if it is retained as
    part of a development.
13. Except for second units approved pursuant to Chapter 17.44.160, of the Monrovia Municipal Code,
    all units shall be detached. Rear units shall be restricted to single-story construction.
14. All new single-family homes and in multiple residential projects units closest to the street shall have
    street facing entries.
                                        Planned Development Area 2
Land Use Element                               PAGE 63

AREA PD-3: Monterey/Chestnut Area: Bounded by Chestnut Avenue on the north, the Freeway
Overpass on the west, and Monterey Avenue on the east: Much of this area is developed with uses related
to the World Vision International operation. Uses in this area include offices, warehouses, manufacturing
operations and temporary residences found in the World Vision complex. The area also contains several
apartment developments on Monterey Avenue.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 3:
 1.  A planned office/business park area will be encouraged. All uses shall be compatible with adjacent
     uses in the area particularly the surrounding residential uses.
2.   Heavy Industrial uses shall not be permitted.
3.    Permit residential Planned Unit Development consisting of detached single family homes on land,
      fronting Monterey Avenue, and across the street from the residential neighborhoods of King and
      Maple Avenues. The Residential Medium Density (RM 3500) development standards shall apply.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 64
AREA PD-4 - Highway Esplanade/Parker Neighborhood: This area exhibits the integrity of a single
family neighborhood although many second units exist. The area's cohesion is defined by the
predominance of Craftsman bungalows and Spanish Colonial Revival bungalows, therefore the need for
their preservation, as well as the retention of the original street lamps and significant stands of specimen
trees.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 4:
1.  The RM development standards shall apply with a maximum density of one unit per 3,500 square feet
    of land area and an F.A.R. of 35%.
2.  Preservation and retention of the older period homes (pre 1940’s) shall be encouraged and slight
    deviations from development standards (i.e.; yard size, building separation, unit size) may be used by
    the DRC/PC to help establish minor exception and/or variance findings. The DRC/PC must determine
    that the preservation and retention of the older period home outweighs its elimination and the
    deviations do not make a less desirable development.
3.  If new units are proposed or substantial redevelopment of an existing property is proposed, the new
    construction shall be architecturally compatible with the residence(s) on the lot and new development
    shall follow the existing pattern in the area:
    a. A predominant, detached unit in the front.
    b. Front porches shall be included.
    c. Review shall include, but not be limited to: siding, roof pitch and overhang, window sizes and
         shapes, and predominant architectural details, such as porches, cornices, and bay windows.
4.  Existing period street lamps shall be retained. No modern street fixtures shall be used.
5.  No lot consolidations shall be allowed if lot size is increased to allow more than two units on a lot.
6.  No units shall face or have vehicular access from Chestnut Avenue.
7.  Property lines adjacent to Chestnut Avenue shall be “rear” property lines and setbacks shall be applied
    accordingly. Accessory structures in the rear yards shall be setback a minimum of 3 feet from rear
    property lines.
8.  Older period homes (pre 1940s) which demonstrate the architectural style of a specific period, if
    substandard in size shall not be required to be increased to the minimum unit size if it is retained as
    part of a development.
9.  Front-loading and side-loading attached garages visible to the street shall be considered only if it is
    determined that the quality of design outweighs any negative impact and there is no other location
    on the site a garage could be better located.
10. Except for second units approved pursuant to Chapter 17.44.160, of the Monrovia Municipal Code, all
    units shall be detached. Rear units shall be restricted to single-story construction.
11. All new single-family homes and in multiple residential projects units closest to the street shall have
    street facing entries.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 65

12. Front porches shall be included;
13. Review shall include, but not be limited to: siding, roof pitch and overhang, window sizes and shapes,
    and predominant architectural details, such as porches, cornices, and bay windows.
14. Existing period street lamps shall be retained. No modern fixtures shall be used.
15. All trees shall be shown on development plans and every effort should be taken to preserve specimen
    trees.
Land Use Element                               PAGE 66
AREA PD-5: DOWNTOWN: These areas are adjacent to the Historic Commercial Downtown designations
along Myrtle Avenue and generally encompass the side streets running through Old Town Monrovia to
Primrose Avenue on the west and Ivy Avenue on the east. The area has historically been the commercial
core of the City; however, there are a substantial number of residential units. These areas can support a
variety of uses but the uses should be related to Myrtle Avenue and be of a quality in keeping with Old
Town Monrovia.
The following development guidelines shall apply to PD Area 5:
    1.   A pedestrian oriented atmosphere shall be maintained with Myrtle Avenue as the focal point.
    2.   Encourage businesses such as theaters, restaurants, and specialty retail that support the Myrtle
         Avenue downtown commercial corridor and other similar uses as determined by the Development
         Review Committee. Stand alone bars, cocktail lounges, and liquor stores shall not be allowed.
    3.   Residential development shall only be allowed in mixed-use developments on sites exceeding 2
         acres in size and shall require the approval of a specific plan.
    4.   No building setbacks are required except for the following:
    5.   Where a building is adjacent to a residential zone, the multiple story setback standards for the
         residential zone shall apply.
    6.   For property lines adjacent to Ivy Avenue a ten-foot setback shall be required.
    7.   The Development Review Committee shall determine appropriate setback requirements based on
         adjacent land uses.
    8.   Public improvements shall be compatible with the downtown theme in terms of street furniture,
         lighting, and landscaping.
    9.   Public parking lots are permitted.
AREA PD-5a: DOWNTOWN/COLORADO COMMONS: This is a 2.11 acre site directly to the west of
Downtown which is currently used for public parking. This area can be developed to provide additional
residential opportunities in downtown, providing additional customers for downtown businesses
enhancing the economic and social vitality of Old Town by adding residents that will participate in a
variety of activities throughout the day. Design of the development will provide a transition between the
commercial corridor and the residential neighborhood to the west.
The following development guidelines shall apply to PD Area 5a:
    1.   A pedestrian oriented atmosphere shall be maintained with Myrtle Avenue as the focal point. This
         area will be primarily developed as residential with incidental commercial and live/work
         opportunities.
    2.   The non-residential spaces shall be lower intensity commercial uses and shall be sensitive to the
Land Use Element                                PAGE 67
         surrounding residential uses. Use of commercial spaces shall be limited to types of uses that are
         open to the public, support downtown commercial uses and will encourage pedestrian activity
         such as retail, food service, service commercial, and office. New uses shall be reviewed by the
         Homeowners Association and approved by the DRC prior to issuance of a Business License and
         are subject to the Performance Standards in the Monrovia Municipal Code.
     3.  Uses allowed in live/work units shall be approved by the Homeowners Association.
     4.  High density urban residential and mixed-use development is encouraged. High quality design
         and materials on all elevations is required. The following development standards shall apply to
         development in PD-5a:
         a. Provide shared public/private parking that supports Old Town. Two dedicated parking spaces
             for each residential and live/work unit. Commercial spaces shall provide one space for each
             250 square feet of building area. In addition to the required spaces generated by the new
             development, all public parking spaces shall be replaced within the structure.
         b. Minimum unit size is 750 square feet.
         c. Maximum permitted number of stories is four.
         d. Maximum permitted residential density is 35 dwelling units per acre.
         e. No setback is required on property lines adjacent to public streets. Setback requirements
             from the project’s interior property lines shall be subject to the determination of the
             Development Review Committee. Setback areas adjacent to the condominiums in that block
             shall be planted with ample landscaping.
         f. Signage for commercial spaces shall be subject to the Sign Ordinance. Signage for the
             parking structure and live/work spaces shall be included in a detailed sign program, which
             shall be submitted to the Development Review Committee for approval. Illuminated signage
             shall be allowed subject to a lighting study. No illuminated signage will be permitted on
             live/work units.
Public improvements and interior common areas shall be compatible with the downtown theme in terms
of street furniture, lighting, and landscaping
Land Use Element                                PAGE 68

Area PD-6: Royal Oaks Drive: This area consists of an odd-shaped lot, part of which was formerly a
railroad right-of-way. The area is bounded on the north by a single family residential area and on the
south by Royal Oaks Drive, an arterial street. Because of the lot configuration, any future development
would have to front on Royal Oaks, making it somewhat undesirable for single family residential
development, yet back up to the single family residential area to the north, which could be adversely
affected by an development of a higher density nature. Guidelines for planning development Area 6 shall
be:
     1.  General development shall be those required for developments in the R-M (Medium Density
         Residential) Zone.
     2.  All future developments shall be compatible in design with the single family residential area to
         the north. The privacy of the homeowners shall not be compromised by any development in the
         area.
     3.  Any future developments shall be designed so as to reduce the adverse effects of noise from
         traffic on Royal Oaks Drive.
                                       Planned Development Area 6
Land Use Element                              PAGE 69
AREA PD-7: Area northeast of Huntington Drive/ Mountain Avenue Intersection: Straddling both
sides of the abandoned Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way, this area includes a variety of existing land
uses: light industrial and high-density residential development north of the right-of-way; a mobile home
park occupies a considerable portion of the area just south of the right-of-way; retail uses, motels, high
density residential development and a large irregularly shaped vacant lot front Huntington Drive. This
area interfaces with new development in the City of Duarte and is the eastern entrance to the City of
Monrovia. Special attention to the kinds and quality of uses needs to be addressed.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 7:
1.  Uses on Royal Oaks and Mountain Avenues can be light industrial, office or R&D.
1.  Medium Density Residential (RM 2500) will be allowed on Royal Oaks Avenue if contiguous with
    existing residential developments on Royal Oaks Avenue.
2.  Any light industrial, office, or R&D development on Royal Oaks shall be compatible with the
    surrounding residential uses.
3.  Uses allowed on Huntington Drive shall include well planned office and/or commercial development.
    Strip commercial development shall not be allowed. Other uses that are compatible with office,
    commercial and restaurant and are well designed will be reviewed on a case by case basis.
4.  Lot consolidation on Huntington Drive shall be encouraged.
5.  Any development shall have well designed architecture and landscaping and parking areas shall not
    dominate the appearance of the site from Huntington Drive.
6.  An extension of the Monrovia Redevelopment Project area should be considered for this area.
Land Use Element                               PAGE 70
AREA PD-8: West Huntington Drive/South Side: Bounded by Fifth Avenue, Santa Anita Wash, and the
Railroad Tracks. This area is developed with a mixture of uses including a mobile home park, single family
residential, industrial and warehouse/storage. The area has the potential to develop with uses that relate
to the Regional/Subregional Commercial development on West Huntington Drive.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 8:
1.   Permitted uses shall include regional/subregional commercial, office, entertainment, hotels, and
     restaurants.
2.   Emphasis will be placed on quality of site layout and building design.
3.   Uses shall expand upon the existing regional/subregional commercial uses on West Huntington Drive.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 71
AREA PD-9: California Avenue Between Cypress and Central: The subject area represents the
properties fronting on South California Avenue between Cypress and Central Avenues. The properties
represent a mix of development with single-family homes, duplexes, and a scattering of multiple-family
structures with four or more units. The properties fronting on South California Avenue abut the single-
family (R-L Zone) to the west and to the east which are neighborhoods of low scale single-family homes.
Property immediately adjacent to the area also includes uses such as the Southern California Edison
Company and an adjacent parcel zoned M (Manufacturing) on South California Avenue.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 9:
1.  The Planned Unit Development (PUD) type of development shall be required. Two (2) story dwellings
    shall be detached. One (1) story may be attached up to a maximum of two (2) units per building.
2.  The Residential Medium Density (R-M 3500) development standards shall apply.
Land Use Element                             PAGE 72
AREA PD-9a – California Avenue/Fig Avenue: This area consists of two properties. One lot is
approximately one acre in size and has frontage on both California and Fig Avenues. The second lot is
over ½ acre in size and is at the dead end of Fig Avenue. Both properties are adjacent to each other on
the Fig Avenue dead end side. There are single-family residences on the north side of Fig Avenue and
small light industrial uses on the south side of the street. South of the double frontage lot on California
Avenue is a utility company and the 210 freeway and north of the lot are one and two story multiple
residential developments. This is an area where incompatible uses interface each other.
The following development guidelines apply to Planned Development Area 9a:
1402 South California
1.       Multifamily residential or live/work uses shall be allowed in the 16-unit development subject to
         the approval of a conditional use permit. In addition to the conditions of approval, live/work use
         shall be subject to the Live/Work Development Regulations (below).
2.       Once occupied, a conversion from one use to another shall require a new conditional use permit.
509 Fig Avenue
1.       The existing building can be occupied by office, R&D, and light industrial, wholesale, and
         warehouse uses as defined in the Zoning Ordinance (uses permitted by right).
2.       If the use of the existing building changes, the required number of off-street parking spaces shall
         be provided in accordance to the Zoning Ordinance.
3.       Multifamily residential or live/work development shall be permitted subject to the approval of a
         conditional use permit. Residential development shall be subject to the RM2500 development
         standards. Live/Work development shall be subject to the Live/Work Development Regulations
         (below).
Live/Work Development Regulations
Live/work development shall be permitted at 1402 South California Avenue; and if existing improvements
are removed at 509 Fig Avenue. Density shall be determined at RM2500 standards (1 unit per 2500
square feet of lot size) and each unit shall contain a living space and work space. A 2-car garage per unit
is required for residential parking and commercial parking is required at a ratio of ¾ spaces per unit. The
following criteria shall be followed:
1.       Occupant(s) of each unit shall operate a business and maintain a valid City business license in
         order to ensure that the work space remains a commercial use.
2.       A live/work unit shall have a minimum work space of 500 square feet on the ground floor.
3.       A live/work unit cannot be used solely for residential or solely for commercial purposes. It must
         be used for both.
4.       Permitted uses include administrative/professional services, office, service commercial, individual
         instructional services, artist studio, and warehousing. Other uses that do not require the use of
         heavy or noisy machinery may be considered. The Homeowners Association (HOA) shall approve
         all uses prior to a business license being issued. Both the HOA and Development Review
         Committee shall determine the appropriateness of uses not easily identified.
5.       Businesses that require the use of machinery that produce noise that is audible beyond the
         property are prohibited.
6.       Deliveries shall be made on-site and shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 AM to 9:00 PM, Monday
         through Friday and 9:00 AM to 9:00 PM Saturday and Sunday.
Land Use Element                                  PAGE 73

7.     All commercial activites shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building; however the
       garages cannon be used for business activity.
8.     No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
9.     Commercial parking spaces as shown on the projects approved site plan shall not be used for
       residential parking during business hours of operation.
10.    Maximum building height shall be 2-storey and setbacks shall be a minimum 25’ on California
       Avenue, 10’ on Fig Avenue. Side setbacks shall be determined based on development proposals
       and proximity of neighboring residential and/or industrial and commercial properties.
11.    The double frontage lot shall be electronically gated on the Figh Avenue side to stop unwanted
       through traffic.
12.    A detailed sign program shall be submitted for review and approval by the Development Review
       Committee.
13.    Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions (CC&R’s) shall be recorded that include conditions as
       setforth in MMC §17.44.050 (c)(4)(a).
Land Use Element                             PAGE 74

AREA PD-10: Auto Center: During the last decade, this area has transitioned from older industrial and
commercial uses to primarily new car auto sales in the form of an auto center.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 10:
1.  New car dealerships and ancillary activities such as new car servicing and used car sales (servicing and
    used car sales must be part of a new car dealership) are the primary intended uses of this area.
2.  All development should be designed to create an expansive auto center atmosphere that includes
    product display in front, outside and in showrooms, while keeping servicing operations hidden from
    off-site view.
3.  The minimum site size for an auto dealership shall be that which is necessary to create an expansive
    design including placement of buildings to be in harmony with the neighboring structures and
    setbacks and to accommodate required on-site parking and landscaping.
4.  Landscaping and streetscape shall be consistent throughout the Auto Center and shall be in
    compliance with the approved auto center landscape/hardscape plan.
5.  Fencing and walls shall not be located within the setback area paralleling a street right-of-way. All
    other perimeter fencing shall be wrought iron or other approved materials.
6.  Signage shall provide for maximum aesthetics and appropriate visibility for each franchise-holder.
    Each franchise-holding establishment shall submit a sign plan for review that may include a
    combination of wall, monument, freestanding, special purpose, and miscellaneous signs as provided
    for in the Sign Ordinance of the Municipal Code. Each sign plan shall be consistent with other sign
    plans in intensity, scale, quantity and location without necessarily being identical. Existing signs at the
    time these guidelines are approved shall be considered approved and shall constitute the sign plans
    for the respective franchise-holders.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 10A:
1.  The building fronting Huntington Drive may be used for new automobile and/or motorcycle sales,
    office uses as approved by the Development Review Committee, new retail, and any indoor incidental
    storage or warehousing associated with the uses. The rear of the site can be used for new car,
    motorcycle sales and automotive repair shop where all work is customarily done in one day, inside
    storage and warehousing, ad light manufacturing subject to Development Review Committee
    approval.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 75
Land Use Element PAGE 7
AREA PD-11: Diamond Street/El Dorado/Encino/Alamitas Avenues: This area is generally bounded by
the railroad track on the north, Fifth Avenue on the west, Genoa on the south, and Alamitas Avenue on
the east. The area is predominantly zoned PD with enclaves of newer single-family subdivisions zoned RL
on Sierra Blanca, Venice/Naples, Leafwood/Rosewood, Anita/Maryanna/ Pilgrim Way and Radford Place.
The balance of the area has a mixture of various sized lots with some as small as 4,500 square feet, a
predominant number of 15,000 - 20,000 square foot lots, and a few larger than 35,000 square feet. This
PD area should have the feel of a single-family area while still allowing multiple units on the larger lots.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 11:
1.  A density of one unit per 7,500 square feet of land area per unit, and a 35% floor area ratio shall be
    allowed on each lot.
2.  The front yard setback shall be the average of the block, but in no case shall be less than the
    minimum required by the Zoning Ordinance.
3.  Mature trees shall be retained whenever possible.
4.  Residential medium development standards shall apply.
Land Use Element                               PAGE 77
AREA PD-12: Station Square Transit Village: The City’s key objective in establishing the Station Square
Transit Village Development Guidelines for Area PD-12 (“PD-12 Development Guidelines”) is to provide
flexibility in land use types and intensities that will allow future development to respond to changes in the
marketplace over time. These PD-12 Development Guidelines establish land use mechanisms that will
allow individual development projects to move forward consistent with the goals and objectives in the
General Plan, including the Station Square Transit Village Vision and Objectives in the Land Use Element.
Implementation
To ensure implementation of the goals and objectives, all new construction in PD-12 shall be reviewed
and approved subject to the following general provisions that apply to the entire Area PD-12:
General Provisions
1. New development shall be designed pursuant to the Planning Objectives outlined in the Land Use
     Element for the Station Square Transit Village (e.g. architecture, hardscape, landscape).
2. With the exception of single family dwellings, the construction of new buildings or additions to
     existing buildings shall require the approval of a conditional use permit. However, a conditional use
     will not be required if the existing building is conforming and occupied by a conforming use, the
     addition is 25% or less in area of the existing building, and the project meets the requirements set
     forth in the Monrovia Municipal Code.
3. Lot consolidation that leaves remnant parcels totaling less than the conforming lot size for the
     applicable zone shall be discouraged.
4. Development located adjacent to or facing residential neighborhoods shall be designed to mitigate
     adverse impacts.
5. Mixed uses are encouraged (except for development using RL, or RM/RH standards, which shall be
     solely residential).
6. In order to encourage the inclusion of affordable residential units, deviations in unit size, recreation
     space and parking based on the Zoning Ordinance can be considered if at least 15% of the units are
     designated for moderate income or 10% low income or 5% very low income. Units designated as
     affordable shall be restricted for a minimum of 55 years.
7. Conversion from nonresidential uses to residential uses or mixed use development that includes
     residential uses shall be adjacent to other residential uses.
8. A minimum of two acres is required for a specific plan.
9. All development in Station Square Transit Village will be based on the following development
     parameters established by the Land Use Element, which establish maximum caps and minimum
     requirements for various types of development in Station Square Transit Village (Area PD-12) on an
     area-wide basis::
                                            Summary of Land Uses
                              Land Use                          Maximum/Minimum Parameters
              Residential                                    1,400 units – minimum
                                                             3,600 units – maximum
              Commercial                                     150,000 square feet – maximum
              Office, Light Manufacturing, Research &  850,000 square feet (combined of all
              Development, Metro Gold Line Support              four potential uses)
              Facilities
              Hospitality                                    271 hotel rooms
                                                             45,800 square feet ancillary uses
Land Use Element                                 PAGE 78

            Open Space                                   4.35 acres minimum area-wide; ratio of 3.0
                                                         acres per 1000 new residents
            Transit Station Parking                      Parking to be provided per Gold Line
                                                         agreement
            Parking – All Others                         Per Municipal Code, shared parking
                                                         agreements and/or parking demand
                                                         analysis.
Specific Provisions by Neighborhood
Recognizing that the Station Square Transit Village (Area PD-12) is a mixture of established
neighborhoods, specific guidelines have been established for each neighborhood area that address and
respond to the existing conditions and will allow for future development of various scales. Both the
general guidelines and the specific guidelines apply to development within those neighborhoods for
which specific guidelines are provided; to the extent there is a conflict between a general and specific
guideline, the specific guideline shall control.
Residential Neighborhoods
1.  Single family residential homes shall be treated as conforming uses and allowed to expand or
    redevelop subject to the RL development standards.
2.  Lot consolidation for the purpose of new multifamily development is permitted subject to a
    conditional use permit and a subdivision map based on the following:
        a. Property totaling less than two acres shall be subject to the RM/RH development standards
             based on the minimum lot sizes and dimensions of that zoning district.
        b. Property totaling two acres or greater shall require approval of a specific plan and subject to
             the development parameters established for Station Square Transit Village (Area PD-12).
3.  In addition to the notice of public hearing requirements in the Municipal Code, entitlements requests
    requiring a public hearing within the residential neighborhoods shall include the entire residential
    neighborhood.
Land Use Element                                 PAGE 79

Hamby Park
    1.   Existing legal uses shall be considered conforming. New uses shall be based on the BE Zone.
    2.   Incidental retail sales of products manufactured on site shall be permitted subject to a minor CUP.
    3.   No additional square footage shall be permitted without the provision of additional parking.
Station Square North
1.  Future uses permitted in this area are the Gold Line parking structure and other Gold Line related
    uses, public open space and high density residential and commercial uses.
2.  The Historic Santa Fe Depot shall be restored and repurposed for a commercial or public use.
Station Square South (Duarte Road)
1.  Existing legal uses shall be considered conforming. New uses in existing structures and new
    construction shall be subject to the provisions of the BE Zone.
2.  As an incentive to provide underground and/or structured parking as part of new development, an
    increase in FAR to 2.5:1 may be allowed.
3.  The parking requirements of the Monrovia Municipal Code shall apply. Reduction in required parking
    is discouraged, however shared parking concepts may be considered.
4.  Residential development or mixed use development that include residential uses shall be permitted
    on sites with a minimum size of two acres and will require approval of a specific plan.
Western Gateway (Myrtle/Evergreen/Primrose/Pomona)
1.  Existing legal uses shall be considered conforming. New uses in existing structures and new
    construction shall be subject to the provisions of the BE Zone.
2.  Lot consolidation is encouraged.
3.  New development shall have its primary orientation toward Myrtle and Pomona Avenues. The
    maximum building setback along Myrtle Avenue shall be five feet. Parking facilities adjacent to Myrtle
    Avenue are discouraged.
4.  High-quality design (“signature architecture”) shall be a primary consideration in the approval of new
    development.
5.  As an incentive to provide underground and/or structured parking as part of new development, an
    increase in FAR to 2.5:1 may be allowed.
6.  Residential uses (non-ground level) shall be permitted on sites with a minimum size of two acres only
    as part of a mixed use development and will require approval of a specific plan.
Eastern Gateway (Myrtle/Evergreen/Pomona/alley east of Myrtle)
1.  Existing uses shall be considered conforming. New uses in existing structures and new construction
    shall be subject to the provisions of the BE Zone.
2.  Lot consolidation is encouraged.
3.  New development shall have its primary orientation toward Myrtle and Pomona Avenues. The
    maximum building setback along Myrtle Avenue shall be five feet. Parking facilities adjacent to Myrtle
    Avenue are discouraged.
4.  High-quality design (“signature architecture”) shall be a primary consideration in the approval of new
    development.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 80

5. As an incentive to provide underground and/or structured parking as part of new development, an
   increase in FAR to 2.5:1 may be allowed.
6. Expansion of Eastern Gateway may occur if:
        a. The property is contiguous
        b. Development is designed to minimize visual intrusion into adjacent neighborhood (e.g.
            stepped setback).
        c. Site is a minimum of 2 acres with approval of a specific plan.
Industrial Neighborhoods
1. Existing legal uses shall be considered conforming. New uses in existing structures and new
   construction shall be subject to the provisions of the O/RD/LM and BE Zones.
2. Lot consolidation is encouraged.
3. New development with frontage on either Myrtle Avenue or California Avenue shall be oriented
   toward those streets. The maximum building setback along Myrtle Avenue shall be five feet. Parking
   lots adjacent to Myrtle Avenue are discouraged.
4. As an incentive to provide underground and/or structured parking as part of new development, an
   increase in FAR to 2:5:1 may be allowed.
5. Mixed uses that include a residential component may occur in appropriate locations with the approval
   of a specific plan.
Gold Line Operations Campus
1. Existing buildings can be occupied by uses as defined in the zoning ordinance for the M Zone.
2. The Gold Line Operations Campus is a permitted use.
Land Use Element                              PAGE 81
Area PD-13: bounded by Evergreen Avenue on the north, Shamrock Avenue on the west, Mountain
Avenue on the east, and Duarte Road on the south:                      This area primarily supports large
industrial/commercial businesses. The sites are substantial in size, ranging from 15,000 square feet to
over 15 acres. Improvements vary in age and maintenance, and most have sufficient on-site parking. The
area has good freeway visibility and accessibility and possibly at a future date a commuter rail stop may
be located near Duarte/Monrovia city limits. To ensure that the area continues to attract desirable
development and maintains and renovates the existing sites, development guidelines tailored to the
needs of this area are needed.
The following development guidelines apply to Area PD-13:
Existing Development
1.  Existing buildings can be occupied by Office, R&D, regional commercial and light industrial uses as
    defined in the zoning ordinance (uses permitted by right).
     Some examples of Office/Research & Development permitted uses are: administrative or executive
     offices; scientific research and experimental development laboratories; clinics, doctors, engineering,
     industrial design and other professional offices; assembly and repair of electrical or electronic
     equipment; manufacturing of scientific optical, medical instruments; blueprinting and photocopying
     services; manufacturing of ceramic products, electrical equipment, and hardware.
     Some examples of Light Industrial uses are: machine shops, plumbing, heating or electrical shops,
     building material and hardware sales; manufacture of paints and plastics (excluding any boiling,
     melting, or odorous processes).
     Some examples of regional commercial are retail businesses with sales areas of 50,000 square feet or
     over. Home Improvement and furniture stores over 50,000 square feet are examples of these kinds of
     uses.
2.  Heavy industrial uses in existing buildings shall require a conditional use permit.
3.  Existing buildings can be expanded up to 25% of the existing square footage of the building if the
    building is conforming and the uses permitted.
Future Uses:
1.  Uses allowed: Regional commercial, research and development, office, and master planned
    industrial/business parks.
2.  Master planned projects shall be encouraged with minimum development sites of 1.5 acres.
    Individual lots within a master planned project shall have no less than 15,000 square feet per lot.
3.  Consider establishing a Redevelopment Project Area.
4.  New developments shall be designed with uniform standards (e.g.: architecture, hardscape, and
    landscape).
5.  All new construction shall require a Conditional Use Permit.
Land Use Element                               PAGE 82
Land Use Element PAGE 8
AREA PD-14: El Norte Avenue: This residential area is predominantly single-family and consists of lots
ranging in size from 10,000 square feet to 40,000 square feet. The front property lines of these lots are
situated on the City boundary with the City of Arcadia. The Arcadia properties are zoned single-family.
The overall appearance of this area is a low-density and low-profile quiet residential neighborhood.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 14:
1.  A density of one unit per 5,000 square feet of land area (RM 5000), and a floor area ratio of 35% shall
    be allowed for each lot.
2.  The front yard setback will be the average setback of the block, but in no case shall be less than the
    minimum required by the Zoning Ordinance.
3.  Only single-story residential construction will be permitted unless it is determined by the PC that a
    two story structure will not be obtrusive.
4.  Mature trees shall be retained whenever possible.
5.  Residential Medium development standards shall apply.
Land Use Element                               PAGE 84
AREA PD-15: Area southwest of Peck Road/Duarte Road Intersection: This area is developed with a
combination of new and old industrial and high density residential uses. Specifically, auto repair uses are
located along Peck Road at the north end of the site, and multiple-family residential uses are located
along Peck Road at the south end of the site. A relatively new light industrial park occupies much of the
central portion of the site. A handful of small, modest houses are wedged between the auto uses and
industrial park. This area has incompatible land uses, particularly residential abutting auto repair uses.
There is a need to improve the physical appearance of existing uses, and increase the use of on-site
landscaping. This area is suitable for light industrial development provided it is well designed and
compatible with adjacent uses, particularly the middle school.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 15:
1.  Encourage replacement of small houses and auto repair uses with light industrial or R&D uses,
    preferably through lot consolidation.
2.  New development shall emphasize building design and landscaping. All uses shall be well designed
    and compatible with surrounding uses.
3.  Visual buffering between light industrial and surrounding uses shall be encouraged to protect
    surrounding residential uses from noise, light and glare, and air pollution. Such buffering shall
    include, but not be limited
    to, trees, shrubbery, and
    decorative solid walls.
4.  All proposed uses shall be
    assessed     to    determine
    whether or not they will
    adversely affect school
    activities.
5.  High      density    multiple
    residential can continue on
    lots fronting Peck Road that
    are currently developed
    with residential uses.
Land Use Element                              PAGE 85
AREA PD-16: Peck Road/Myrtle Avenue: This area is a mixture of older, well-maintained, lower density
residential along Peck Road, and newer industrial and some commercial uses along Myrtle Avenue. The
Peck Road frontage shall continue primarily as a residential area and the Myrtle Avenue frontage shall
continue primarily as a light industrial area.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 16:
Light Industrial:
1.  The light industrial use shall be adequately buffered from surrounding residential uses in terms of
    noise, light and glare and air pollution. Such buffering shall include, but not be limited to, trees,
    shrubbery, and decorative solid walls. Lighting for light industrial uses shall be designed such that
    there is no spillover onto adjacent residential properties.
2.  Light industrial uses on through lots (those that extend from Myrtle Avenue to Peck Road) may be
    permitted with appropriate mitigation measures.
3.  All light industrial development shall front Myrtle Avenue, and primary access to the site shall be from
    Myrtle Avenue.
4.  The height and setback of all structures within 100 feet of the Peck Road frontage shall be consistent
    with the height limit in the Residential Medium Density (RM)Zone.
Residential:
1. Residential uses along Peck Road shall be developed at RM 5500 standards.
2.  The residential neighborhood to the north of Spanner Street shall be maintained as a single family
    neighborhood with no intrusion of industrial development.
Land Use Element                               PAGE 86
Land Use Element PAGE 8
AREA PD-17: El Sur St./Atara St. Area: This area is bounded by an industrial area on the north and west
(Myrtle Avenue frontage), and a single-family residential area located in Los Angeles County to the east
and south. Most of the lots near Myrtle Avenue are developed with industrial uses while interior lots are
still developed primarily with single-family residences. The area has several problems, the most obvious
being incompatible land uses. Some of the industrial uses are poorly designed, with inadequate loading
and parking facilities and outdoor storage of materials without adequate screening. Some of the homes
in the area are in need of improvements. The two east-west streets serving the area are private streets.
They are not dedicated and are not developed to City standards. Finally, the ownership patterns consist
of many small lots characteristic of a single-family subdivision.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 17:
1.    The area on Atara Street and El Sur Street shall be designated for residential development, with a Low
      Density Residential (R-L) designation.
2.    The street frontage along Myrtle Avenue and the existing improved industrial lots adjacent to the
      frontage shall be designated for light industrial development.
3.    The light industrial uses shall be adequately buffered from surrounding residential uses in terms of
      noise, light and glare, and air pollution. Such buffering shall include, but not be limited to, building
      setbacks, trees, shrubbery, and decorative solid walls.
Land Use Element                                 PAGE 88
Land Use Element PAGE 8
AREA PD-18: Jeffries at Peck Road: The area is a total of 18,730 square feet at the southwest corner of
Jeffries and Peck Road. At present, a dairy occupies the 13,070 square foot lot to the north and a
commercial building occupies the 5,660 square foot lot to the south. Because the area is surrounded by a
variety of uses: commercial, industrial, school/church, and residential, the uses allowed in the area are
restricted.
Existing
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 18:
1.   Light manufacturing uses should be allowed but restricted to research and development uses,
     assembly and/or packaging of already manufactured products excluding food, and custom
     manufacturing as defined in the Zoning Ordinance.
2.   Public/Quasi public uses should be allowed after determining compatibility through the CUP process.
3.   Commercial uses should be allowed excluding automotive repair, sales/rentals, servicing or storage.
4.   Only parking of employee/customer cars allowed in the parking lots. No outdoor storage allowed.
5.   No industrial uses shall be permitted that generate noise that emanates past the property lines.
Land Use Element                               PAGE 90
AREA PD-19: Novice Lane area between California/Myrtle Avenues: This is a mixed-use area with
industrial uses on the California Avenue side, vacant land, and single family residential on the Myrtle
Avenue side. The industrial uses shall be allowed to expand from east to west but consideration of the
single family homes on the west shall be given. The following development guidelines apply to PD Area
19:
1.  The existing single family residential homes shall be treated as permitted uses and be allowed to
    expand and be upgraded as typically permitted. Conversion of existing residences to industrial uses
    shall not be permitted.
2.  Industrial uses shall be allowed but designed so the residential lots will not be adversely impacted.
3.  Any new development will trigger a review of access and possible improvement of Novice Lane.
Land Use Element                               PAGE 91
AREA PD-20: Valley Circle: The 6.17-acre site is surrounded by Benrud Street on the north, the Sawpit
Wash on the east and south, and Wyland Way deadends into the property to the west. Between 1955 and
1989,the City property was used as a ball field and residential land uses are now being encouraged. The
site is surrounded by County unincorporated area and Duarte's Sphere of Influence.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 20:
1.   The site may be developed at a Residential Medium (RM) Density with minimum lot sizes of 4,500
     square feet.
2.   The existing water well shall be on a separate lot and shall not emit a noise level greater than 50
     decibels at the property line. A combination of a soundproof housing, decorative block walls, and
     landscaping shall be required.
           A lot shall be reserved at the northeast corner of the property for a future well site. Measures
            shall be taken or a bond posted to provide for future soundproofing of the water well site.
           A 30 foot wide utility easement shall also be provided along the south and east property lines.
3.   A deed restriction or restriction in the covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be placed
     on lots with a 100 foot radius of the existing and future well sites stating that no herbicides or
     pesticides can be used. Approved signs shall be placed on the well site walls or fencing to remind
     homeowners of this restriction.
           New sewers adjacent to the water wells shall be approved by the State Health and County
            Health Departments.
Land Use Element                                 PAGE 92

AREA PD-21: Peck Road Specific Plan: This area contains several auto dismantling and salvage facilities,
roofing wholesale supplies and RV storage and sales. The area surrounding Area PD-21 includes
commercial development to the north, Peck Road Spreading Grounds to the south, residential to the west
(County) and a gravel pit to the east. With the exception of the gravel pit, surrounding uses are located
outside the City in Los Angeles County.
Detailed development standards for this area are contained in the Peck Road Specific Plan.
The following uses are allowed in the Peck Road Specific Plan Area with a Conditional Use Permit.
1.  Auto dismantling and salvage yards.
2.  Custom Manufacturing
3.  General Manufacturing
4.  Warehouse/Storage
5.  Other types: uses not specifically mentioned but easily identified by the Development Review
    Committee as belonging to one or more of the above type uses.
Land Use Element                             PAGE 93
AREA PD-22: Peck Road Dump Site: The area is an old gravel pit located south of Live Oak and east of
Peck Road. The site is 45.68 acres and is now used for a Class 3 dump. Industrial uses would be
appropriate for the site.
Development guidelines are:
1.  Industrial shall be encouraged.
2.  Development shall be in accordance with the standards required for the M (Manufacturing) Zone.
3.  Extensive soil tests must be required before development is approved.
Land Use Element                              PAGE 94
AREA PD-23: Walnut/Royal Oaks Double Frontage Lots:                      This residential area represents
predominantly single-family and two-family lot development on through lots with frontage on both
Walnut Avenue and Royal Oaks Drive. There is no consistency in orientation of homes and placement of
garages and accessory structures. Often front yards are next to back yards. To encourage more
consistent development and stimulate new growth, lot splits and 2-unit Planned Unit Developments
(PUDs) shall be permitted on this block. If existing lots are consolidated for a single development, the
Residential Medium Density/PUD development standards shall apply. The addition to a single-family
dwelling or a second, single story dwelling on an already improved lot shall be permitted by right. All
other development shall require a conditional use permit.
The following development guidelines apply to Planned Development Area 23:
Two-unit PUD’s shall be allowed if in compliance with the following:
1.  One unit shall front on Royal Oaks Drive and one shall front on Walnut Avenue.
2.  At least one of the 2-units shall be new construction.
3.  If it is determined that a unit is worth retaining it shall be upgraded to tie in architecturally with the
    new unit.
4.  The permitted density shall be one dwelling unit for every 3,000 square feet of lot area.
5.  Residential Medium Density development standards shall apply with the following exceptions:
6.  Front setback shall be no less than 20 feet (on both streets)
7.  Minimum dwelling unit size is 1,000 square feet.
8.  CC&R’s shall not be required. Each property owner will be responsible for their improvements. If
    there are common areas (i.e. driveway) a maintenance agreement will be required.
9.  A Conditional Use Permit shall be required.
PUDs of three or more units shall be allowed if in compliance with the following:
1.  All units shall be oriented toward the closest street.
2.  No more than one existing unit may be retained and it shall be upgraded to tie in architecturally with
    the new units.
3.  The permitted density shall be one dwelling unit for every 3,000 square feet of lot area.
4.  Residential Medium Density development standards shall apply with the following exceptions:
5.  Front setback shall be no less than 20 feet (on both streets)
6.  Minimum dwelling unit size is 1,000 square feet.
7.  CC&R’s will be required for 4+unit developments.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 95

8.   A Conditional Use Permit shall be required.
Lot splits shall be permitted on existing through lots if in compliance with the following:
1.   The lot shall be vacant and cleared of all improvements before a split shall be approved.
2.   The lot shall be divided equally into two 50 feet x 70 feet parcels, and one dwelling unit shall be
     permitted on each new lot.
3.   Residential Medium Density development standards shall apply with the following exceptions:
     a. Front yard setback shall be no less than 20 feet.
     b. Rear yard setback shall be no less than 10 feet from the first story and 15 feet from the second
         story.
     c. Minimum dwelling unit size is 1,000 square feet.
4.   A lot shall not be split without concurrently securing a Conditional Use Permit approval for
     development of homes on each newly created parcel.
5.   A Parcel Map and a Conditional Use Permit shall be required.
Existing Improved Properties may be expanded or new unit(s) constructed if in compliance with the
following:
1.   The permitted density shall be one dwelling unit for every 3,000 square feet of lot area.
2.   The Residential Medium Density/PUD development standards shall apply and front yard setbacks shall
     be required on both street frontages.
3.   Single-story residential additions or new single story units are permitted by right
Land Use Element                                 PAGE 96
Land Use Element PAGE 9
PD AREA-23a - 805 SOUTH SHAMROCK AVENUE: This area consists of one parcel that is bounded on
the south by Royal Oaks Drive, the north by Walnut Avenue, and the east by Shamrock Avenue. The
property measures approximately 105 feet long on the north and south sides, 140’ on the west property
line and approximately 130’ on the Shamrock Avenue side. The parcel measures approximately 15,172
square feet in area.
There currently exists an approximately 5,000 square foot building that has both a brick and stucco
exterior. The building is a remnant of when Shamrock Avenue was part of the Route 66 Corridor. The
exterior of the brick building shall be preserved. Any proposed exterior changes shall be approved by the
Historic Preservation Commission. Future local landmark status should be encouraged.
The following guidelines apply to Planned Development Area 23a:
Site Requirements
1. A perimeter wall shall be erected on the west property line when a new use is proposed and it shall be
     allowed to exceed the maximum 6’ high allowable by code pending approval by the Development
     Review Committee.
2. Sound mitigation measures shall be required for all proposed uses to ensure that noise levels are
     according to Chapter 9.44 of the Monrovia Municipal Code regardless of this property’s zoning
     designation.
3. Any proposed use will require the removal of all the structures located to the rear (west) of the main
     building.
The following uses (as defined in the Monrovia Municipal Code) shall be permitted with approval of a
Minor Conditional Use Permit:
1.   Administrative Professional Services
2.   Business Support
3.   Medical Laboratory Services
4.   Research and Development
The Development Review Committee will review and approve items such as parking, traffic, noise, hours of
operation, etc., as part of the Minor Conditional Use Permit process. The following uses shall be
permitted with approval of a Conditional Use Permit:
1.   Adult Day Care Centers
2.   Veterinary Services without long term boarding
3.   Warehousing
The building shall also be allowed to be retrofitted for residential uses but shall have a density not to
exceed the current medium density zoning of RM2500. Open on-site parking will be allowed in lieu of
enclosed parking spaces. Required recreational space shall be located at the rear (west) of the building.
Other requirements:
1. No late night operations allowed.
2. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited.
3. All uses shall provide necessary parking based on the requirements stated in the Monrovia Municipal
     Code.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 98

4.   Occupant(s) of the building shall maintain a valid City business license in order to ensure that the
     work space meets the guidelines of this Planned Development zone.
5. Businesses that require the use of machinery that produce noise that is audible beyond the property
     are prohibited.
6.    All exterior lighting shall be designed, arranged, and installed so as to confine direct rays onto the
      premises and to direct light away from adjacent structures.
7.    Deliveries shall be made on-site and shall be limited to the hours of 8:00am to 6pm, Monday
      through Friday, and 9:00am to 7pm on Saturday. Sunday deliveries shall be prohibited. Deliveries
      shall occur on the Shamrock side only.
8.    All commercial activities shall be conducted entirely within the enclosed building.
9.    No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
10. A detailed sign program shall be submitted for review and approval by the Development Review
      Committee.
11. A sound barrier (to be approved by the Development Review Committee) shall be installed and
      maintained at all times on the west side of the property line.
Future Zone Expansion
Currently there are several parcels to the south and north of 805 South Shamrock Avenue that may be
considered as being added to the PD zone in the future. Sites to be included have potentially historic
structures that serve to preserve the
heritage of Monrovia and the old Route
66 Corridor. Staff will do a feasibility
study at a later time, to look at the
possibility of including a portion of the
Shamrock frontage into the PD zone.
Along Shamrock there are interesting
sites including the gas station located
immediately to the north and the
neighborhood market located at the
northwest corner of Colorado Boulevard
and Shamrock Avenue.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 99
AREA PD-24: Poppy/Shamrock north of Foothill Boulevard to Norumbega Drive: This residential
block consists of double frontage lots (50 feet x 165 feet) and lots that have been subdivided over time
that have lot depths of 75 feet or less. The Poppy Avenue side is predominantly improved with historic
Craftsman bungalow homes. The Shamrock Avenue side is a mixture of back yards, accessory structures,
and homes varying in age and architectural style. To encourage the retention and preservation of the
historic homes on Poppy Avenue and to encourage more consistent development along Shamrock
Avenue the following design guidelines addressing orientation of homes, rear yard fencing and off-street
parking are designed to meet the specific needs of this neighborhood.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 24:
1.  The RM development standards shall apply with a maximum density of one unit per 3,000 square feet
    of land area and an F.A.R. of 40%.
2.  Preservation and retention of older period homes (pre 1940s) shall be encouraged and slight
    deviations from development standards (i.e., yard size, building separation, unit size) may be used by
    the DRC/PC to help establish minor exception and/or variance findings. The DRC/PC must determine
    that the preservation and retention of the older period home outweighs its elimination and the
    deviations do not make a less desirable development.
3.  Allow 2-unit detached PUDs on double frontage lots if the following standards are met:
    a. two enclosed garage spaces shall be provided for each unit;
    b. total private recreation space shall be equal to 20% of the residential floor area on the site. A
         private yard area shall have at least ¼ of the required total yard area with minimum dimensions
         of 8 feet per side;
    c. C.C.&R’s shall not be required. If there are common areas (i.e., driveway) a recorded joint
         maintenance agreement will be required;
    d. if an historic home is determined to be eligible for historic landmark designation pursuant to the
         criteria in the Historic Preservation Ordinance, it shall be retained and shall be landmarked as a
         condition of approval;
    e. if an existing home does not exemplify the architectural style of the neighborhood it shall be
         upgraded to incorporate appropriate design elements;
    f. Conditional Use Permit shall be required.
4.  Front-loading and side-loading attached garages visible to the street shall be considered only if it is
    determined that the quality of design outweighs any negative impact and there is no other location
    on the site a garage could be better located.
5.  All new residential units shall face the street they are closest to and be designed to reflect the historic
    values of the neighborhood.
6.  On Shamrock Avenue if a backyard is adjacent to a front yard, backyard fencing shall be permitted
    along property lines if it is determined that the following criteria are met:
    a.   fencing does not create a visibility problem to nearby driveways. The fence shall comply with
         MMC Section 17.12.040 Setbacks, Physical Obstructions;
    b. The DRC shall review and approve fencing material, height and landscaping in front of the fence
         line. A setback may be required if the DRC determines that its location adversely impacts
Land Use Element                                PAGE 100

       adjacent properties or that additional area is needed for landscaping.
7. On Shamrock Avenue placement of accessory structures in the rear 25 feet of backyards adjacent to
   front yards shall require approval by DRC. The DRC shall take into consideration impact to adjacent
   properties and visibility from the street. In no case shall the structure be closer than 3 feet to a side
   property line and 10’ from the property line adjacent to Shamrock Avenue.
Land Use Element                              PAGE 101

AREA PD-25: Monrovista/California/Duarte Road: This area is generally bounded by California Avenue
on the west, Shamrock Avenue on the east, Duarte Road on the north and Monrovista Avenue on the
south. The Area is surrounded with by commercial and industrial properties on Duarte Road and California
Avenue. On Monrovista Avenue there is a combination of both single-family and multiple-family units
and churches. To better define and develop standards consistent with the surrounding neighborhoods,
the Planned Development Area is divided into two sub-areas: PD-25a and PD-25b.
The following development guidelines apply to PD Area 25a, which is approximately 1.42 acres in size
and consists of seven lots on Duarte Road, three lots on California Avenue, 3 lots on Monrovista Avenue
and the alley that runs east from California and then south to Monrovista Avenue:
1.  A maximum density of one unit
    per 3,000 square feet of land
    area, and a maximum 50% floor
    area ratio for dwellings shall be
    permitted.
2.  PD Area 25a shall be developed
    as a single, multiple-family
    residential project.     The alley
    shall     be      vacated        and
    incorporated into the project.
3.  A Conditional Use Permit shall
    be required for all new
    development.
4.  Minimum setbacks shall be:
    a.   Twelve     (12)    feet      on
         Monrovista Avenue.
    b. Nineteen (19) feet on California Avenue and Duarte Road.
    c. Six (6) feet for the first floor and eight (8) feet for the second floor for all interior property lines.
    d. A six foot decorative wall shall be setback a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the property lines
         adjacent to California Avenue and Duarte Road.
5.  Minimum building separation shall be 6 feet between first story walls and 9 feet for second story
    walls.
6.  The total private recreation space for the development must be a minimum of 20% of the total
    dwelling square footages of the development.
7.  All future development shall be designed to encourage interaction with the surrounding streets. The
    following design concepts shall be incorporated into the development:
    a. Units fronting Monrovista shall be oriented toward the street.
    b. Front porches shall be encouraged. The porch may encroach 5 feet into the street setback.
    c. Encourage garage designs to minimize the visibility from the street.
Land Use Element                                PAGE 102
     d. Side and rear elevations that directly face a public street shall have adequate modulation and
          architectural enhancements such as porches, balconies, windows and other features.
      e. Pedestrian access shall be provided from California and Duarte Road.
8.   Any development standard not provided in these guidelines shall be in accordance with the RH
     (Residential High Density) regulations.
The following development guidelines apply to Planned Development Area 25b, which consists of 19
lots on the north side of Monrovista Avenue beginning at the alley on the west to Shamrock Avenue on
the east. This area is approximately 2.5 acres in area.
1.   A maximum density of one unit per 3,000 square feet of land area, and a maximum of 60% floor area
     ratio for dwellings shall be permitted.
2.   Consolidation of lots shall be encouraged to accommodate PUDs.
3.   The front yard setback for new construction shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
4.   All future developments shall be designed to reflect a single family neighborhood. Units must be
     detached and the unit closest to the street shall incorporate the following design features:
     a.   Street facing units shall have street facing entries.
     b.   Front porches shall be encouraged. The porch may encroach 5 feet into the front yard setback
     c.   Encourage garage designs to minimize visibility from the street.
     d.   No building shall exceed two stories. The maximum building height shall be 27’.
5.   Single-family homes shall be permitted by right. All other development shall require a Conditional
     Use Permit
6.   Existing legal     non-
     conforming
     properties may     only
     be       altered     or
     expanded in a       way
     that lessens       their
     nonconformity.
7.   Any       development
     standard            not
     provided in these
     guidelines shall be in
     accordance with the
     RM          (Residential
     Medium         Density)
     Zone regulations.
Land Use Element                                  PAGE 103

AREA PD-26: 311 West Foothill Boulevard – Aztec Hotel: This area consists of four parcels with
an area of approximately 49,632 square feet. The site is bounded on the south by Foothill
Boulevard, the east by Magnolia Avenue, and the west by Melrose Avenue and abuts a
residential neighborhood on the north.
The Aztec Hotel was constructed in 1924-25 and was listed on the National Register of Historic
Places in 1978 and designated a local historic landmark in 2003. The 33,907 square foot
building is an L-shaped, two-story building with a large enclosed rear patio and a parking lot on
the west side of the property. The hotel includes thirty-six (36) private rooms with baths, eight
(8) one-room apartments, the entrada and lobby, and basement and a restaurant.
The Aztec Hotel is one of the most significant historic buildings in Monrovia and based on the
historical significance of the property and the unique challenges from a zoning and regulatory
standpoint, these Planned Development Guidelines are designed to provide appropriate
development standards and provide flexibility to adjust permissible land uses in response to
changing market demands, while addressing the impacts those uses may have on the
surrounding neighborhood.
The following guiding principles were used to focus the development of the plan for the
improved property and shall be considered in making future land use decisions:
    1. Emphasize the preservation and restoration of the Aztec Hotel.
    2. Promote long-term economic viability of the property.
    3. Identify and permit uses that will be compatible with the neighborhood.
The following guidelines apply to Planned Development Area 26:
    1. Based on the limited availability of onsite parking, a parking demand study shall be
        submitted to the City to determine a baseline parking demand for the anticipated use(s)
        of the property. Such uses include a restaurant, coffee shop, retail, hotel, and banquet
        facilities. The study shall also provide measures that must be employed to
        accommodate the parking demand. Future uses that were not studied and that
        intensify the demand for parking shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally
        approved, or denied, by the Development Review Committee, unless the use requires a
        conditional use permit, in which case the Planning Commission shall review and act on
        the conditional use permit. In determining whether a use intensifies the demand for
        parking, the reviewing body shall consider the parking requirements for the use as
        designated in the City’s Zoning Code.
    2. Parking associated with the property shall not be allowed in the adjacent residential
        neighborhoods.
    3. Restaurant uses shall be permitted in the western storefront space that has traditionally
        operated as a restaurant and in the “coffee shop” space along Magnolia Avenue.
    4. Unless otherwise stated in these guidelines, the use types permitted in the storefront
        area of the Aztec Hotel are subject to the NC (Neighborhood Commercial) Zone use
        regulations.
Land Use Element                            PAGE 104

   5. A hotel use is permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit.
   6. The use of the banquet room and patio for special events including, but not limited to,
       banquets, weddings, and meetings, separate from the incidental use of those areas by
       hotel guests, shall require approval of a conditional use permit. The sale and/or service
       of alcoholic beverages for special events in the banquet room shall also require the
       approval of a conditional use permit. Live entertainment for special events in the
       banquet room shall also require the approval of a conditional use permit. The
       conditional use permits required by this Section 6 shall conditionally allow such use on
       an ongoing basis; it is not the intent of this Section 6 to require a conditional use permit
       for each banquet, wedding or meeting.
   7. Live Entertainment and amplified music may be allowed on the patio subject to
       approval of a conditional use permit for outdoor entertainment.
   8. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
Land Use Element                           PAGE 105
4..
    RECREATIONAND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                   OF THE
            CITY OF MONROVIA
                GENERAL PLAN
                  Prep;aredby
           Victor GNen   Associates
           AdoptedJanuary-, 1966
~ 1~~tRee~e~le...~_-
 i' c
      The Recreation Plan, as shown, indicates those areas of the city requiring additional
      physical facilities to a.ccommodate the recreational and leisure time needs of all age
      groups within the city. The plan anticipates future needs based on increased population
      and establishes policies and programs for their long-range development. In some instances
      implementation     of the program will require cooperation of two agencies in both
      development and program. In the case of school-City playgrounds the Recreation Plan
      endeavors to relate both programs to each other and to the land use plan.
      Generally accepted national standards indicate that a city should provide one acre of
      recreational space for each 100 persons. At this rate, which is seldom achieved by older
      cities, Monrovia would currently need approximately 320 acres. At the present time the
      City has 11.5 acres developed and almost unlimited land in the mountains with potential
      for development.       Although the City can, in the future, meet these gross area
      requirements, the major problem lies in the distribution of this area by specific types of
      facilities.  The critical need is in the provision of small play lots, playgrounds and
      neighborhood parks. One ,of the important elements in a recreation plan is a guide to the
      amount and types of facilities needed in the future. The following standards provide such
      a general guide.
                                Recreation and Open Space Element Page 1
   Q§~~                                                                                             '. I
   1.   To make available parks, playgrounds and open spaces which will satisfy the cultural,
        recreational and leisure time needs of the residents of Monrovia.
   2.   To protect and preserve existing fac:ilities and natural resources of the area as much
        as possible.
   3.   To encourage use of those areas of the city         which have scenic, historical       and
        locational advantages.
   PRINCIPLES
   1.   Provision should be made for a community-wide~ system of recreation facilities and
        open spaces to meet the needs for recreation and esthetic experience of all age
        groups.
   2.    In planning these facUities, State, 'County and local commercial facilities    should be
         taken into account to avoid duplication.
   3.
   4.
   STANDARDS
~
                                                                                    Population
                                                                                      Standard
    Facility
    Neighborhood Park                                                           2.00 acres/l,OOO
    Play Field                                                                  1..50acres/1,000
    City Park                                                                   2.00 acres!! ,000
    Tennis Courts                                                                  1 court/2,OOO
                                                                                     1 field/.5,OOO
    Softball
                                                                                     1 field/6,OOO
    Baseball
                                                                                 1 course/50,OOO
    Gol!'
                                                                                   1 each/20,OOO
     Community Building
 8
'J
                             Recreation and i:>pen Space Element Page 2

   ,:: .-eROen'F n 'OA       PRnVFOAF  "T'
          The general standards previously shown, although desirable, cannot be achieved by every
          city.     In the case of .Mon~ovia rapid land absorption,- lack of vacant land and high land
          values may preclude reachIng these standards. The City should be aware, however, of the
          type and amount of land needed for recreation in the future. These standards, together
           with neighborhood and city population projections, can provide this guide.
          The major need for facilities is in the provision for small play lots in the neighborhoods to
          serve approximately a one-fourth mile radius. These lots have not been indicated on the
           Recreation Plan since it would involve designating a single lot currently occupied.
           Acquisition of land for these 4,000 to 6,000 square foot facilities will have to be on a
           long-term basis as the City may be able to acquire and develop them. Suggestions for this
          type of development are shown in the Neighborhood Improvement section of Special
          Studies in the back of this report.
           It would be desirable to provide an additional City park comparable in size to Library Park
           in the western section of. the city.     Due to the difficulty and cost of assembling this
           amount of land, it has .been proposed to supplement this type of facility with five
          neighborhood parks, ten school-City playground facilities and a major expansion of
          Monrovia Canyon Park.
           Although the City may not be able in the future to provide the ideal type of location of
          facilities, it will be able to provide sufficient recreational space to meet the demands
          while enhancing the beauty and desirability of the city as a place to live.
           Community Center: Although elements normally associated with a community building
          are located throughout the city, the quantities are not sufficient nor are they properly
          located or organized into an efficiently functioning unit. The ideal location of such a
           facility would be adjacent to Library Park. In this location it could supplement the
          facilities in Library Park for senior citizens, and it would be centrally located for the
          entire city.
          Facilities proposed for the center would include:
           1.     Combination gymnasium-auditorium to accommodate a standard basketball court and
                 portable seating for 300. A stage should be provided with seating storage underneath.
          2.      Locker and shower rooms.
                  Exercise rooms.
          4.      Reading room and lounge.
          .5.     Four or five hobby rooms.
          6. Music.      Listening rooms.
          7.      Kitchen.
                                      Recreation and .Open Space Element Page 3
3.
~
                    .
 9. Lobby.
10. Storage.
 11. Office.
Total area required for the building would be approximately 22,000 square feet.    Parking
for the facility should occupy approximately 21,000 square feet.
 City Parks: The city is critically short of park land to serve the entire city.      Since
acquisition of sufficient land in the developed areas would be extremely difficult and
expensive, it is necessary that existing parks be more efficiently utilized and supple-
mented by other facilities in Canyon Park.
CanYOO Park                     .
Although owned by the City, the Park serves as a district or small regional park. There
are 400 acres of land in this area owned by the City which could be developed on a limited
basis. .At the present time only &0 c~cres of this land are developed. Following are
proposals for development of this land.
Utilize funds from State Park Bond Act in the amount of $48,000 to partially accomplish:
      a. Acquisition of 80 acres of land irt Emerson Flats.
      b. Modernize existing picnic areas and provide additional sites.
      c. Construction of rustic amphitheater.
      d. Extend existing trails and construct new ones.
      e. Improve sanitary facilities.
      f. Provision of interpretative program facilities.
      g. Additional parking
      h. Expandnaturemuseum.
      i. Additior'\al play areas.
        .Provisioln   of trail markers.
An area of approximately 800 acres northeast of Sawpit Reservoir has been designated as
a regional park on the Los Angeles County Master Plan-Recreation Element. It has been
referred to as the Monrovia Area-Sawpit Canyon Park. The development of this area by
                              Recreatjon and .Open Space Element Page 14
                                                                .
    provide some problems if not properly planned. Access to the area is limited to Canyon
    Boulevard, designated in part as a secclndary highway. Traffic generation by the facility
    could impose I,;lnreasonable loads on residential sections of the city. To this extent, the
    City should work closely with the Courlty in planning improvements for this and possible
    alternate access routes. This park combined with Monrovia Canyon Park would provide a
    1,.300-acre facility of major importance.
    Recreation Park
    Improvements proposed to Recreation Park include:
          a. Redesignand equip 'two play areas.
          b. Remodel or replace existing bathhouse.
          c. Remodelswimmingpool.
          d. Remodel baseball.standsto seat 7.50.
    Li»rary Parlc
    This center city park of 4..5 acres serves a multi-pur,pose function. It not only provides an
    outstanding service to the retail area, a central library site and a community active area,
    but also provides some active facilities for the senior citizens. It is extremely important
    that this facility be maintained intact w'ith the exception of expansion 01 the library.
 L~ Nei~hborhood Parks: At the present time only one such facility exists, with another in the
    planning stage. Four additional parks are proposed.
    Grand Avenue
    This 2.7-acre park is currently under development to provide a needed facility for the
    northeast section of the city. It is recommended that attempts be made to expand this
    park into approximately a l2-acre flood control facility.        This 12-acre area could be
    designed into a much needed nine-hole par three golf course with parking and a small
    clubhouse.
    Li~ -Calif 0 rni a
    This area, containing approximately .7~ acres, is currently under development as a small
    neighborhood park. The area should be expanded to an additional .7.5 acres to provide
    facilities needed in a higher density neighborhood.
    WaJnut-Olive Area
    It is proposed that Olive Avenue from Mayflower to a point 600 feet west, continue to
    serve its present function. The railroad right-of-way, approximately 70 feet wide, should
    be developed from the end of this strip to Fifth Avenue as an open green area for a
     pedestrian path and play area. The entire area from Mayflower to Fifth Avenue continues
     approximately .5.8 acres. As properties along this right-of-way between Monterey and
     Fifth Av~nue might become available, they should be acquired and developed as a
    neighborhood park.
 v                           Recreation and. Open Space Element Page 5
..

   't8 ~ml'"
       The area ~~bounded by the   railroad, the southern city limits, Mayflower and Fifth Avenue
       contains no recreation facilities.    A neighborhood park of two to three acres should be
       developed to serve thl; area.
       Clove rleaf Area
       Although this area contains larger lots and more open space than the remainder of the
       city, there is a need for a park site to serve the area. Acquisition of a three- to five-acre
       site should be considered at an early date before land prices are accelerated by adjacent
       development.
       School-City Play~rounds: The School section of this report recommends the expansion of
       several existing school sites and the acquisition of new sites for proposed new schools.
       The expansion program is designed primarily for the addition of playground space. It
       would be desirable for the City to acquire additional adjacent land for a combined larger
       playground area. Although the City portion of playground area would be developed by the
       Parks and Recreation Division, title to the land should be held by the City. Cooperative
       maintenance and operation of the facility should be effected. Following is a tabulation of
       the proposed School-City playgrounds, their location and area.
       School                                                                              City Area
       Santa Fe                                                                                  acres
       Fano Street                                                                         1.1.5acres
       Olive Street                                                                        1.37 acres
       Upper Canyon                                                                        2.00 acres
       Prospect                                                                             .7.5 acres
       Wildrose                                                                             .23 acres
       Clifton                                                                              .83 acres
       NewH. S.                                                                            3.00 acres
       Mayflower                                                                             .96 acres
        Huntington                                                                         1.60 acres
        TotaJ                                                                             13.16 acres
                                Recreation and Open Space Element Page 6
1.4.5
   (::   '  Estimated    Future Bud2et: Current expenditures for recreation, not including the street
          "           .,                          rIma     ey     per capl a compare     0 a eslr   e
            average of 6. Following is a projected budget based on future population estimates for
            current and desirable per capita expenditures.
                                                                                             $6.00/cap.
            1965                                     $140,000                                $186,600
                                                      160,600                                 214,200
                                                      180,400                                 240,600
                                                      227,700                                 303,600
                                                      273,100                                 364,200
                                   Recrea,tion and OJ)enSpace Element Page 7
$4..50/cap.
      The preceding sections of this report have presented proposals for the long-range
      improvement of almos~ every major element of public and private interest in Monrovia.
      No matter how well these proposals may have been conceived, they will be of little or no
      benefit to the city unless they are adopted, financed and vigorously pursued.
      The key to implementing the Plan is cooperation.                                  This effort involves the entire city-
      public, business, industrial and private interests.                               Cooperation can be achieved to the
      highest degree with the broad understanding by a                                large cross section of the city, of the
      goals, objectives and the long-range benefits to the                             general public within a reasonable tax
      structure.
      The "Action Chart" graphically indicates the sequential steps necessary to carry out the
      proposals of the General Plan and illustrates the degree of cooperation and involvement of
      Monrovia citizens.
                                                                                                  -.~     .0
                             T~~~~~r                                     "-0: .~
                                                                                 -.;-.,O
                                                                                 ,..-::   '
                                                                                             J- ~ --
                                                                                                   0'-,~-    ~
                             ~~='~~l..~~~                           ~:.::-::;::.
                                                                               °              :~.: _i' :,
                                  ~O_~"O'                 ~~.          ..
                                                  ."':"      ~'--'.         .-
                                  ~:_:~~-~~.:':
                                  ~..~.
                                  ~~                    .,..~.:".::0:.-   '.
                                   ~        ~             .,::..., .'.
                                   ~       PIM:           '"...
                                  ~                           :-
                                   ~"'-:.-':'"
                             ---:'               ...'~..,                                       -
                             ""           ,..~~::                          'c.              ..~o .
                              ._~~
                              7. ~c.-~-                                                     -'.
                                                                                                             '-"
                                   ~..~~
                                   ~                                                        _.                 .1
                              ..,""M___~   ~.                          -,_.                                   .:.;
                                   ,                        ~
                                   ~.c.-.
                                   :.-;+._-;,~              _.
                             :.-:
                             ..~-~.".M:-~:                        ..'"
                                                                                                     ., ,-'
                                   L z.-. _.:-~.
                                  ~~~
                                   c.~~
                                  d."..~.,..,.
                                  ..:1-::- Jra,~
                                   f.~~
                                  ..c                     pDIid8
                                   ""~..,~
                              -.-tf(
                                      .~..~
                                          ~    .I~.
   ~                          ,'-- .~~
                                             --"~.
                                       ._~"_._~ .~. ..'-
                               Recreation and Open Space Element Page 8
.~:~.
..
~

          -
     RESPONSIBIUTIE          OR IMPLEMENT A TION
     The State law sets forth planning responsibilities, however they can be generally defined
     as follows:      Clouncil~legislative,   Planning Commission-administrative,   and citizens'
     groups-advisory.
     City Council: The role of the City Coun,cil in implementing the General Plan is the vital
     and final legislative action necessary to legal Plan execution. The important first step is
     the conduct of public hearings and adoption of the Comprehensive General Plan.
     Following adoption, the Capital Improvements Program is initiated by scheduling improve-
     ments by year of priority.           This step is accomplished together with the Planning
     Commission, City departments and citizens' groups. As a minimum, the first six years of
     the Capital Improvements Program should be budgeted in a six-year capital budget.
     Council's subsequent actions relative to the Plan will consist of receiving recommenda-
     tions from the Planning Commission in regard to Plan administration, enforcement and
     amendment.          ..
     Plannini.Commi~            The Planning Commission and Planning Director have perhaps the
      greatest respon~iibility in Plan effectuation.      The task ahead will no doubt require
     considerable help for the Director in the form of sta:rf and citizens' help. Following is a
     partial list of possible Commission action:):
   ~  1.  Continue day-to-day Plan administration, reviewing developments for legal conform-
          ance to regulations and ordinances as they affect the Plan.
           Assist Counl:il in the preparation of program sche(~ulesand budgets.
           Preparation of additional detail and estimates necessary to carry out Plan proposals.
     4.    Prepare special detailed studies and recommendations. for Plan implementation.
     .5.   Review of Plan elements with general public and citizens' advisory groups for Plan
          implementation.
     6.    Re-draft of existing ordinances and regulations, recommending          changes where
           necessary to carry out the objectives of the Plan. These include:
          a. Zoning
          b. Subdivisionregulations
          c. Setbacklines
           d. Fire limits
           e. Mechanical codes
            .
           f. Building code
           g.  Health or sanitation relative to housing
  ~        h. Community design policies
                                Recreation and Open Space Element Page 9
2.
3.
   !           ~
           Periodic review of the General Plan to determine      its conformance to objectives set
           forth in view of changing conditions.      --
       9.  Adopt habit of constant reference to the Plan on each application for land use change
           or development.      Policy determination should not be judged on the location of the
           development alone but rather on how that development affects the goals of the Plan
           for the entire city.
                                                           -
      10. Develop record keeping system which will reflect changes in development patterns
           that will be effective in keeping Plan current.    If the City administration, at some
           future date, acquires a computer or data processing equipment, the Planning
           Department records should be put on cards for accurate and repaid summation of
           changing statistical data.
      11. Initiate and guide implementation of projects proposed in the Special Studies section
           of this report to inclu,de:
           a. Commercial revitalization
           b. Neighborhoodimprovement
           c. Hillside development
      12. Active coordination among City departments toward Plan implementation.
      13. Continuingresearch.
     Citizens' Groups: If given an active role, objectives and incentive, citizens' groups can
      perform an important function in Plan implementation.
           Assist   in interpreting    the thinking and desires of the public    to the Planning
           Commission.
     2.    Perform direct services in the nature of surveys, opinion polls and even carrying out
           small community projects.
           Collaborate with the Planning Commission in determining policies and measures for
           carrying them out.
     4.    Assist in informing the people of the city regarding the purpose and methods of
           planning in general and the plans of the Commission specifically.
     .5.   Provide support in carrying out the Plan.
     6.    Support and vote on issues for public improvements as proposed by the General Plan.
            .
                                                                      .~
                                Recreation and Open Space Element Page       I)
3.
     The existing zioning and subdivision ordinances enacted in 19.58 and 19.59 substantially
     contain adequa'te provisions for the effective legal implementation of the General Plan.
     There are, howlever, certain concepts new to Monrovia which will require changes in Zones
     and controls:
    Zoning Districts
     1.    The Hillside area north of Scenis Drive should be designated as a low-density special
           residential district. The entire district should be considered as a single unit in which
           dwelling unit densities per parcel ownership would not exceed five-tenths to one
          dwelling unit per acre. "Developable" area within one ownership would be permitted
           higher denisity as long as adequatf~ open space were provided to maintain overall
          density.
    2.    The area designated "Center City Area" should be given a special zone to permit
          development of a true cultural center. Permitted used should include retail, office,
          business, civic center, public uses, parking, recreation, and multiple housing.
    3.    The ftC-M" (commercial manufacturing) zone should be re-evaluated to' determine if
          stringent performance standards may be discouraging development.            High quality
          property development standards should be retained.
    4.    A special industrial zone as indicated on the Plan should be created south of the
         center city for campus-type research and development. Architectural design control,
         landscaping and setback requirements should be enacted to provide an attractive
         district complementing the center city area.
         Existing p~rking zones other than municipal lot:s have not proved effective in the
         past. It is recommended that these zones be restudied for possible use of contiguous
         land use designations as long as the overal1 parking requirements are met. Possible
         use might include room for commercial expansion.
    6.   Most deep lots have been developed, thus the R-D zone should be eliminated when the
         remainder are developed.
        ..
                                Recreation and. Open Space Element Page 11
.5.
ZONING AND SUBDIVISION STANDARDS:
1.      Present R-2 zones require 6,000 square feet per two dwelling units with no more
than two units per structure. As indicated in special neighborhood studies, this provision
has been a deterrent to. investment and development. It is recommended that the present
density of 1.5dwelling units per acre be retained but the number of units per structure be
unlimited as long as present density is maintained. In addition, a re-evaluation of side and
front yard require mens should be made to accomodate new housing types proposed herein.
2.      To eliminate existing hazardous blind intersections, legal investigation    should be
made as to steps possible to effect removal of ~ch hazards.
3.       Setback lines should be checked to determine conformance with the street classi-
 fication system indicated on the Circulation Plan.
4.      Slope zoning should be considered for the hillside area, providing a ratio of usable
 lot area to average lot slope.
 OTHER STANDARDS:
 1.      Fire limits in the center city should be restudied and redefined based on the special
 development proposed in special studies.
 2.      Effect of special housing types should be examined in the existing building code,
 particularly in relation to common walls of town houses, court houses, and patio houses.
                              CAPIT AL IMPROVEMENT        PROGRAM
 The Capital Improvement Program is a combined planning and financial operation
 providing a schedule of major projects to be developed during th.e planning period.
 Its primary function is to indicate the approximate date an improvement will be needed,
 its estimated cost and the agency responsible for its execution. It provides a long-range
 guide to the annual preparation of a capital improvement budget and therefore must be
 considered general and flexib~.        The land and improvemen-t costs shown are approxi-
  mations based on average costs per acre for land and square foot costs of buildings.
 Before t!'\ese costs are applied to a budget, detailed cost analysis ~ould be made by the
  agencies involved.
  The improvement program scheduling should be a continuing process which should be
  reviewed annually and projected to the year ahead to keep abreast of changing conditions.
  In order to determine the economic feasibility of the Capital Improvement Program and
  how much can be financed during the initial phases, it will be necessary for the City to
  analyze its financial structure in detail before preparing a six-year capital budget. The
  analysis should include existing receipts and expenditures and potential increases of both.
  Proje.cted income should take into consideration increased assessed valuations of proposed
   development and additional revenue from increased retail sales. Policies on tax rates will
   also influence future income for financing improvements.           -::
   Many of the improvements proposed are self-supporting,     such ~s water, sewer and refuse.
   Others are separately financed, such as schools.
        items should be selected from the schedule and a determination made of the method of
        proposed financing -either       from general funds or utilization of bonded indebtedness. If
        the bond method is used, financing charges must be added to future expenditures and
        policy determined as to .the percentage of total debt limit to be utilized.
        Once the financial capability of the city is determined, it may be necesary to reschedule
        items of capital improvements geared to the City's ability to finance them. This should
        be an annual review and adjustment process.
        Following is the proposed Capital Improvement Program indicating responsible agency,
        method of financing and the year the improvement is needed. Some of the improvements
        are critically needed and should be given high priority, while others are long range and can
        be geared to long-range financial capability of the City. If critically needed facilities
         cannot be scheduled in the first six-year capital budget, they should be phased and
        rescheduled for succeeding years.
         It cannot be stressed enough that it is extremely important that the Capital Improvement
         Program and capjtal budget be frequently reviewed and updated as often as necessary. An
         updated, current program provides an overall picture of needed improvements, their
         priority and most important, refects the long-range intent and policy of the City
         admjnistration.
         The costs indicated are rough estimates proposed on a very general basis without benefit
         of detailed plans or specifications.     Detailed plans and estimates should be prepared
...before        projects are initiated.    The costs shown in the following schedule are therefore
l'elJSi" intended to indicate the magnitude of improvements.
  I';
    ':
   '--
   ..
  .~
  .
   ':
   I.~
   ~',:c~-:
   :co
                                                                                             '--to'
                                                                                                  ,       '.:''                   '. .
                                                                                              ~.-.'...                  ..:     '- _.
                                                                                               ...
     ..~                                                                         ...
    ::.~~                  -f.~;:'                          ...,:      ~ ~~~:.
                                                                                --
                                                                               ""1
                                                                                           -   .~-"                                                              .,.~
                                                                                                                                                                          "         ;".    .
                                                        Po'..::a
                                                                                                                                                                            ,;".--           I
                                                             ~.:."-..II..-
                                                                       ~'     "2ft. ..        , .~ ~-.         "
                                                                                                                       w.                                          ~.: "':' ~"7.      ,..;
           A.-.:--.~                                   ,..'"                  :. J,8    ..     ,:~~",...17_,,:. .
           ~ ,...~~
      '.). ~      2 :-~...             ...:r
                                                        ' -.,~              "..."-'     ..                       '..'.               ','.
                                                                                                  ~~W~                        :.;";~,.-:~,.                        ~t.'
                                                                                             ~'JOf~~.~
                                                                                                                                 '~':.'
                                                                                                                               ': ";:';. '~
                                                                                                                                                    .                       :.;"--~'
                                                                                                                                                                            " ...            .:\:
                                                                                                                                                                        ..",...,..     .
    ~  :'~~,~ ':~t:.~;~-~%:~Y:i.:;,'                                                           1175   ..,. IMN~'                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                          .".
                                                                                               ~, =      ~       T~"    .""'.', ,:,.~~:..a'~';:i:--
                                                                                                                            " -'             ,
                                                                                                                                               ...:.                 ..
                                                                                                                                                                              .~
                                                                                                   ._.~ ~.i..-                                  t                .            .'...
    ...~.':                ..:~-;~.~~:r~£1'1;:'fi;;-~..~                                       .-,_._~ -..~...~"...C.                             , ...-..
     ..~                   -.~                 .-0,'""" ',          , ~          "'--"0
                                                                                                   ~-~                         :::..:~         ",.--                              J.-
      c.==~~.
           ~
           ~H..L~~
                      :
                                   m.a.~o~
           11_-. : ~';; '~~,,;,.:~"':-."
           ~'I_~~
                                                    ':;:-,~;:.~;:
                                      ;:'f...,~~.t~~fo~'
                                            .'.. ".'.
                                               ..o"'.#i!o"\""'"
                                                                   .~.:;~.
                                                                  --,-
                                                                        ~~~~.".
                                                                             ,... ,..
                                                                                        ~.
                                                                                  tow" ..
                                                                                                .-.it
                                                                                                   ~"Id8-.-
                                                                                                    ~
                                                                                                   1DT
                                                                                                            ~. .~
                                                                                                       .AI..,
                                                                                                                                   ..,
                                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                                                                     .;-...
                                                                                                                                  ..."!.
                                                                                                                                                           ;.
                                                                                                                                                           It..
                                                                                                                                                         .".
                                                                                                                                                                              ~-
                                                                                               ,. -,. I-.ft~
           ~~~
        .-.t..-
               ,'-                ..:~':~" o"""\;;~..:~';, .'.':..::;'-.:0
                                                               ..,.
                                                                           -:.""~::~.
                                                                       "~"'~.
                         ~~--.""::~~:'~~~~'~~:.~...I._~::"~'.:.fi'~~:"'.~.:';;'..':.~~
                                                                                               ~.  ~~-:-,W8-                                       ..'..      ;_..oU,.~.aI:~-~---~"
                                                                                                                                          -of:.            w~                 .JtQ,8
      _.,.~..",                                   :"":'..~'"            ,~.          :~        ~.~.          -.:                           "                  ..-
                                                                                                -~                     ~..          ..'"..
                                                                                                                                                             .,.."',      ~.- .
                                                                                                                                                             ..;..,-.!..:.ft8
       A.~..                         '         .
       &~   ~--.:.':-          .".~~c ,:~i~      ,,-t;to '..:.-  ~\:. ..)'-.' --;;.
                                                              :,~.'.::::i~..~                 ~          -:.'            .:,...'          ':"" '-~';'::~. ":.-:"~~ .
                                                                                              k ~""M~_.-                                   -.-:-.,:~~:...:'.~*,.,.        '-..~
                                                                                              ~.~.,.,.                                     :-.-"'.
                                                                                                  ..:'~';o;.-                                   ..,..;.,..:-:" ::":';".."
         '~~~1:"'" ..:~~..:..                                                                                                               .;; .-:       -;"; "";" ','.. .,: ..'
.


