Agriculture Element
Introduction
The open space lands used for crop production and animal grazing play a key
role in defining the visual context of Fairfield as well as having an important
economic impact to Solano County. The General Plan Land Use Element and
the Open Space/ Conservation and Recreation Element contain a number of
policies for preserving the hillside areas around Fairfield and agricultural lands in
Suisun Valley and Green Valley. In addition, the City has a right-to-farm
ordinance, and is bound by the terms of a 30 year agreement with the Solano
Irrigation District and the Solano County Flood Control and Water Conservation
District which prohibits extension of City services to, or annexation of, land in
Suisun Valley.
California State Law requires that a General Plan address agricultural resources
in a variety of ways. The location and extent of agricultural lands and resources
must be addressed in the Land Use Element. In addition, the Open Space and
Conservation Element must address the development and utilization of natural
resources including soils, and the open space used for the managed production
of food and fiber. The Agriculture Element is included as an optional element of
the City’s General Plan, to emphasize and strengthen existing City policies
regarding preservation and enhancement of agricultural lands and activities in
the Fairfield General Plan Area, and reducing or eliminating conflicts between
agricultural and urban uses.
City of Fairfield General Plan          AG - 1                              June 2002

Goals
The goals of the Agriculture Element are:
Preserve agricultural and grazing lands within the General Plan
Area which define the visual setting of Fairfield.
Recognize the economic importance of agriculture in Solano
County by directing the City’s growth away from important
farmlands and prime agricultural soils.
Objectives, Policies & Programs
Objective AG 1
Support preservation of existing agricultural lands. (See Policy LU 2.1 and
Objective ED8)
    Policy 1.1
    Preserve agricultural enterprises by supporting right-to-farm policies, and
    separating and buffering agricultural lands from new development areas. (See
    Policy OS 1.1)
    Policy AG 1.2
    Provide economic support for permanent commitment to agricultural uses.
    (See Policy OS 1.2)
         Program AG 1.1A
         Provide economic supports for growers: low interest loans, farmers
         markets, tax reforms, and water subsidies, in exchange for long term
         commitment to agricultural use. (See Policy ED 8.1 and Program OS
         1.2A)
         Program AG 1.2B
         Support the Solano County agricultural preserve program and a strong
         county right-to-farm ordinance. (See Program OS 1.2B)
         Program AG 1.2C
         Encourage development of agriculture processing and handling industries.
         (See Program OS 1.2C)
City of Fairfield General Plan           AG - 2                         June 2002

    Policy AG 1.3
    Maintain current agricultural zoning in the area east of Travis Air Force Base,
    including the Jepson Prairie. (See Policy OS 1.3)
    Policy AG 1.4
    Permanently preserve productive agricultural lands within the Suisun Valley
    by continuing to direct new urban development away from the Suisun Valley.
    (See Policy LU 2.1, OS 1.4 and ED 8.3)
         Program 1.4A
         Where land is identified as prime farmland, farmland of statewide
         importance, or unique farmland on the most recent Important Farmland
         maps prepared by the California Department of Conservation is proposed
         for conversion to urban uses, the City shall arrange for preservation of an
         equal amount of the same class of farmland within the area. Such
         arrangement may be through fee purchase, purchase of conservation
         easements, payment of an in-lieu fee, or other mechanism.
    Policy AG 1.5
    Strongly reaffirm the City of Fairfield’s commitment to the basic goals of the
    1974 Agreement between the City of Fairfield, Solano County Flood Control
    and Water District, and the Solano Irrigation District (the “SID Agreement”),
    and actively participate in any local measures that promote preservation of
    agriculture adjacent to Fairfield. (See Policy OS 1.5)
         Program AG 1.5A
         The City shall, in cooperation with Solano County and the Solano Irrigation
         District, initiate and support an extension of the SID Agreement beyond its
         current expiration date of January 1, 2006.
    Policy AG 1.6
    What is Urban shall be municipal, and what is rural shall be within the County.
    Any urban development requiring basic municipal services shall occur only
    within the incorporated City and within the urban limit line established by the
    General Plan. (See Objective LU3, Policy LU 3.1, and Policy OS 1.6)
    Policy AG 1.7
    Annexation areas contained in the City’s 1998 Comprehensive Annexation
    Plan which contain prime agricultural soils shall be given a lower priority than
    annexation areas without prime agricultural soils with the same land use
    designation or intended use unless: a) this would not result in orderly
    development patterns (i.e. pockets of prime agricultural soils surrounded by
    land developed with urban uses), or b) the annexation area is within an area
    designated for development by the General Plan, or c) the prime agricultural
    soils contained within the annexation area are not planned for urban
    development.
City of Fairfield General Plan             AG - 3                          June 2002

    Policy AG 1.8
    Annexation proposals should not be processed while there is an active
    California Land Conservation Act (“Williamson Act”) contract(s) on a
    substantial portion, being 50 percent or more, of the subject property or until a
    cancellation has been filed with Solano County and less than five years
    remain on the life of the contract. Exceptions to this policy may be made
    under either of the following circumstances: a) for properties where
    development will result in the permanent preservation of substantial (50
    percent or more of the subject annexation area) amounts of agricultural land
    or open space; or b) for those properties whose Williamson Act Contracts
    were protested by the City prior to adoption of the City’s 1998 Comprehensive
    Annexation Plan.
    Policy AG 1.9
    Annexation proposals that are within one of the City’s Open Space Planning
    Areas (OSPA’s) that contain prime agricultural soils shall be first reviewed by
    the Open Space Commission for their review and comment.
Objective AG 2
Encourage the preservation and expansion of the local agricultural
economy. (See Policy LU 2.1, Objective OS 1, Policy OS 1.1, Policy OS 1.2,
Programs OS 1.2 A, 1.2 B, and 1.2 C, and Objective ED 8)
    Policy AG 2.1
    Cooperatively work with farmers, property owners, universities, colleges, and
    agricultural organizations and agencies to enhance the viability of agricultural
    uses and activities. (See Policy ED 8.1)
         Program AG 2.1 A
         Continue to sponsor the Downtown Farmers Market and other related
         activities that promote local farming and agriculture. (See Program ED 8.1
         A)
    Policy AG 2.2
    Coordinate open space preservation and conservation programs with
    economic development programs to enhance agriculture. (See Program ED
    8.2)
    Policy AG 2.3
    Development shall not encroach upon or consume productive cropland in
    areas such as the Suisun Valley. (See Policy OS 1.4, Policy OS 1.5, and
    Policy ED 8.3)
City of Fairfield General Plan            AG - 4                           June 2002

    Policy AG 2.4
    Attract industry that complements and supports the local agricultural
    economy. (See Policy ED 8.4)
Objective AG 3
Achieve a pattern of development that reinforces the City’s desired image.
(See Objective LU 2, Objective UD 4, Policy UD 4.1)
    Policy AG 3.1
    Encourage the preservation of agricultural land surrounding the City and
    permanently preserve agriculture in the Suisun Valley. (See Policy LU 2.1,
    Objective OS 1, Policies OS 1.1, OS 1.2, OS 1.3, OS 1.4 and OS 1.5,
    Programs OS 1.2 A, OS 1.2 B, OS 1.2 C, OS 1.4 A, and Rancho Solano
    North Master Plan Area Policy 6)
         Program AG 3.1A
         In cooperation with Solano County, establish a permanent agricultural
         buffer between urban development in Fairfield and agriculture in Suisun
         Valley. The City shall seek to establish such a buffer through the
         acquisition of fee title, development rights or conservation easement(s).
         Agriculture and recreational uses will be allowed within the buffer. The City
         may choose to lease back to farmers any lands acquired by the City.
          This buffer shall incorporate existing landforms and features, such as the
         ridges east of Mankas Corner Road and Clayton Road, and groves of
         trees so as to take advantage of these features to visually screen
         development from the Valley. If existing features prove inadequate, the
         development shall use trees, berms, and other methods to minimize
         visibility from the Valley. (See Policy LU 2.1 and Program LU 2.1A)
         Program AG 3.1 B
         The City, in cooperation with the County, shall establish similar buffers
         between productive permanent agricultural lands and development in
         other areas undergoing development. (See Program LU 2.1B)
         Program AG 3.1 C
         The City shall continue to work with the County to plan for the preservation
         of the hills to the west of Suisun Valley as open space. (See Program LU
         2.1C)
City of Fairfield General Plan             AG - 5                            June 2002

Supporting Text
One of the underlying goals of the General Plan is to maintain and enhance the
City’s desired image through a well balanced pattern of development. The
agricultural lands in the Suisun Valley and the grazing lands to the north and
south of Fairfield play a prominent role in defining the visual character of the City.
Further, intensive agriculture (row crop and orchard) plays a vital role in Solano
County’s economy, accounting for about 150 million dollars yearly in total value
of production.
The City's agricultural preservation policies contained in the General Plan are broad
and comprehensive. Having realized that the community's sense of identity and
quality of life are closely associated with the natural setting surrounding Fairfield,
the City has adopted numerous policies and programs aimed at protecting valuable
agricultural lands around Fairfield from the rapidly increasing development
pressures within the region.
The Environmental Impact Report prepared for the 1992 General Plan identified
2,734 acres of prime agricultural lands in Fairfield’s planning area. Most of this land
is located within Green valley and Suisun Valley. The 1998 Comprehensive
Annexation Plan identified 361 acres of prime farmland in the City’s Urban Limit
Line. All of this land is located north of Travis Air Force Base within the proposed
Fairfield-Vacaville-Solano County Greenbelt and the Travis Reserve Area.
City of Fairfield General Plan           AG - 6                              June 2002

Circulation Element
Introduction
The Circulation Element is a required element of local general plans and is closely
linked to all other general plan elements. Circulation systems can influence the
nature, extent and pace of urban development. The Circulation Element and Land
Use Element must therefore be consistent. The circulation system can also be
planned to satisfy social and urban design objectives, and a well-planned
circulation system is an important ingredient in a healthy economic environment.
The Circulation Element is not limited to automobile-related transportation, but
addresses the development of a balanced, multi-modal circulation system for the
City. It addresses such topics as roadway development, road safety, public transit,
pedestrian and bicycle facilities and transportation systems management.
The City is committed to the concept of “Complete Streets” in which the system of
roads, streets, and highways accommodates all users and encourages walking,
bicycling, and use of public transit. Complete Streets also serve as social spaces
and urban design elements that help strengthen the overall community. Complete
Streets policies and programs are a key mechanism for the City to reduce Vehicle
Miles Traveled and to meet the City’s obligations under State law to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions.
Fairfield is located at the convergence point of three growing regions: the San
Francisco Bay area, the greater Sacramento area and San Joaquin County.
Population growth in all three of these areas, as well as the growth of Fairfield itself,
affects the City's circulation system. Because transportation facilities perform a
regional as well as local function, transportation planning must inevitably tend to
cross jurisdictional boundaries. The Circulation Element, therefore, addresses
coordination with other jurisdictions.
Goal
The goal of the Circulation Element is:
Create and maintain an efficient, safe, and coordinated multi-modal
circulation system that reduces environmental and social impacts of
transportation systems, serves the needs of a variety of users and meets
the social, economic development, and urban design needs of the
community.
City of Fairfield General Plan            CI - 1

Objectives, Policies and Programs
Objective CI 1
Establish a circulation system that is consistent with the land use patterns of
the City. (See Objective LU 4 and Policy LU 4.2)
    Policy CI 1.1
    The City’s network of roads, local streets, sidewalks, bicycle routes, and
    multiuse pathways shall be compatible with the general land use patterns of the
    City. The circulation system in infill development areas and Priority
    Development Areas shall facilitate and complement infill development.
    Policy CI 1.2
    The City’s mix of land uses, development patterns, and densities shall be
    conducive to alternative modes of transportation, such as walking, transit,
    paratransit and bicycles. Pedestrian travel shall be encouraged through the
    location of employment centers and commercial development within close
    proximity of residential areas. In particular, new development in infill areas, such
    as Priority Development Areas, should support alternative transportation. (See
    Policy LU 1.2)
         Program CI 1.2 A
         Develop and implement design standards for infill development which
         support walking, bicycling, and public transit.
         Program CI 1.2 B
         Implement the rezoning program recommended in the 80-to-80 Corridor
         Plan for West Texas Street to foster creation of a mixed use, pedestrian-
         oriented high density residential and commercial corridor which
         complements and supports transit use.
         Program CI 1.2 C
         Implement the Train Station Specific Plan to ensure that development
         supports the train station and pedestrian and bicycling infrastructure
         identified in the Specific Plan.
         Program CI 1.2 D
         Initiate a planning and traffic safety study to improve pedestrian safety and
         comfort that recognizes the unique character of Downtown Fairfield.
         Solutions might include installing stop signs along Texas Street between
         Pennsylvania Avenue and Jefferson Street, traffic calming, and/or
         redirecting fast through-traffic to Highway 12 and/or Travis Blvd.
City of Fairfield General Plan               CI - 2

    Policy CI 1.3
    Acquire the ultimate right-of-way for streets during early stages of development.
    Include adequate right-of-way for sidewalks, bicycle lanes, and/or multiuse
    paths identified in the Circulation Element and/or master plans.
    Policy CI 1.4
    Control the spacing of access points to adjoining properties along arterials to
    assure the free flow of traffic on the arterial, except as needed to support access
    for pedestrians and bicyclists.
    Policy CI 1.5
    Plans for new development in higher density infill areas, including Priority
    Development Areas should facilitate walking and bicycling.
         Program CI 1.5A
         The Public Works and Community Development Departments shall develop
         a guidebook for pedestrian and bicycling infrastructure. The guidebook
         should address narrowing existing collectors and arterials through bicycle
         lanes, expanding sidewalks, enhancing pedestrian crossings, installing
         special pavements, and implementing other traffic calming policies and
         mechanisms.
         Program CI 1.5 B
         The Public Works and Community Development Departments will pursue
         available planning grants to study “complete streets” policies through traffic
         calming and modification of existing collector and arterial streets in Priority
         Development Areas and other infill locations.
    Policy CI 1.6
    Public Works staff shall incorporate appropriate traffic calming and Complete
    Streets considerations during design of City capital and maintenance projects.
    Policy CI 1.7
    Streets and intersections shall be safely and easily usable for all types of
    pedestrians, including school children, youths, the elderly, and the disabled.
         Program CI 1.7 A
         Apply for funding such as Safe Routes to Transit and Safe Routes to
         Schools to improve pedestrian safety.
         Program CI 1.7 B
         Plan for and install crosswalks on major pedestrian routes used by schools
         children, youths, the elderly, and the disabled. Install pedestrian crossing
         signals where appropriate.
City of Fairfield General Plan             CI - 3

         Program CI 1.7 C
         Address the problem of illegal crossing of the Union Pacific Railroad south of
         Texas Street by children and others by developing a plan for alternative,
         accessible pedestrian routes to Armijo High School and other major activity
         centers accessed by youth.
Objective CI 2
Achieve a coordinated regional and local transportation system that
minimizes traffic congestion and efficiently serves users.
    Policy CI 2.1
    Local circulation system improvements shall be generally consistent with the
    goals and objectives stated in the Metropolitan Transportation Commission
    (MTC) Regional Transportation Plan. (See Objective LU 5 and Policy LU 5.1)
    Policy CI 2.2
    Cooperate with local and regional jurisdictions in the preparation of State
    mandated regional plans, such as the Sustainable Community Strategy, Clean
    Air Plans and the Solano County Congestion Management Program. (See
    Objective LU 5 and Policy LU 5.1)
    Policy CI 2.3
    Work with Caltrans to identify needed improvements to its highway/interstate
    facilities in the City and implement necessary programs on the state highway
    system and its interchanges/intersections with local roadways.
    Policy CI 2.4
    Work with Caltrans and adjacent jurisdictions to improve the operational
    performance of I-80, I-680 and State Route 12 as regional facilities.
    Policy CI 2.5
    Work with Caltrans in analyzing the performance of freeway interchanges
    located in the General Plan area, and seek appropriate improvements.
    Policy CI 2.6
    Cooperate with adjacent jurisdictions to plan and construct a loop system of
    arterial streets and roads so that traffic can flow around the periphery of the city
    and not cause congestion in central Fairfield.
    Policy CI 2.7
    Cooperate with adjacent jurisdictions to improve the principal arterial gateways
    to Fairfield to facilitate the movement of traffic flowing into and out of the City.
    Improvements shall be consistent with adopted design plans, including the
    Urban Design Element, the Urban Design Plan, the Fairfield Gateways
    Implementation Plan, and the West Texas Street Master Plan. (See Policy UD
    1.1 and Policy UD 1.4)
City of Fairfield General Plan            CI - 4
    Policy CI 2.8
    Continue to support and participate in efforts led by the Solano Transportation
    Authority and CALTRANS to evaluate and mitigate traffic flowing between cities
    in Solano County.
Objective CI 3
Street and highway improvements shall provide adequate and appropriate
levels of service for all streets in Fairfield.
    Policy CI 3.1
    P.M. Peak Hour Levels of Service (L.O.S.) shall generally meet the following
    standards:
         •    Arterial Streets:    L.O.S. “D” or better
         •    Collector Streets:   L.O.S. “C” or better
         •    Local Streets:       L.O.S. “B” or better
    These standards may be modified where public health, safety, and welfare
    requirements warrant. Intersections may be permitted to maintain lower levels of
    service if urban design, community character, pedestrian circulation, access for
    bicyclists, or other goals limit necessary road or street improvements.
    Select arterial intersections may be permitted to maintain a Level of Service of
    “E” where the estimated construction cost of required improvements is
    significant relative to the expected reduction in congestion.
    Policy CI 3.2
    Prioritize street improvements based on current and forecasted service levels.
    Roadways experiencing or forecast to experience worse than applicable Level
    of Service conditions (unstable or forced traffic flows) shall require
    improvements, unless other public health, safety, or welfare factors determine
    otherwise.
         Program CI 3.2 A
         Continue monitoring traffic volume of roads within the City.
         Program CI 3.2 B
         Conduct periodic traffic forecasts to account for major land use changes in
         the City. Traffic forecasts should be used to identify deficient roadways and
         update street improvement plans and priorities.
         Program CI 3.2 C
         Develop action plans to improve the roadway system, as necessary for
         buildout of the General Plan.
    Policy CI 3.3
    Reduce traffic congestion at key intersections throughout the City.
City of Fairfield General Plan             CI - 5

         Program CI 3.3 A
         Make improvements to intersections experiencing conditions worse than the
         applicable Level of Service standard by adding appropriate turning lanes to
         congested approaches, widening intersection approaches, or modifying
         signal timing at intersections and coordinating with other signals, as
         appropriate, unless other public health, safety, or welfare factors determine
         otherwise. Such factors shall include impacts on pedestrian and bicycling
         circulation and safety, including access to major activity centers and
         community facilities.
   Policy CI 3.4
   When a traffic study is required for an application for new development, the City
   will require that the study include an analysis of the appropriate local and
   collector intersections that may be affected by the proposal. The study shall also
   consider impacts of the project and the projects road improvements on
   pedestrian and bicycling circulation and safety and shall propose mechanisms
   for mitigating such impacts and improving access for bicyclists and pedestrians.
Objective CI 4
Adequately finance street and highway improvements.
    Policy CI 4.1
    Coordinate local transportation plans with the Solano County Congestion
    Management Program to ensure eligibility for state and federal funding. (See
    Policy LU 5.1)
         Program CI 4.1 A
         Develop and regularly update the Citywide Transportation Capital
         Improvement Plan consistent with the General Plan, Congestion
         Management Plan, and Regional Transportation Plan. The Transportation
         Capital Improvement Plan shall identify how the improvements identified in
         the general plan are to be funded. This shall include identification of city
         funding sources and amounts (i.e., taxes, assessments, fees), as well as
         non-City funding sources (i.e., taxes and funding share).
         Program CI 4.1 B
         Continue to collect taxes authorized by Assembly Bill 1600 to fund needed
         circulation improvements.
    Policy CI 4.2
    Coordinate local funding with the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) to
    ensure eligibility for maximum available funding under the Regional
    Transportation Improvement Plan (RTIP).
City of Fairfield General Plan            CI - 6
         Program CI 4.2 A
         Amend the citywide development impact fee ordinance to help fund needed
         circulation improvements, as identified in the General Plan the
         Transportation Capital Improvement Plan, Specific Plans, Areawide Plans,
         or Development Agreements. Impact fees shall be set in accordance with
         the relative share of improvements necessitated by new development.
         Program CI 4.2 B
         Identify non-fee based funding sources, including special taxes under the
         Mello-Roos Community Facilities District Act and benefit assessments
         under the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 or other similar legislation,
         consistent with the circulation improvements identified in the general plan.
         These funding sources should be used for regional and citywide projects
         consistent with the RTP and RTIP, in addition to local improvements.
Objective CI 5
Provide adequate parking and loading facilities while encouraging alternative
means of transportation.
    Policy CI 5.1
    Development projects shall provide off-street parking as required in the Zoning
    Ordinance or other governing ordinances, policies or plans. Reduced standards
    will be considered for projects in close proximity to transit.
    Policy CI 5.2
    Public and private employers should provide preferential parking for vanpools,
    carpools and other transit users.
    Policy CI 5.3
    Encourage shared parking facilities for both private businesses and public
    agencies.
         Program CI 5.3 A
         Establish a joint agreement between the City, County and School Districts to
         operate shared parking facilities.
         Program CI 5.3 B
         Staff will work with developers to facilitate joint parking and access
         agreements, shared parking arrangements, consolidated parking lots, and
         other mechanisms for sharing parking facilities.
    Policy CI 5.4
    Reserve on street parking in commercial areas for short-term users and/or
    residents of mixed use buildings.
City of Fairfield General Plan              CI - 7
    Policy CI 5.5
    Work with the various government agencies to provide secure parking at park-
    and-ride lots and transit stations.
    Policy CI 5.6
    Permit reductions in on-site parking in exchange for pedestrian and bicycling
    improvements, such as secure bicycle parking, private shuttle services, or
    subsidized transit pass programs. Where appropriate, permit the use of off-site
    parking areas, on-street parking, and other alternatives to parking lots and
    parking garages.
Objective CI 6
Develop Transportation Systems Management (TSM) programs for the
Fairfield area in order to reduce the amount of peak hour congestion on City
streets.
    Policy CI 6.1
    Encourage the use of carpooling and vanpooling to maintain an acceptable level
    of service on City streets and highway/interstate facilities.
    Policy CI 6.2
    Require that all large public and private employers develop TSM plans to
    encourage their employees to use some form of collective transportation to
    commute to and from work. These plans should include not only information
    regarding rideshare lists and available transit, but also provision of transit
    passes, preferential parking and other incentives to participating employees.
         Program CI 6.2 A
         Continue to implement the City’s Trip Reduction Ordinance (TRO) in
         accordance with State Air Quality and Congestion Management
         requirements.
    Policy CI 6.3
    Implement TSM plans in conjunction with development in order to prevent future
    traffic congestion in the City.
    Policy CI 6.4
    Work with Caltrans to implement the use of high occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes
    on I-80 through Fairfield and to study the use of reduced tolls or license fees for
    carpools and vanpools on highway/interstate facilities.
    Policy CI 6.5
    Coordinate with ride-sharing programs, such as RIDES and Solano Commuter
    Information, and other transportation agencies to provide up-to-date lists of
    potential riders and to educate the public on commuting options.
City of Fairfield General Plan           CI - 8

    Policy CI 6.6
    Encourage the development of employer funded vanpool and shuttle bus
    services to new employment centers.
    Policy CI 6.7
    Encourage employers to offer flex time arrangements to their employees in
    order to reduce the percentage of trips made during the peak hours.
    Policy CI 6.8
    Strive to achieve a 30% reduction in the total number of peak period employee
    trips.
Objective CI 7
Develop a transit network capable of satisfying both local and regional travel
demand.
    Policy CI 7.1
    Encourage maximum utilization of the existing transit system in Fairfield.
         Program CI 7.1 A
         Establish turnout points to facilitate the loading and unloading of passengers
         and to reduce conflicts with other traffic.
         Program CI 7.1 B
         Study the feasibility of increasing transit frequency in areas currently served,
         and continue evaluating the possibility of expanding service to areas without
         service.
    Policy CI 7.2
    Design transit stops that provide good access to major public facilities and
    employment centers within the City.
         Program CI 7.2 A
         Evaluate annually the need for additional bus shelters.
    Policy CI 7.3
    Develop well-defined transit corridors linking all areas of the City. The transit
    system shall promote the Central Business District as the cultural and social
    hub for the City. (See Policy LU 2.2)
City of Fairfield General Plan              CI - 9
         Program CI 7.3 A
         Establish centralized transit facilities in the western, central and eastern
         areas of the City. In eastern Fairfield, implement the Fairfield Train Station
         Specific Plan, which calls for a multi-modal transit station centered on the
         planned train station located near the southeast corner of Vanden Road and
         Peabody Road.
    Policy CI 7.4
    Provide transit services between major employment centers in each area of the
    City and surrounding residential communities, coordinating transit services with
    the particular land uses proposed for each center.
    Policy CI 7.5
    Provide express transit service between the western, central and eastern areas
    of the City, when the demand is sufficient.
    Policy CI 7.6
    Integrate regional transit with local transit to make the entire system more user-
    friendly. Coordinate the integration of local and regional transit with the Solano
    County Transportation Authority and other cities.
         Program CI 7.6 A
         Develop a system of intermodal transfers between transit operators serving
         the local area, Solano County and neighboring cities and counties of the
         region, including the San Francisco Bay Area and Metropolitan Sacramento.
         The system shall include a multi-modal transit station which provides
         regional rail service, to be located at the southeast corner of Vanden Road
         and Peabody Road.
    Policy CI 7.7
    Coordinate with regional transit planners to determine the feasibility of
    developing fixed guideway systems for interregional passenger traffic, making
    use of existing rail lines whenever possible.
    Policy CI 7.8
    Continue to support efforts to expand ridership on the Capital Corridor rail line
    between Sacramento and the Bay Area.
         Program CI 7.8 A
         Develop and implement planning concepts for Downtown Fairfield which
         encourage appropriate infill development and intensification of land uses.
         Program CI 7.8 B
         Continue studying the potential for reopening a direct surface street
         connection between downtown Fairfield and downtown Suisun City to better
City of Fairfield General Plan             CI - 10
         facilitate and encourage pedestrian, bicyclist, and vehicular access to the
         Suisun City Train Station. Address this street connection as part of the
         planning for the Highway 12/I-80/I-680 interchange project.
         Program 7.8 C
         Implement the Train Station Specific Plan which encourages high density
         development in a “transit village” configuration near the planned Vacaville-
         Fairfield Train Station
Objective CI 8
Preserve the future availability of the Travis Air Force Base facility. (See
Policy ED 1.9)
    Policy CI 8.1
    Participate in any regional studies for additional airport facilities. (See Objective
    LU 5)
Objective CI 9: Support bicycling as a safe method of everyday transportation
for all people in Fairfield. Bicycle facilities should link residences, major
activity centers, employment, public services, recreational facilities, and
regional bicycle routes.
    Policy 9.1
    Ensure that all development projects incorporate bicycle infrastructure
    consistent with this Circulation Element.
         Program CI 9.1 A
         As funding permits, plan for and construct the bicycle infrastructure identified
         in the Circulation Element. Prioritize closing gaps in the existing network.
         Program CI 9.1 B
         The City will develop and implement a funding program for each
         development project which addresses project specific infrastructure consist
         with the goals of this Circulation Element as well as providing for a fair share
         of regional and city-wide bicycle facilities.
         Program CI 9.1 C
         Use bicycle projects to mitigate environmental impacts, such as greenhouse
         gas emissions, air quality, and transportation.
    Policy CI 9.2
    Cooperate with neighboring jurisdictions and regional agencies to expand the
    countywide bikeway network and to provide linkages, where appropriate, with
    regional networks. (See Policy OS 11.5 and Objective LU 5)
City of Fairfield General Plan             CI - 11

    Policy CI 9.3
    Facilitate and promote bicycling by providing adequate information to bicyclists
    regarding routes, facilities, and destinations.
         Program CI 9.3 A
         Develop and implement a comprehensive bicycle signage program
         consistent with CALTRANS Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices or
         other appropriate standards which may incorporate these elements:
                  •  A logo unique to the City of Fairfield consistent with federal, state,
                     and regional graphic design for bicycle signage
                  •  Route type identification(i.e., bicycle path, bicycle lane, bicycle
                     route)
                  •  Route name if appropriate (e.g., “Fairfield Linear Park Trail”)
                  •  Key destinations, with distances (wayfinding signs)
                  •  Bicycle speed limits, where appropriate
                  •  Safety warnings, including crossings, pedestrian crossings, and
                     shared bicycle/pedestrian use.
         Program CI 9.3 B
         Prepare and make available to the public a comprehensive bicycle route
         map accessible via the internet and in published form. Illustrate designated
         bicycle facilities, recommended routes, and activity centers/key destinations
         Program CI 9.3 C
         Create a website focused on bicycling in Fairfield. Work with Solano County,
         adjoining cities, and the Solano Transportation Authority to develop and
         publicize a Solano County bicycling website.
    Policy CI 9.4
    Design bicycle infrastructure to provide a safe, comfortable environment for
    cyclists of all levels and experience.
         Program CI 9.4 A
         Develop street and trail location and design standards consistent with Table
         CI 2 which at a minimum meet the standards of the Caltrans Highway
         Design Manual or other appropriate standards. Standards should address
         cross sections, road widths, and bike path and lane dimensions. Ensure that
         bicycle facilities are safe for riders, avoiding door zones, unsafe intersection
         conditions, and other problems. Implementation should be flexible enough to
         meet local conditions and needs.
    Policy CI 9.5
    Minimize bicycle/pedestrian/motor vehicle conflicts by providing proper trail,
    street and intersection signage, design and separation. Bicycle trails should
    cross at marked crosswalks or controlled intersections. Continue to monitor and
City of Fairfield General Plan               CI - 12

    consider for adoption new tested technologies which improve bicyclist’s mobility
    and convenience while addressing safety considerations.
    Policy CI 9.6
    Identify and obtain potential funding sources for construction and maintenance
    of bicycle facilities. Use these funds to leverage local funds wherever possible.
         Program CI 9.6 A
         Continue monitoring and applying for grants such as Transportation for
         Livable Communities, Safe Routes to School, and Safe Routes to Transit
         and successor programs to fund bicycle education, promotion, and
         infrastructure projects
    Policy CI 9.7
    Maintain in a safe condition the City’s existing network of bicycle paths, lanes,
    and routes identified in Figure CI 9-1. Ensure new facilities can be maintained
    in a safe and usable condition by requiring annexation into a maintenance
    district or similar funding mechanism.
         Program CI 9.7 A
         As an element in the City’s Pavement Management System, periodically
         inventory, evaluate, and rank on an ongoing basis all existing bicycle
         facilities, identifying damage, safety issues, and missing infrastructure in
         accordance to best practices.
         Program CI 9.7 B
         Prioritize in the City’s maintenance budget and Capital Improvements
         Program the repair or replacement of damaged bicycle facilities.
         Program CI 9.7 C
         Install, replace or repair missing bicycle route signage, repaint or remark
         existing bicycle lane markings consistent with Caltrans or Federal retro-
         reflective standards as funding is available.
         Program CI 9.7 D
         Ensure that the contracted street sweeping program removes debris and tire
         hazards from all bicycle lanes and pathways.
    Policy CI 9.8
    Public and private employers should include appropriate on-site infrastructure
    and programs to facilitate bicycling.
City of Fairfield General Plan            CI - 13

         Program CI 9.8 A
         Conditions of approval for new developments shall address bicycle facilities
         and programs in major commercial, industrial, and institutional projects.
         Such facilities will include storage lockers, educational and outreach
         programs, and employer incentives programs.
         Program CI 9.8 B
         Fully implement Section 25.34.8 of the Zoning Ordinance, which requires
         one bicycle storage space for each 25 automobile parking spaces.
         Program CI 9.8 C
         Work with major activity centers such as the Solano County Government
         Center, Fairfield Civic Center, Fairfield-Suisun School District, Solano Mall,
         industrial and business parks and other business districts and major
         employers to develop programs to support and encourage the use of
         bicycles by employees, students, and clients. Include incentives such as
         reducing the number of parking spaces for major activity centers and
         employers who develop a comprehensive plan to encourage alternative
         commuting, including bicycling and walking.
    Policy CI 9.9
    Promote bicycle safety as a priority through public education and outreach.
         Program CI 9.9 A
         Support the work of local school districts, bicycle organizations, bicycle
         shops, and the Solano County Health Department and the Solano
         Transportation Authority to promote bicycle safety.
    Policy CI 9.10
    Integrate bicycles into public transit.
         Program CI 9.10 A
         Continue the policy of installing bicycle racks on all FAST busses.
         Program CI 9.10 B
         Incorporate bicycle storage, such as secure lockers, at the Fairfield
         Transportation Center on Cadenasso Drive as well as at the planned
         Vacaville-Fairfield Train Station.
Objective CI 10
Provide pedestrian facilities throughout the City to encourage walking as an
alternative to short distance vehicle travel.
    Policy CI 10.1
    Provide pedestrian facilities that are safe and pleasant to use. (See Policy UD
    3.2)
City of Fairfield General Plan              CI - 14
    Policy CI 10.2
    Implement street standards that include sidewalk or walkways on both sides of
    streets, where appropriate.
    Policy CI 10.3
    Street networks should emphasize short, accessible routes for pedestrians and
    bicyclists. Provide a connected street grid wherever possible. If cul-de-sacs
    and loop streets are used, provide pedestrian shortcuts and pathways to reduce
    the length of trips for pedestrians and cyclists.
    Policy CI 10.4
    Consider using landscaping or physical barriers on high capacity arterials to
    separate vehicles and pedestrians. (See Policy UD 3.2)
    Policy CI 10.5
    Consider constructing pedestrian overpasses where heavily traveled
    pedestrian routes cross busy intersections.
    Policy CI 10.6
    Design access ways to school facilities that will ensure the safety of children.
         Program CI 10.6 A
         In conjunction with local school districts, develop public education programs
         to promote pedestrian safety.
    Policy CI 10.7
    Require new commercial and residential developments to provide walkways
    that are safe and pleasant to the user.
    Policy CI 10.8
    Encourage existing facilities and require future facilities to provide access to
    disabled persons.
    Policy CI 10.9
    Encourage the location of basic shopping and services within approximately
    1,300 feet of residential and industrial areas.
Objective CI 11
Develop a vehicular circulation system that is safe and sensitive to adjoining
land uses.
    Policy CI 11.1
    Road and highway accident records shall be maintained to monitor the safety of
    local facilities.
City of Fairfield General Plan            CI - 15
         Program CI 11.1 A
         In conjunction with local school districts and other appropriate agencies,
         develop public education programs to promote automobile safety.
    Policy CI 11.2
    Route roadways in careful relationship to adjoining land uses to minimize noise,
    visual, and other impacts.
    Policy CI 11.3
    Discourage through-traffic in residential areas.
         Program CI 11.3 A
         Develop and implement a traffic calming program for residential collector
         and local streets where discouraging high speed through-traffic is desirable.
         Devices might include narrowed streets at intersections, speed tables,
         signage, or diverter systems.
    Policy CI 11.4
    Provide for adequate spatial separation and landscaping for development along
    freeway rights-of-way.
Objective CI 12
Contribute towards improving the air quality of the region through more
efficient use of private vehicles and increased use of alternative
transportation modes. (See Policy OS 8.3)
    Policy CI 12.1
    Cooperate with the regional air quality planning agency (the Bay Area Air
    Quality Management District) and agencies that deal with issues directly related
    to air quality, such as the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) and
    the Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC), in the development and
    implementation of regional air quality strategies. (See Objective LU 5, Policy LU
    5.1, Policy OS 8.l, and Policy OS 8.2)
         Program CI 12.1 A
         Support transportation control measures (TCM) recommended by the 1997
         Bay Area Clean Air Plan that would reduce the number and length of vehicle
         trips, including TCM1 (support voluntary employer based trip reduction
         programs), TCM 9 (improve bicycle access and facilities), and TCM 19
         (advocate planning and design of development projects to facilitate
         pedestrian travel).
City of Fairfield General Plan           CI - 16
    Policy CI 12.2
    Support subregional coordination with other cities, counties and planning
    agencies concerning land use, jobs/housing balance and transportation
    planning as a means of improving air quality. (See Objective LU 5, Policy LU
    5.1, and Policy OS 8.2)
    Policy CI 12.3
    Balance jobs and housing in future development to provide Fairfield residents
    the opportunity to work in the City near their homes and reduce long-distance
    commuting either to or from Fairfield. Jobs should be balanced (to the
    maximum extent possible) both in numbers and in salary range/housing cost.
    (See Objective LU 4)
    Policy CI 12.4
    Support the expansion and improvement of transit systems and ride sharing
    programs to reduce the production of automobile emissions. (See Policy OS
    8.3)
    Policy CI 12.5
    Minimize the number, properly space, and interconnect traffic signals in order to
    minimize the acceleration/deceleration that produces significantly higher
    vehicular emission levels.
         Program CI 12.5 A
         Adopt an action plan to improve the efficiency of traffic signals throughout
         the City.
Objective CI 13
Continuously evaluate the City’s transportation system for implementation of
General Plan objectives, policies, and goals, including “complete streets”
concepts.
    Policy CI 13.1
    Capital projects shall include an analysis of how the projects meet “complete
    streets” and other objectives and policies.
    Policy CI 13.2
    The City’s annual Capital Improvement Plan will include an analysis of
    consistency with General Plan goals and objectives, including complete streets
    concepts.
City of Fairfield General Plan          CI - 17

Supporting Text
Vision 2020 Traffic Task Force
The Circulation Element incorporates many of the recommendations included in the
Vision 2020 Traffic Task Force Final Report of April 1990. The Traffic Task Force
evaluated existing and future traffic problems and prepared recommendations
based on the previous General Plan. Their recommendations have therefore been
updated to reflect current land use and traffic projections.
Transportation System Improvements and Land Use
The future circulation system is consistent with the future land use concept
described in the Land Use Element and presented in the Land Use Diagram. The
circulation system is designed to facilitate easy access between any two points in
the City, including a transit system which links key destinations throughout the City.
The City Council adopted the Train Station Specific Plan in July 2011; The Specific
Plan includes specific roadway alignments, design standards which include
Complete Streets principles, and a funding program.
It is essential that a periodic inventory of system facilities be conducted to identify
deficiencies and develop plans for mitigation. These plans should be coordinated
with the State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP), the Regional
Transportation Improvement Program (RTIP) and the Solano County Congestion
Management Program (CMP). This coordination must be achieved in order to
secure state and federal funding for eligible projects.
Sustainable Community Strategy and the Priority Development Area Program
Assembly Bill 32 and Senate Bill 375 and related legislation requires the City of
Fairfield to address greenhouse gas emissions and the associated climate change.
One element of the response is the Priority Development Area (PDA) program
established by the Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) and the
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) The PDA program allows local
governments to designate areas near transit and employment prioritized for
intensification and infill development. The City of Fairfield has designated four
PDAs:
     •   Downtown South. This PDA includes Fairfield’s original “downtown” and the
         associated residential areas to the south and north. The Suisun-Fairfield
         Train Station abuts the PDA immediately to the south.
     •   West Texas Street. The West Texas Street PDA extends from Pennsylvania
         Avenue to Oliver Road. It incorporates the City’s Transportation Center on
         Cadenasso Drive.
City of Fairfield General Plan           CI - 18

    •    North Texas Street. This segment of central North Texas Street is focused
         on the Fairfield Linear Park Trail.
    •    Fairfield-Vacaville Train Station. This PDA incorporates the planned new
         community in northeastern Fairfield centered on the planned Capital
         Corridor train station.
The purpose of the PDA program is to concentrate new growth and development
near transit in order to theoretically reduce carbon emissions from private vehicles.
Regional planning and transportation capital funding will increasingly be focused in
PDAs. This represents both a constraint and an opportunity for Fairfield, as funding
may be available for needed transportation infrastructure in or near PDAs. Such
infrastructure can include improved pedestrian and bicycle facilities, transit stop or
center development, infill development which supports transit and alternative
transportation use, and other community infrastructure that supports development .
Transportation Systems Management and Air Quality
Transportation Systems Management (TSM) aims to improve the efficiency of
existing transportation systems. TSM plans are oriented toward making better use
of existing transportation facilities through short-term, low-cost improvements that
are more easily implemented than system development modifications, such as
roadway construction. A key element in the implementation of a TSM plan is the
dissemination of information to employer and employees concerning existing transit
and rideshare options for trips between home and work.
Commonly, TSM plans involve the implementation of Transportation Demand
Management (TDM) and Transportation Control Measures (TCM). TDM employs
techniques aimed at reducing traffic congestion. These techniques include the
promotion of flexible work schedules, rideshare programs and expanded transit
service. These strategies give employees greater flexibility in travel to and from
work, reducing congestion during commute periods.
TCMs are incorporated into state-mandated air quality plans. These measures
seek to reduce the quantity of pollutants discharged by motor vehicles through a
reduction in the number of single-occupant vehicle trips. TCMs not only include
public transit and ridesharing, but also measures such as the use of cleaner-
burning automobile fuels, the adoption of local trip reduction ordinances, the
design of highways to mitigate negative air quality impacts, and land use planning
to reduce trip distances.
Existing and Future Roadway Network
The City is served by two interstate freeways (Interstate 80 and Interstate 680), a
state highway (Highway 12), a set of arterial streets and many collector and local
streets. Proposed improvements to the roadway network are shown in Exhibit CI-1.
These include widening the regional highways and major arterials, upgrading
City of Fairfield General Plan             CI - 19

freeway interchanges, and creating new roads. A significant new roadway is the
new Manuel Campos Parkway, connecting Peabody Road in eastern Fairfield with
Interstate 80 at the North Texas Street interchange.
Improvements to the roadway system often require coordination with other
jurisdictions. Of particular importance to Fairfield are coordinated roadway
connections with Vacaville and Suisun City.
Fairfield's growth in recent years has stressed the need to improve the local
roadway network and parking facilities. Our dependence on the automobile as the
primary source of transportation necessitates the improvement of parking facilities
at various locations throughout the City.
The need to improve roadway and parking facilities, however, must be carefully
balanced with the need to control traffic congestion in Fairfield. The unrestricted
expansion of roadways and parking will undermine attempts to promote the use of
alternative means of transportation. The long-run economic and social health of the
City will depend on favorable traffic conditions that can only be maintained through
a balanced transportation system.
Existing and Future Transit System
Transit refers not only to buses and rail systems moving large numbers of people
over fixed routes, but also to carpools and vanpools of commuters traveling daily to
a common destination. In 1990, new regional transit routes were initiated. These
include buses to the Bay Area Rapid Transit System (BART) and Citylink service to
Vacaville. Passenger train service is offered by Amtrak, with trains stopping at the
Suisun-Fairfield Station. At a local level, the Fairfield-Suisun Transit System
provides bus service to major employment centers, schools, and shopping areas in
Fairfield and Suisun City. Coordination between the various transit systems should
continue to be encouraged.
The Circulation Element includes policies and programs that address both regional
and local transit. These include improvements to regional transit, consideration of a
future BART extension to Fairfield, and transit terminals.
Bicycle Transportation
The growth of bicycling as a sport and recreational activity and as an alternative
means of transportation has placed increasing demands on local government. The
growth of cycling can be attributed in part to the relatively low cost of cycling versus
motor vehicle travel, environmental benefits such as reduced air pollution, and
health and fitness benefits. The mild climate and predominately flat topography of
the Fairfield area are also conducive to cycling.
City of Fairfield General Plan          CI - 20
The use of bicycles as an alternative to motor vehicles can be enhanced by
providing cyclists with a safe, more convenient cycling environment. “Complete
Streets” design accommodates all users, including bicyclists. Bikeways should be
developed to provide direct routes to major employment centers and other
destinations from residential areas. Table CI -1 lists some key bicycling
destinations in Fairfield.
                                       TABLE CI-1
                               BICYCLING DESTINATIONS
         Fairfield Civic Center
         Solano County Government Center
         Solano County Health and Human Services Center
         High Schools
         Middle Schools
         Elementary Schools
         Fairfield Gateway (Solano Mall)
         Regional, Community, and Neighborhood Parks
         Northbay Hospital
         Public Transportation (AMTRAK/Solano Mall/Fairfield Transportation Center)
         Fairfield Gateway/Solano Mall
         Neighborhood and Community Commercial/Shopping Districts
         Office and Industrial Parks (Employment Centers)
         Travis Air Force Base
Roads should be designed and better maintained for bicycle comfort. In addition, the
City should consider zoning and development standards for commercial office and
business park development which require bicycle storage facilities, showers and
locker rooms for employees. Existing public transit facilities can be modified to allow
for better bicycle storage and transport so that a link between public transit and
bicycle use is reinforced. In addition, bike pools of local commuters can be formed.
Employer incentives such as redeemable coupons for bicycle maintenance at local
bike shops could encourage bicycle commuting.
In the past, children comprised the greatest percentage of cyclists. However,
adults now represent the majority of cyclists. This change can be attributed to the
greater emphasis being placed on health and fitness which has emerged in the
past two decades. The availability of parks and multi-use trails which allow bicycles
to be ridden in a safe environment has encouraged recreational cycling.
Additionally, the technological advances in bicycles themselves have allowed the
development of bicycles which are much more comfortable; this has resulted in
increased sales to the general public.
Several factors contribute to the safe operation of bicycles. Citizens must be
educated on applicable laws, and programs are needed to instruct riders on proper
bicycle operation. Violations, such as riding on the wrong side of the street, riding
City of Fairfield General Plan           CI - 21

at night without a light, and ignoring traffic signals, account for a majority of bicycle
accidents and citations. Requiring attendance at bicycle safety classes instead of
fines will allow enforcement to promote education.
In addition to providing access to key destinations, an effective bicycle
infrastructure should be designed to meet the conditions of the roadway network.
Standard bicycle planning defines three basic classes of bicycle facilities: Type 1
Bicycle Paths, Type 2 Bicycle Lanes, and Type 3 Bicycle Routes. Table CI-2
summarizes the locational and design requirements for these types of facilities.
                                                           TABLE CI-2
                                           CRITERIA FOR BIKEWAYS
                                                                                                                                                      Examples of
                                                                                                                                                      Existing
     Type of Facility Name          Definition                             Locational Considerations                                                  facilities
                                                                           Major regional bicycle routes such as the Fairfield Linear Trail.
                                                                           Expressways and arterial streets with posted traffic speeds in excess
                                    Paved pathway separated from           of 45 miles per hour and adequate right-of-way for separate off-street
     Class I          Bicycle Path  vehicular travel lane                  bike path.                                                                 Fairfield Linear Trail
                                                                           Arterial or collector streets with high projected traffic volumes but with
                                    On-street bicycle lane marked with     adequate road width to accommodate separate lanes. Posted speed
                                    pavement striping, color, or other     limit generally 45 miles per hour or less. Where appropriate and as
                                    indicators. Not separated by a barrier identified in Figure CI 9-2, existing four lane arterial and collector
     Class II         Bicycle Lane  from traffic                           streets may be converted to two lane streets with bicycle lanes.           Oliver Road
                                                                           Expressways and arterial streets with posted traffic speeds in excess
                                                                           of 45 miles per hour and inadequate right-of-way for separate off-street
                                                                           bike paths may utilize Class II Bike Lanes when such lanes incorporate
                                                                           rumble strips or other warning/protective devices, signage, colored
                                                                           pavement materials, or wider than standard lanes to provide more
                                                                           safety and visibility for the bicycle facilities.
                                    On street route marked with signs or   Road width and low projected traffic volumes which can
                                    pavement markers. Sharrow may be       accommodate both motor vehicles and bicycles on shared right-of-
     Class III        Bicycle Route appropriate                            way. Posted speed limit 30 miles per hour or less.                         Utah Street
Class I bikeways are separate off-street bike paths or trails for bicycles only. Multi-
use trails are off-street paths that are shared by pedestrians. Class II Bike Lanes
are striped lanes on existing rights-of-way. Class III Bike Routes are bikeways
which are signed routes which share the roadway with motor vehicles. Criteria for
locating these routes are listed in Table CI-2.
Based on the destinations outlined in Table CI-1 and the criteria and types of
facilities summarized in Table CI-2, staff has developed a recommended bicycle
infrastructure network.
This network is based on extending and completing the existing network of
facilities, which is illustrated in Exhibit CI-2. A second layer in the Exhibit maps
proposed bicycle infrastructure designed to implement the objectives and policies in
this Circulation Element. Key factors in this network include access to major
destinations, regional connections, consistency with the adopted Countywide
Bicycle Plan, completion of missing links and gaps in the existing bicycle network,
and providing safe routes for children accessing schools and parks.
City of Fairfield General Plan                                    CI - 22
Pedestrian traffic in the City is primarily generated by children; however, many
adults walk for pleasure, and walking is often a secondary means of short distance
travel. In addition, persons operating wheelchairs are considered pedestrians.
The increased emphasis on alternative modes of transportation, infill development,
and mixed use, walkable communities potentially increases the walkability of the
community-for all segments of the population.
Since children have traditionally comprised the largest proportion of pedestrians,
areas with a large concentration of children, such as schools and playgrounds,
demand additional attention to the separation of pedestrians and vehicular traffic.
In addition, pedestrians often include elderly persons and persons with disabilities
who may have mobility limitations. Pedestrian facilities should meet ADA standards
wherever physically possible to accommodate all pedestrians.
The pedestrian is often intimidated by traffic passing by, noise from traffic,
extreme weather conditions, air pollution, and fear of attack. Pedestrians need to
be able to move about comfortably and freely. Neighborhood design and the
relative proximity to basic goods and services can promote pedestrian travel and
safety. If redevelopment occurs in the City’s older neighborhoods, pedestrian
activity will also increase. In such areas, new or improved pedestrian infrastructure
may be needed to improve walkability.
City of Fairfield General Plan           CI - 23

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bicycle Facilities, Existing and Proposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PEABODY RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TO VACAVILLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TO VACAVILLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PA      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SE
                                   Rockville Hill Regional Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LLEY R D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RA   D I SE VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PEABODY RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EL CA M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MANU        P OS PKW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E R AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Y                                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PKW                                                                                                                  R        N R                            DICKSON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HILL                     DOV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NO                                                                                                                     BO                                                               RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N TEXAS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LA                                                                                                                  HI L
                                                                                                                                                   WY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DI
                                                                                                                                                 PK                                                                                                                           SO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C   K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RANCHO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SO
                                                                                                                                          ISU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                             N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     80                                                                                                                         HI L
                                                                                                                                          SU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L RD       MANUEL                                                         CEMENT HILL RD
                                                                                                    RD                                             80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CA M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POS
                                                                                                    EY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PK WY
                                                                                              NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DOVER AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RD
                                                                                                ALL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GULF DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HILL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                             IS U                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HI
                                                                                             SU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NT
                              GR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CE
                               EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PEABODY RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CEMENT HILL RD
                                 AL
                               NV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RD
                                       LE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GULF DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T
                                       YR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EN
                                            D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Y                                                                                                                                                                                   CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K
                                                BL                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NO P
                                            S
                                       EL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LA
                                                                                   R
                                   NG                                           R D                                                                                                                                                                                            SO                                                                               BL
                                   A                                         NTE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AN                           AIR B ASE PKWY                                AIR BASE PKWY
                               M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AIR BASE PKWY
                                                                       C   E                                                                                                                                                                                              O                                                                             RM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AIR BA S                                          AIR BASE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N TEXAS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E P                                                                                           AIR BASE PKWY
                                                          NE                                                                                                                                                                                                           RAN                                                                 W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  K WY
                                                            SS                                                                                                                                                                                                            CH                                                                  E
                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                UNION AV
                                                         US
                                                     B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WALTERS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WATERMAN BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PENNSYLVANIA AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DOVER AV
                                                                                                                            RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E TABOR AV
                                                                                                                     L IA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R    AV
                                                                                                              RD
                                                                                                                 E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E TABOR AV                             E TABO
                                                                                                         CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                            680
                  RE D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TRAVIS BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TRAVIS BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ER R
                      P
                   TO
                         RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O LIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N TEXAS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SECOND ST                                                            UNION AV
                                                                           RD
                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PENNSYLVANIA AV
                                                                  PE
                                                                  LO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          W TEXAS ST                                                              TEXAS ST
    TO VALLEJO
                                                                            680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IS                                                                                            12
             80                                                                                                                                                                                                   SU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CHADBOURNE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                             WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PK
                                                                                                                                                                                            SUISUN
                                                                                                                                                                                             80
                                                                                                                                                                                DR
                                                                                                                                                                          TER
                                                                                                                                                                        EN                                                                                                                                               RD
                                                                                                                                                                    C                                                                                                                                               IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO R
                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                               ES
                                                                                                                                                               IN
                                                                                                                                                        B US
                                                                                       680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CORDELIA RD
                                                                                                                                                                                              IA   RD
                                                                                                                                                                                          DE L
                                                                                                                                                                                     CO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHADBOURNE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Legend
                                                                                                                      680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Regional Bike Routes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Major Destinations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (Employment Centers, Shopping, Schools, Parks, etc.)
                                                                                                                             TO BENICIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Roadways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Proposed Bicycle Facilities                                                              Existing Bicycle Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Class I (Off Street Paved Route)                                                                       Class I (Off Street Paved Route)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Class II (Bicycle Lane)                                                                                Class II (Bicycle Lane)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Class III (Bicycle Route)                                                                              Class III (Bicycle Route)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Multi-use Facility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            City Limits
JDA:061912
                                                                                                                                                                 Proposed Roadway Improvements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NEW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CANNON RD
                  Rockville Hill Regional Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IS E VALLEY R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EL CA O S PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MANU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HILL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DIC K S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                        WY
                                                                                                     PK
                                                                                              ISU
                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VAN D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DOVER AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RD
                                                                                              SU
                                                                 RD                                    80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E R BILT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OR                                                                                                                           RD
                                                               EY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HILB
                                                           NV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LT
                                                             ALL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                          IS U                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CEMENT HILL RD
                                                                                                                                                                            RANCHO
                                                          SU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PEABODY RD
             GR
             EE                                                                                                                                                              SO  LA
                AL
              NV                                                                                                                                                                        PKW
                  LE                                                                                                                                                                 NO    Y
                  YR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AIR BA
                   D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SE P KWY
                         BL
                     S
                                                                                                                                                                                                        WATERMAN BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WALTERS RD
                  L
                                                      R
                                                   R D
             AN
                                                 TE
               GE
             M
                                           C   EN
                              NE
                                 SS
                                      SI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E TABOR AV
                                  U
                              B
                                                                                                                                                                                                 IV
                                                                                                                                                                                               OL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PENNSYLVANIA AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                  RD
                                                                                         RD
                                                                              E   L IA
                                                                           RD
                                                                      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TRAVI S BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N TEXAS ST
                                                680                                                                                                                                                                           SECOND ST                                        UNION AV
     RE D
      TO                                                                                                                                                                                                       W TEXAS ST                                                TEXAS ST
       PRD
                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                       WY
                                                                                                                                                  PK
                                                                                                                                         SUISUN
                                                                                                                                          80
                                           LOPES R D                                                                      NTER
                                                                                                                               DR
                                                                                                                      S CE
                                                                                                                    ES
80
                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                             BU
                                                680                                                            SI
                                                                                                                                                            CHADBOURNE RD
                                                                                                                                LIA RD
                                                                                                                               CORDE
                                                                       680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Interchange Improvements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Improved Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 New Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City Limits
Economic Development Element
Introduction
Implementation of the General Plan Economic Development Element is essential to
the preservation and enhancement of the quality of life in Fairfield. Economic
development provides the community with the means to shape its destiny by
ensuring that adequate levels of public services will be provided in the future. The
Economic Development Element sets forth policies, which if successfully
implemented, will maintain a healthy jobs-housing balance and provide for a diversity
of quality businesses and jobs. Attracting and retaining quality jobs and
development, preserving the local economy, including agriculture, and maintaining
the viability of Travis Air Force Base are key policies.
The Economic Development Element is closely related to other elements such as
Land Use; Open Space, Conservation and Recreation; and Housing. As this element
seeks to sustain a strong economic base, the Land Use Element also designates
residential, commercial, and industrial uses throughout the city. The Housing
Element includes policies which will make possible the growth of affordable housing
to maintain a desirable jobs-housing balance. The Open Space, Conservation and
Recreation Element preserves substantial portions of the planning area as
permanent open space, protecting natural and visual resources. In conjunction with
the other elements, the Economic Development Element will play an important role
toward preserving the quality of life for the city's future.
City of Fairfield General Plan             ED - 1                           June 2002
Goal
The goal of the Economic Development Element is:
Maintain and enhance a high quality of life for the City's
residents by developing and sustaining a strong and diverse
economic base.
Objectives, Policies and Programs
Objective ED 1
Encourage a mix of large and small industries and businesses to support a
strong and diverse economic base. This mix should create large numbers of
jobs, generate substantial public revenues, and involve high levels of private
capital investment. (See Objective LU 14, Policy LU 14.1, and Policy LU 14.2)
    Policy ED 1.1
    Target and attract industries and businesses which contribute to diversification
    and stabilization of the local economy. (See Policy LU 14.2)
         Program ED 1.1 A
         Develop and regularly update an economic development strategy which, in
         part, identifies the existing economic base, identifies certain business sectors
         for special expansion and recruitment efforts, and maintains the desired jobs-
         housing balance.
    Policy ED 1.2
    Encourage through special programs, including financing, the expansion and
    attraction of small and medium size firms with good growth potential.
    Policy ED 1.3
    Identify and mitigate, where appropriate, obstacles to the formation and
    expansion of local businesses.
    Policy ED 1.4
    Encourage, through implementation of the Zoning Ordinance, office and
    professional home occupations. (See Policy LU 13.5)
    Policy ED 1.5
    Support new business development which does not overburden infrastructure
    capacities. Provide adequate infrastructure capacity to support new business
    development, while not negatively impacting operations of the existing business
    base. (See Objective LU 4 and Policy LU 4.2)
    Policy ED 1.6
City of Fairfield General Plan              ED - 2                              June 2002
    Recruit and retain a diversity of businesses and industries which meet the skill
    levels of the community's broad labor pool. At the same time, work with the
    various job training and educational agencies to develop and match the skill levels
    of the labor pool to the needs of the economy as a whole.
    Policy ED 1.7
    Facilitate entitlement processing for all businesses, large, medium, or small,
    which conform with the objectives in this Element.
    Policy ED 1.8
    Development incentives should only be used for projects that conform with the
    Economic Development Element, provide significant private capital investment
    and/or create a large amount of jobs and public revenues.
    Policy ED 1.9
    Continue to support the role of Travis Air Force Base as a significant contributor
    to the economic base of the community. Discourage development which could
    negatively impact the Base. (See Policy LU 13.3, Phasing Area D Policy 24,
    Phasing Area E Policies 1, 8-11, Policy CI 8.1, Objective HS 5, and Policy HS
    9.3)
    Policy ED 1.10
    In the event of a change in the status of Travis Air Force Base, work to create
    joint use or commercial use of the airport. (See Objective CI 8)
    Policy ED 1.11
    Support development projects which broaden and enhance the City's economic
    base and produce viable long-term land use patterns.
         Program ED 1.11 A
         Actively promote the development of land uses which will generate new jobs
         and tax revenues to the City.
         Program ED 1.11 B
         Consider, through market studies, the potential long-term land use and
         economic impacts that major new projects could have on the City or
         geographical areas of the City by overbuilding or exceeding the market
         capacity for the types of uses proposed.
Objective ED 2
Effectively concentrate industrial and commercial uses. (See Policy LU 14.3)
City of Fairfield General Plan            ED - 3                            June 2002
    Policy ED 2.1
    Protect existing businesses within areas designated by the General Plan for
    existing or future industrial and commercial uses and discourage encroachment
    by noncompatible uses. Encourage the preservation and expansion of existing
    industrial uses in areas designated as industrial. (See Policy LU 13.2, Program
    LU 13.2 A, Policy LU 13.4, and Policy LU 14.1)
    Policy ED 2.2
    In order to provide a stable economic base, provide sufficient tracts of land at a
    variety of sizes available for industrial and commercial uses. (See Policy LU 14.1,
    Policy LU 14.2)
    Policy ED 2.3
    The Zoning Ordinance shall be implemented to recognize and provide for ongoing
    and long term changes in business operations and market trends. For example,
    some facilities may be permitted to include combinations of manufacturing,
    distribution, wholesaling, and limited retail on one site. The integrity of both the
    overall area and project must be protected. (See Policy LU 13.4 and Program
    LU 13.4 A)
         Program ED 2.3 A
         Incorporate criteria into the Zoning Ordinance to address long-term changes
         in business operations and market trends. (See Policies LU 14.2 and LU 14.3)
    Policy ED 2.4
    Areas shall be identified in the General Plan to provide for a concentration of
    industrial and business uses. Areas shall be designated to provide for primarily
    manufacturing uses (such as the Tolenas Industrial Park), areas which allow a
    mixture of uses (such as the Solano Business Park), and areas which are
    primarily office, research and development uses (such as Fairfield Corporate
    Commons).
    Policy ED 2.5
    To minimize traffic impacts, industrial and business activity should be located in
    areas close to major transportation. Such areas should have room for expansion
    and sufficient buffers to prevent conditions of potential incompatibility with
    surrounding uses. (See Policy LU 13.2)
Objective ED 3
Attract and retain commercial uses to support a strong, diverse economic
base. These uses should be in balance with the ultimate growth of the
community. (See Objective LU 4 and Policy LU 14.3)
City of Fairfield General Plan             ED - 4                              June 2002
    Policy ED 3.1
    Retail uses which increase the City's revenues by expanding the community's
    regional retail market share should be attracted to the community. They should
    not create unmitigatable levels of traffic congestion or other undesirable impacts.
         Program ED 3.1 A
         As part of the annual economic development plan, analyze the City's per
         capita sales by market category compared to statewide averages. Target
         those sectors where the City is deficient or below the state average.
    Policy ED 3.2
    As the community grows, marketing efforts shall be targeted to attract uses which
    will complement the City's economic development objectives.
    Policy ED 3.3
    In the Downtown area, retail, office, financial, government, and professional uses
    shall be encouraged to expand the current business mix and increase the area's
    economic viability as a destination point for shopping, work, dining, and
    entertainment. (See Policy LU 2.2)
    Policy ED 3.4
    Assist in the retention and expansion of existing businesses which conform with
    the goal and policies of this element by providing and coordinating available
    financial and non-financial resources. Examples are financing and loan
    programs, cooperation with lenders, providing capital loans, technical assistance,
    and counseling.
Objective ED 4
Select commercial and industrial locations which are convenient, while
compatible with the growth and future service needs of the community.
    Policy ED 4.1
    New commercial land use designations shall be of sufficient size and shape to
    meet existing and future market and service needs of the overall area in which
    they are located. (See Policy LU 14.3)
    Policy ED 4.2
    New commercial areas are encouraged to cluster in identified areas to prevent
    and discourage strip development. Where appropriate, locate commercial uses
    at focal points along major arterial streets or expressways. (See Policy LU 14.4)
    Policy ED 4.3
    The location, size, scale, and design of neighborhood commercial uses shall
    complement and meet the needs of the surrounding neighborhood. The
    neighborhood concept of providing pedestrian, bicycle, and other non-motorized
City of Fairfield General Plan            ED - 5                              June 2002
    access shall be encouraged. (See Policies UD 3.2 and UD 3.3 and Objective CI
    10)
    Policy ED 4.4
    To minimize traffic generation impacts, new commercial development shall be
    located to meet the needs and convenience of the customer base and promote
    compatibility between land uses. (See Policy CI 10.8)
Objective ED 5
Encourage a balance of office/professional uses which support a strong,
diverse economic base and are compatible with the needs of the community.
    Policy ED 5.1
    Encourage a mix of office and professional uses targeted to different areas
    throughout the community. Back office projects such as data processing,
    financial services, and other such uses, shall be encouraged to locate in a
    business park environment, while professional offices should be encouraged in
    the urban core areas such as Downtown, Gateway, the Northeast Activity Center
    and other identified areas.
    Policy ED 5.2
    Provide for ancillary commercial development in business parks, such as banks
    and restaurants, in order to provide amenities necessary to attract office uses in
    these areas.
    Policy ED 5.3
    Encourage clustered, smaller scale office and professional uses along major
    streets and in neighborhood centers in a variety of areas dispersed throughout
    the community to meet the needs of nearby neighborhoods.
    Policy ED 5.4
    As part of an overall economic development strategy, attract and retain a variety
    of office and professional uses to not only meet the needs of the community, but
    to establish a strong office market base servicing the regional and sub-regional
    area.
Objective ED 6
Create a balance between jobs and housing within the City's planning area.
(See Objective LU 1, Policies LU 1.2 and 1.3, and Objective HO 4)
    Policy ED 6.1
    Coordinate economic development planning with land use planning.
City of Fairfield General Plan           ED - 6                              June 2002
    Policy ED 6.2
    In areas such as the Downtown and the Fairfield-Vacaville Train Station area,
    encourage mixed-use development that provides opportunities for a jobs and
    housing balance at the community, neighborhood, and project level.
Objective ED 7
Create an economic climate conducive to attracting new development and
businesses which yield net social and economic benefits to the community.
    Policy ED 7.1
    Encourage economic development activities which provide, either through initial
    stages or through expansion, the opportunity for employment of local residents
    and/or increased municipal revenues.
    Policy ED 7.2
    Encourage industrial or business uses which create large numbers of new, well
    paying jobs, and maximize private capital investment based upon the size and
    scope of the project.
    Policy ED 7.3
    Preserve and enhance the community's assets and character, including
    education, agriculture, open space, recreational amenities, cultural amenities,
    and other factors, which make the community an attractive area to live, work, and
    invest. (See Objective LU 1 and Objective PF 1)
    Policy ED 7.4
    Require an equitable sharing of the full cost of public improvements between the
    public and private sectors. Improvements specifically and originally attributed to
    a single development, development area, or business shall be borne by those
    entities. (See Policy LU 4.2, Phasing Area D Policies 6 and 10, Phasing Area E
    Policy 5, Objective PF 2, and Policies PF 2.1, PF 2.2, and PF 2.3)
    Policy ED 7.5
    Work to remove impediments to gainful employment, such as lack of
    transportation, child care, job training, vocational education, and other factors.
    Coordinate efforts with local, state, federal, and private agencies/organizations.
    (See Program HO 7.3 A)
    Policy ED 7.6
    Encourage increased cooperation between the public and private sectors, such
    as the Chamber of Commerce, plant managers, and business associations, in
    formulating economic development plans and programs.
City of Fairfield General Plan            ED - 7                             June 2002
    Policy ED 7.7
    Discourage businesses that have a net negative impact to the community.
    Businesses shall create minimal and/or mitigatable levels of noise, fumes, odors,
    hazardous waste, traffic and other negative factors for the community as a whole
    and their location in particular.
    Policy ED 7.8
    Support a strong, quality local education system. (See Objective PF 20)
         Program ED 7.8 A
         The City shall work with the Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District and the
         Travis Unified School District to actively plan for future growth and to ensure
         that growth levels improve, and do not degrade, the quality of the local
         educational system. (See Policy PF 20.1)
Objective ED 8
Encourage the preservation and expansion of the local agricultural economy.
(See the Agriculture Element, Policy LU 2.1, Objective OS 1, Policy OS 1.1,
Policy OS 1.2, and Programs OS 1.2 A, 1.2 B, and 1.2 C)
    Policy ED 8.1
    Cooperatively work with farmers, property owners, universities, colleges, and
    agricultural organizations and agencies to enhance the viability of agricultural
    activities and uses.
         Program ED 8.1 A
         Continue sponsoring the Downtown Farmers Market and other related
         activities that promote local farming and agriculture.
    Policy ED 8.2
    Coordinate open space preservation and conservation programs with economic
    development programs to enhance agriculture.
    Policy ED 8.3
    Development shall not encroach upon or consume productive cropland in areas
    such as the Suisun Valley. (See Policy OS 1.4 and Policy OS 1.5)
    Policy ED 8.4
    Attract industry that complements and supports the local agricultural economy.
Objective ED 9
Create and encourage an economic climate to facilitate the redevelopment of
existing commercial areas.
City of Fairfield General Plan             ED - 8                               June 2002
    Policy ED 9.1
    Provide for and encourage the maintenance and long term revitalization of
    existing commercial areas, such as Texas and North Texas Streets. Where
    appropriate, incentives shall be used to encourage and assist the private sector
    to maintain and revitalize these areas.
         Program ED 9.1 A
         Expand redevelopment district boundaries to include all properties adjacent
         to and fronting North Texas Street from Travis Boulevard to Air Base Parkway.
         (See Program UD 4.4 A)
         Program ED 9.1 B
         Extend the powers of eminent domain for all redevelopment areas, with
         appropriate restrictions, such as those prohibiting eminent domain on owner
         occupied residential units.
    Policy ED 9.2
    Leverage redevelopment funds and private funds by targeting federal, state, and
    local resources to the existing commercial areas.
         Program ED 9.2 A
         Evaluate the feasibility of creating enterprise zones, incubator projects, or
         other appropriate programs.
City of Fairfield General Plan            ED - 9                              June 2002
Supporting Text
Existing Conditions
Background
Fairfield is at the center of the fastest growing County in the San Francisco Bay Area,
one of the strongest marketplaces in the nation. Fairfield also benefits from an
excellent transportation network, availability of developable land, a diverse housing
supply, a healthy business mix, and exceptional quality of life.
Throughout its early history, Fairfield's economy was primarily agricultural.
Agriculture remains an important part of the City's economy and of its character.
When Travis Air Force Base was established and later incorporated into the City,
local employment concentrated at the Base. And while Travis remains the City's
largest employer, economic development over the years has diversified the
economic base and provided plentiful, stable and desirable employment
opportunities.
Employment
Employment growth in Fairfield is strong and steady. Historically, Fairfield accounted
for approximately one-third of Solano County's employment. Population growth in
Fairfield is also strong, although its pace appears to be slowing and is exceeded by
the pace of employment growth.
Commercial
Retail and office development generates jobs, offers convenience, and provides
needed services to residents and local businesses. Commercial development also
plays an important role in the City's financial ability to provide a high level of services
to the community.
Retail
Fairfield is the retail leader of Solano County, generating approximately one-third of
the County's total sales in the year 2000. Between 1990 and 2000, taxable retail
sales increased 53 percent.
The City's retail sector is concentrated in four geographic areas: Solano Mall,
Downtown Fairfield, North Texas Street and along Interstate 80.
Solano Mall exemplifies the strength of Fairfield's retail market. An enclosed regional
shopping center of over one million square feet, its trade area embraces a population
of over 250,000 and includes Vacaville, Vallejo, Suisun City, unincorporated Solano
County, and much of Napa County.
City of Fairfield General Plan              ED - 10                               June 2002
The Gateway is an area of approximately fifty-six acres that wraps around the Mall
to the north and west. The site includes a mixture of uses including office and retail.
The area is intended to serve as a focal point for commercial activity in the county.
Located just north of the Mall, Gateway Plaza is the Gateway's primary retail
development, a 196,000 square foot promotional retail center. In the year 2000, a
new phase of development was completed in the Gateway, including a major national
bookstore and other retail shops. In 2002, a new hotel with more than 150 rooms is
planned to open.
Downtown Fairfield is a traditional city center. Retail development is concentrated
on or near Texas Street. Within walking distance of the County's and the City's
government offices, downtown businesses benefit from the proximity of a large pool
of potential customers. Most downtown retailers are sole proprietors or partnerships,
serving a largely local clientele. In 1989-90, The City's Redevelopment Agency
sponsored a $6 million improvement project that preserves the pedestrian scale and
hometown feel of the downtown while adding color and vitality to the streets and
sidewalks.
North Texas Street is a sparsely landscaped retail corridor featuring strip commercial
development, gasoline stations, fast food restaurants, and neighborhood retail
centers. The age of buildings ranges from the 1950's to the 1990’s, with the majority
of construction taking place in the 1950's and 1960's.
Retail development along the Interstate 80 corridor is primarily regional. Extending
from the North Texas Street exit in the northeast part of the city to the Suisun Valley
Road exit in Cordelia, existing development addresses freeway-related needs, such
as fast food, lodging, and gasoline, as well as regional uses like automobile
dealerships.
Office
Drawing regional and local tenants, Fairfield's office market experienced a dramatic
transition in the late 1980's. The completion of a major quality office building in the
center of the City, as well as the development of a number of quality office
developments in the business parks, focused attention on the office market.
Downtown Fairfield offers more traditional office and office/retail options. City and
County government offices create a spinoff demand for other professional offices.
Industrial Development
Fairfield's industrial sector is diverse and vigorous. Several manufacturing, light
industry, back office, distribution, and research and development firms are located in
Fairfield. Specific business and industrial parks were developed to meet the needs
of particular businesses. Tolenas Industrial Park, a 300-acre park located along Air
Base Parkway, is zoned for general manufacturing.
City of Fairfield General Plan            ED - 11                             June 2002

Solano Business Park and Busch Corporate Center are light industrial parks.
Located along Highway 12, these parks contain light manufacturing facilities,
professional offices, and distribution facilities. Other, smaller light industrial parks are
located along Air Base Parkway (e.g., Travis Industrial Park) and in Cordelia (e.g.,
Fairfield-Cordelia Industrial Park). Located in Cordelia adjacent to Solano
Community College, Fairfield Corporate Commons is planned for research and
development and office uses. Its development currently is targeted toward office
uses.
Future Conditions
Background
Under the policies contained in this element and other General Plan elements,
Fairfield will continue to experience significant, yet controllable, levels of economic
growth. As implemented, the plan policies will provide the City with the means to
continue to diversify its economic base, while recognizing and protecting the
important role of Travis Air Force Base.
Employment
Fairfield's one-third share of all Solano County jobs is expected to continue through
2020. Future job creation in the County is projected to come primarily from the retail,
manufacturing, services, and construction sectors of the economy. In Fairfield, the
relocation or expansion of small and medium-sized firms into the City accounts for a
significant portion of job growth. At general plan buildout, Fairfield is projected to
have approximately 77,000 jobs. Centers of employment are located in a number of
locations through the city, and no one area is expected to receive a majority of new
jobs.
Retail
Newer retail development along the I-80 corridor is expected to focus more on
regional retail uses, and less on highway commercial uses, drawing customers from
well beyond the City limits. Areas such as the 118 acre Regional Commerce Center
at the junction of I-80 and I-680, and redevelopment of the County Hospital site at
Texas Street and Beck Avenue are all examples of areas which will be developed on
regional scale.
Neighborhood retail growth will be directed to designated neighborhood shopping
center sites, located throughout the city in close proximity to surrounding residential
areas.
Office
City of Fairfield General Plan            ED - 12                                  June 2002
A limited amount of new office development will take place in the periphery of the
Downtown. Successful leasing of completed buildings, along with affordable land
prices and a low vacancy rate, will continue to contribute toward a significant demand
in office projects. Office uses will continue to be developed at key intersections in
the community. Furthermore, smaller office developments occupied by primarily
service related businesses will develop in areas convenient to the neighborhoods.
The 157 acre Planned Employment Center, situated along the east side of Green
Valley Road next to the Regional Commerce Center, will be developed for office and
business-related uses in the coming years.
Approximately 70 acres of office uses are planned for the area surrounding the
Fairfield-Vacaville Train Station, which will be constructed at the intersection of
Peabody Road and the Union Pacific railroad tracks.
Industrial
With well over 10 million square feet of existing occupied industrial space and over
1,400 acres of vacant land planned for industrial and business development, Fairfield
offers both short and long-term opportunities for quality business development.
With accessibility to Highway 12 and rail service, the Tolenas industrial park is ideal
for additional heavy industrial users. There will continue to be demand for these
industrial sites. However, large amounts of land currently designated for industrial
uses in this area will make the supply of land exceed demand in the through the end
of the decade.
Several hundred acres of vacant industrial acreage are located in the Solano
Business Park, Busch Corporate Center, and Cordelia, providing ample available
land for light industrial growth beyond the year 2000. These areas will continue to
attract light industrial and back office uses and will see the greatest absorption over
the next ten years.
At least 800 acres of unincorporated land east of Peabody Road is expected to be
designated for development of an industrial park dedicated for research,
development and high-technology businesses.
City of Fairfield General Plan            ED - 13                             June 2002
Health and Safety Element
Introduction
This Element addresses a wide range of issues related to human health and safety.
The topics addressed here relate to the physical setting of the city, various human
activities taking place in the area, and the appropriate response to a variety of
potential situations that represent threats to people. The overall intent of this Element
is to protect persons and their property by identifying potential hazards within the
community, minimizing these potential risks whenever possible, and providing for
appropriate and timely response in cases of catastrophic events. Potential risks are
discussed under the following topic sections within this Element:
•      Seismic and Geologic Hazards
•      Flooding Hazards
•      Fire Hazard
•      Aircraft Related Hazards
•      Hazardous Wastes and Materials
•      Emergency Preparedness
•      Noise
The Health and Safety Element is closely related to the Land Use Element, the Public
Facilities and Services Element, and the Open Space, Conservation and Recreation
Element. The hazards addressed in this Element provide constraints on
development and create an additional need for public facilities and services.
City of Fairfield General Plan            HS - 1                              October 2004

Goal
The goal of the Health and Safety Element is:
Minimize the public's exposure to harmful impacts caused by hazards and
noise.
Objectives, Policies and Programs
Geologic and Seismic Hazards
Objective HS 1
Minimize exposure of the community to hazards associated with seismic
activity.
    Policy HS 1.1
    Existing buildings, structures, and walls within the City shall meet minimum
    seismic safety standards.
    Policy HS 1.2
    All new buildings, structures, and walls shall conform to the latest seismic and
    geologic safety structural standards of the California Building Code as a minimum
    standard.
    Policy HS 1.3
     Comply with the requirements of State law and the recommendations of a
    certified geotechnical consultant when determining setbacks from an active fault
    trace for new development.
    Policy HS 1.4
    Require detailed geologic studies by a Registered Geologist (RG), Certified
    Engineering Geologist (CEG), and/or Geotechnical Engineer for projects within
    areas of potential seismic activity. All studies prepared shall identify the location
    of all surface fault traces within 100 feet of any proposed structure and determine
    their relative activity. Adequate provisions for mitigation of potential hazards to
    human life or property shall also be included.
    Policy HS 1.5
    The City shall restrict the crossing of Alquist-Priolo Act Special Studies zones by
    new public and private transmission facilities, including power, water, sewer, gas,
    and oil lines. Owners of all existing transmission facilities which cross active faults
    shall be required to file an operations plan with the City describing
City of Fairfield General Plan              HS - 2                            October 2004
    the probable effects of transmission line failure at the fault and various emergency
    facilities and procedures which exist to assure that failure does not threaten public
    safety.
    Policy HS 1.6
    In the event that a transmission facility crosses an Alquist-Priolo Act Special Study
    Zone, facility design shall include sufficient provisions for valves, switches and
    other appropriate equipment for minimizing adverse impacts to nearby
    development from fire, disruption of service, spillage, etc. as a result of fault
    displacement.
    Policy HS 1.7
    Any existing natural gas well which feeds pipelines crossing an Alquist-Priolo Act
    Special Study Zone shall be equipped with adequate emergency devices to shut
    off gas flows in the event of pipeline rupture due to fault displacement.
    Policy HS 1.8
    Any existing facility which is located within the boundary of a Special Study Zone
    and attracts large number of people, is open to the public, or provides essential
    community services, shall be investigated by a structural engineer for potential
    hazards to life and property due to fault displacement. Cost of such services shall
    be borne by the building owner. If hazards are identified, appropriate hazard
    mitigation actions, subject to City approval, shall be implemented.
    Policy HS 1.9
    The City should retain a Registered Geologist, Certified Engineering Geologist
    and/or Geotechnical Engineer to evaluate geologic reports required where
    seismic conditions warrant special attention. The cost of such services shall be
    borne by the applicant.
    Policy HS 1.10
    Geologists who conduct studies along the upper Cordelia Fault shall contact the
    California Division of Mines and Geology for early input prior to finalizing the
    status of this portion of the fault relative to the Alquist-Priolo Special Study Zone.
Objective HS 2
Minimize exposure of the community to geologic hazards associated with
landslides and ground failure.
    Policy HS 2.1
    No critical structures such as utilities, communications facilities, hospitals,
    emergency relief facilities, high occupancy structures, and fire and police stations
    shall be located in areas of high ground failure potential.
City of Fairfield General Plan              HS - 3                             October 2004
    Policy HS 2.2
    Require soils and geologic studies by qualified professionals for development
    within Slope Stability Zone 2 identified on Exhibit HS-1.
    Policy HS 2.3
    Require detailed geologic studies and detailed mitigation measures for
    development projects located within Zone 3 and Zone 4 of Exhibit HS-1. Property
    insurance for development in Zone 3 and Zone 4 should be considered as a
    potential risk mitigation measure.
    Policy HS 2.4
    Development is discouraged on slopes in excess of twenty (20) percent and/or
    unstable soils.
         Program HS 2.4 A
         Require compliance with development standards in the Hillside Grading
         Ordinance. (See Program OS 6.4 B)
    Policy HS 2.5
    Require strict engineering standards for construction on soils subject to significant
    shrink/swell and areas of high ground failure potential.
    Policy HS 2.6
    Require strict engineering standards for development projects located in identified
    landslide prone areas.
    Policy HS 2.7
    Require a detailed geotechnical report, including borings, for projects involving
    construction on soils and substrate subject to potential liquefaction, and
    implement the recommendations of the report by making them condition of project
    approval.
    Policy HS 2.8
    Require an erosion control and rehabilitation plan to be prepared for projects
    requiring substantial groundbreaking activities to control short-term and long-term
    erosion and sedimentation in nearby streams and rivers.
Flooding Hazards
Objective HS 3
Minimize exposure of the community to flooding hazards by developing new
flood control facilities as well as maintaining current facilities. (See Objective
PF 8)
City of Fairfield General Plan            HS - 4                            October 2004
    Policy HS 3.1
    Work with other jurisdictions to ensure stability of dams at Madigan, Frey, and
    Curry Lakes where dam failure could result in property damage or personal risk.
    (See Policy PF 8.4)
         Program HS 3.1 A
         Uphold minimum Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA)
         standards for flood control facilities.
    Policy HS 3.2
    Require development within flood plain areas to comply with FEMA regulations
    by providing adequate flood mitigation and financial protection in the event of
    flooding. (See Policy PF 8.1)
    Policy HS 3.3
    Investigate potential for earthquake-induced liquefaction of Putah South Canal.
    Areas of special concern include where Putah South Canal crosses Ledgewood
    Creek on Suisun Valley Road in Solano County, where it crosses Laurel Creek in
    north Fairfield, and those portions of the canal constructed on landfill along the
    base of Cement Hill.
         Program HS 3.3 A
         A report prepared by a state-registered civil engineer detailing the results of
         an inspection of the applicable portions of the Putah South Canal shall
         accompany all projects involving human occupancy which fall within potential
         inundation proximity of the Putah South Canal. The reports shall include
         discussion of the reliability of the facility during a 100-year flood event,
         potential for landsliding, slumping and liquefaction, likely inundation area and
         any improvements necessary to mitigate identified hazards or risk.
    Policy HS 3.4
    Continue to update FEMA flood control studies based upon development and
    ongoing improvements. (See Program PF 9.4 A)
    Policy HS 3.5
    Development that interferes with channel capacity or causes erosion and siltation
    shall not be allowed.
    Policy HS 3.6
    The City should consider adopting road construction standards for areas
    designated as flood prone which allow for the passage of flood water under the
    road surface unless a diking effect is desired.
City of Fairfield General Plan               HS - 5                           October 2004
Fire Hazards
Objective HS 4
Protect people and property by minimizing levels of fire danger. (See Objective
PF 15)
    Policy HS 4.1
    Prohibit residential development in areas of Extreme Wildfire Risk (represented
    on Exhibit HS-2).
    Policy HS 4.2
    Development projects in areas of High Wildfire Risk (see Exhibit HS-2) shall be
    reviewed by the Fire Chief to ensure that fire protection will not be excessively
    difficult or dangerous and that mitigation measures are included to minimize risk
    to acceptable levels.
    Policy HS 4.3
    Require landowners to maintain firebreaks around existing residences. Require
    greater buffer widths in areas of High and Extreme Wildfire Risk. Maintain buffer
    areas along all major roadways and around structures in areas of High Grassfire
    Risk identified on the Fire Hazards Map, Exhibit HS-3. (See Policy PF 15.2)
    Policy HS 4.4
    Maximum residential density for High Grassfire and High Wildfire Risk Areas shall
    be one dwelling unit per five acres unless appropriate mitigation measures are
    included to minimize risk to acceptable levels.
    Policy HS 4.5
    Ensure the ability to provide fire protection within areas of new development. (See
    Objective PF 15)
         Program HS 4.5 A
         Maintain the City water system at a pressure of 45-55 psi, with a goal of
         maintaining pressure at not less than 20 psi during fire fighting operations.
         (See Policy PF 5.6)
         Program HS 4.5 B
         Maintain adequate capacity within the City water system to support 1,000
         gallons per minute usage from numerous fire hydrants in addition to normal
         domestic water service.
City of Fairfield General Plan             HS - 6                           October 2004
Policy HS 4.6
    Require remote hillside developments to maintain sufficient water supplies on-
    site in the form of pools, ponds, or storage tanks for wildfire protection.
    Policy HS 4.7
    Avoid siting structures on hilltops and upper slopes in areas of high fire potential
    due to danger and difficulty of providing adequate fire protection.
    Policy HS 4.8
    Require mitigation for development in high fire potential areas, including site
    planning to reduce dangers, fire- resistant building materials and plantings
    adjacent to structures, and insurance requirements in the event of property
    damage.
    Policy HS 4.9
    Hillside development shall take into consideration the recommendations
    developed by the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection in order
    to minimize the risk of loss due to wildfires.
Aircraft Related Hazards
Objective HS 5
Protect the safety of persons on the ground from aircraft crash hazard
potential. (See Policy LU 13.3)
    Policy HS 5.1
    New development within Compatibility Zones A, B1, B2, C, D, and the Height
    Review Overlay Zone should comply with the basic and supporting Land Use
    Compatibility criteria shown in Chapter 2, including Table 2A, and all other
    applicable criteria of the Land Use Compatibility Plan (LUCP) for Travis AFB.
    New development within Compatibility Zones should comply with the Primary
    Compatibility Criteria shown in Table 2A of the Land Use Compatibility Plan for
    the Travis Aero Club.
    Policy HS 5.2
    Projects within the Travis AFB LUCP Area of Influence Compatibility Zones A, B1,
    B2, or C as shown on Exhibit HS-3 of the General Plan shall be referred to the
    Solano County Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) as required by the Solano
    County Airport Land Use Compatibility Review Procedures. Projects that exceed
    the height limits specified in Table 2A of the LUCP for Travis AFB shall also be
    referred to the ALUC. Projects within the Travis Aero Club Compatibility Zones
    shall be referred to the Solano County ALUC as required by the Travis Aero Club
    Land Use Compatibility Plan.
City of Fairfield General Plan            HS - 7                             October 2004
    Policy HS 5.3
    If it is the determination of the ALUC that any of the mandatory projects referred
    to the ALUC are inconsistent with the LUCP for Travis AFB or the Land Use
    Compatibility Plan for Travis Aero Club, the City Council may hold a hearing to
    consider the project. The City Council may overrule the ALUC after the hearing
    by a two-thirds vote if it makes specific findings that the proposed action is
    consistent with the purposes of Airport Land Use Commission Law as contained
    in Article 3.5 of the Public Utilities Code.
    Policy HS 5.4
    The city should adopt an open land plan for the entire area within Compatibility
    Zones A and B north of Air Base Parkway, as defined in the Land Use
    Compatibility Plan for Travis Aero Club. Individual lots located within Compatibility
    Zone B south of Air Base Parkway shall include a minimum of 50 percent open
    land, as defined in the Land Use Compatibility Plan for Travis Aero Club.
    Policy HS 5.5
    The city will require, as a condition of approval of development within
    Compatibility Zone C of the Travis AFB LUCP, homebuyer notification
    regarding aircraft operational impacts on the property. Similarly, the city will
    require homebuyer notification of the of the proximity of Travis Aero Club and
    the characteristics of the airport’s activity for all new residential development
    located within Compatibility Zone D of the Land Use Compatibility Plan for
    Travis Aero Club.
    Policy HS 5.6
    Nonconforming development or reconstruction within the Travis AFB LUCP Area
    of Influence shall be consistent with the policies in the LUCP regarding such
    development or reconstruction. Nonconforming development within Aero Club
    Zone B that is partially or fully destroyed shall comply with the City’s replacement
    requirements for nonconforming structures and uses as contained in the City’s
    Zoning Ordinance.
Objective HS 6
Protect the safety of aircraft in flight.
    Policy HS 6.1
    Objects and structures within Compatibility Zones A, B1, B2, C, D and the Height
    Overlay Zone for Travis AFB as shown in Exhibit HS-3 of the General Plan and
    objects and structures within the Compatibility Zones A, B, and C for the Travis
    Aero Club as shown in the Land Use Compatibility Plan for Travis Aero Club shall
    conform to FAR Part 77 height limits.
City of Fairfield General Plan              HS - 8                            October 2004

Hazardous Wastes and Materials
Objective HS 7
Minimize the risks associated with hazardous waste treatment, storage,
disposal and transport to ensure that the residents of Fairfield and the
surrounding environment are adequately protected. (See Objective PF 14)
    Policy HS 7.1
    Support the Solano County Hazardous Waste Management Plan (CHWMP) and
    the policies, objectives and programs contained therein to the extent that they are
    applicable to the City of Fairfield.
         Program HS 7.1 A
         Continue to implement the Household Hazardous Waste Disposal program,
         which allows City residents to properly dispose of household hazardous
         waste. (See Policy PF 14.1 and Program PF 14.1 A)
    Policy HS 7.2
    Annually review the Multi-Hazard Disaster Plan to ensure that the sections of the
    plan which address emergencies associated with the storage and transport of
    hazardous materials reflect current inter-agency response agreements and
    procedures.
    Policy HS 7.3
    Establish zoning standards for all industrial zoned areas, where hazardous waste
    treatment, transfer, storage and disposal facilities could be located, which are
    consistent with the adopted Siting Criteria outlined in the Solano CHWMP. (See
    Policy LU 13.2)
    Policy HS 7.4
    Involve the Fire Department and Solano County Department of Environmental
    Health in the review process for all projects located on commercial and industrial
    designated properties where potential for hazardous materials use has been
    identified so procedures for hazardous waste handling, treatment, storage or
    disposal can be implemented. (See Policy LU 13.2)
    Policy HS 7.5
    Continue to address potential concerns associated with the transport, storage,
    use and disposal of hazardous materials and waste through the environmental
    review process and minimize risk through the use of proper mitigation measures.
City of Fairfield General Plan           HS - 9                            October 2004
    Policy HS 7.6
    Through the project review process, require risk assessments for all commercial
    and industrial uses that store, use and produce hazardous materials and are
    adjacent to residential areas and immobile populations such as schools,
    hospitals, convalescent homes, prisons etc. Determine an adequate buffer
    between these uses. (See Policy LU 13.2)
    Policy HS 7.7
    During environmental document preparation for and before approval of any
    project within 0.5 mile of the boundaries of Travis Air Force Base, the City shall
    consult with the Travis AFB Environmental Cleanup Program, EPA, California
    Department of Toxic Substances Control, and the San Francisco Bay Regional
    Water Quality Control Board regarding continuing base contamination and
    remediation efforts. No projects shall be approved where there is substantial
    evidence of existing contamination that would pose an unacceptable risk to the
    health of future occupants of the project.
Emergency Preparedness
Objective HS 8
Provide for organized and timely relief efforts in the event of a major disaster
and all other emergency situations within the Fairfield Planning Area. (See
Objectives PF 15 and PF 16)
    Policy HS 8.1
    Provide secure shelter facilities with adequate supplies for displaced individuals.
    Policy HS 8.2
    Identify critical emergency facilities, including communication, medical, shelter,
    and transportation facilities, and human resources, and ensure their operation in
    the event of disaster.
    Policy HS 8.3
    Promote programs within the community that will improve emergency
    preparedness and public education, and prepare residents to respond to disaster
    situations.
    Policy HS 8.4
    Ensure that critical services will remain operable in the event of disaster. These
    services include water, communications, and utilities.
City of Fairfield General Plan            HS - 10                          October 2004
    Policy HS 8.5
    Annually review the Multi-hazard Disaster Plan to ensure that the plan provides
    the City with a comprehensive response plan for all disaster or emergency
    situations.
Noise
Objective HS 9
Protect the citizens of Fairfield from the harmful and annoying effects of
excessive noise and protect the City's economic base by preventing
incompatible land uses from encroaching upon existing or planned noise-
producing uses.
    Policy HS 9.1
    Ground transportation noise: The compatibility of proposed projects with existing
    and future noise levels due to ground transportation noise sources shall be
    evaluated by comparison to Table HS-1 where the existing or future noise level
    from ground transportation noise sources is determined to exceed the standards
    of Table HS-1. Noise levels in outdoor activity areas and interior spaces shall be
    mitigated to the levels shown in Table HS-1.
    Policy HS 9.2
    Aircraft noise: All new land use proposals shall comply with the basic and
    supporting land use compatibility criteria of the Travis AFB Land Use Compatibility
    Plan (LUCP) and the Land Use Compatibility Plan for Travis Aero Club for aircraft-
    generated community noise. (See Policy LU 13.3)
         Program HS 9.2 A
         New residential zoning will not be applied on land where outdoor noise
         levels are greater than 60 dB CNEL maximum mission contour and/or within
         Compatibility Zones A, B1, B2 or C as indicated in Travis AFB Land Use
         Compatibility Plan. Should the LUCP become invalid or set aside, the
         protection zones and noise contours as shown in the 1995 AICUZ shall
         govern.
         Program HS 9.2 B
         New schools, day care centers, libraries, hospitals, or nursing homes shall not
         be located in Compatibility Zones A, B1, B2, or C as indicated in the 2002
         Travis AFB Land Use Compatibility Plan.
         Program HS 9.2 C
         Office uses located with in Aero Club Zone B shall include a minimum interior
         Noise Level Reduction of 25 dBA.
City of Fairfield General Plan           HS - 11                            October 2004
         Program HS 9.2 D
         Residential uses located within Aero Club Zone C shall include a minimum
         interior Noise Level Reduction of 20 dBA.
    Policy HS 9.3
    Non-transportation noise: Noise created by new non-transportation noise
    sources shall be mitigated so as not to exceed the interior and exterior noise level
    standards of Table HS-2. Where proposed non-transportation noise sources are
    likely to produce noise levels exceeding the performance standards of Table HS-
    2, an acoustical analysis shall be required as part of the environmental review
    process so that noise mitigation may be included in the project design.
    Policy HS 9.4
    Non-transportation noise: New development of noise sensitive land uses shall not
    be allowed where the noise level due to non-transportation noise sources will
    exceed the standards of Table HS-2. Where noise sensitive land uses are
    proposed in areas exposed to existing or projected exterior non-transportation
    noise levels exceeding the performance standards of Table HS-2, an acoustical
    analysis shall be required so that noise mitigation may be included in the project
    design.
    Policy HS 9.5
    All acoustical analyses required by the Noise Component of the Health and
    Safety Element shall:
           • Be the responsibility of the applicant.
           •    Be prepared by a qualified person experienced in the fields of
                environmental noise assessment and architectural acoustics.
           •    Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient
                sampling periods and locations to adequately describe local conditions.
           •    Estimate existing and projected (20 years) noise levels in terms of L dn
                and/or the standards of Table HS-2, and compare those levels to the
                policies of this Element.
           •    Recommend appropriate mitigation to achieve compliance with the
                adopted policies and standards of this Element. Where the noise source
                in question consists of intermittent single events, the report must address
                the effects of maximum noise levels in sleeping rooms in terms of
                possible sleep disturbance.
           •    Estimate noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have
                been implemented.
           •    Describe a post-project assessment program which could be used to
                evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed mitigation measures.
    Policy HS 9.6
City of Fairfield General Plan               HS - 12                            October 2004

    The City shall utilize procedures for project review and issuance of building
    permits to ensure that noise mitigation measures identified in an acoustical
    analysis are implemented in the project design.
    Policy HS 9.7
    The City shall require monitoring of compliance with the standards of the Noise
    Element after completion of projects where noise mitigation measures have been
    required.
    Policy HS 9.8
    The Police Department shall actively enforce the California Vehicle Code sections
    relating to adequate vehicle mufflers and modified exhaust systems.
    Policy HS 9.9
    The City shall purchase only newly acquired equipment and vehicles which
    comply with noise level performance standards based upon the best available
    noise reduction technology.
    Policy HS 9.10
    The City shall periodically review and update the Noise component of the Health
    and Safety Element to ensure that noise exposure information and policies are
    consistent with changing conditions within the community and with noise control
    regulations or policies enacted after the adoption of the Element.
    Policy HS 9.11
    The City shall require all development projects to mitigate noise impacts
    associated with construction activities.
    Policy HS 9.12
    The City shall enforce the State Noise Insulation Standards (California Code of
    Regulations, Title 24) and Chapter 35 of the Uniform Building Code (UBC).
    Policy HS 9.13
    The City may adopt a citywide noise ordinance to address excessive noise. The
    noise ordinance may include special standards for residential development near
    the Fairfield-Vacaville Train Station and for new mixed-use projects that exceed
    the exterior noise standards included in Table HS-1 and Table HS-2.
City of Fairfield General Plan           HS - 13                          October 2004
                                             TABLE HS-1
               MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE NOISE EXPOSURE TO GROUND
                            TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES
                                          Outdoor Activity Areasa                      Interior Spaces
                   Land Use                    L dn /CNEL, dB              L dn /CNEL, dB         L eq , dBb
   Residential                                          60c                          45                       --
   Transient lodging                                    60c                          45                       --
   Hospitals, nursing homes                             60c                          45                       --
   Theaters, auditoriums, music halls                     --                          --                     35
   Churches, meeting halls                              60c                           --                     40
   Office buildings                                       --                          --                     45
   Schools, libraries, museums                            --                          --                     45
   Playgrounds, neighborhood parks                       70                           --                      --
__________
Note: -- = not applicable.
a Where the location of outdoor activity areas is unknown, the exterior noise-level standard shall be
  applied to the property line of the receiving land use.
b As determined for a typical worst-case hour during periods of use.
c Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity areas to 60 db L dn /CNEL or less using a
  practical application of the best-available noise reduction measures, an exterior noise level of up to
  65 dB L dn /CNEL may be allowed provided that available exterior noise-level reduction measures
  have been implemented and interior noise levels are in compliance with this table.
Source: Brown-Buntin Associates 1991.
City of Fairfield General Plan                    HS - 14                                  October 2004
                                                                       TABLE HS-2
                       NOISE-LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR NEW PROJECTS AFFECTED BY
                                           OR INCLUDING NONTRANSPORTATION SOURCES
                                                              Exterior Noise-Level Standard
                                                               (Applicable at Property Line)                       Interior Noise-Level Standard
                                       Noise-Level            Daytime                 Nighttime                  Daytime             Nighttime
                Land Use                Descriptor       (7 a.m. to 10 p.m.)      (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)       (7 a.m. to 10 p.m.)        (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)
   Residential                              L eq                  50                        45                       40                         35
                                           L max                  70                        65                       60                         55
   Transient lodging, hospitals,            L eq                   --                       --                       40                         35
   nursing homes                           L max                   --                       --                       60                         55
   Theaters, auditoriums, music             L eq                   --                       --                       35                         35
   halls
   Churches, meeting halls                  L eq                   --                       --                       40                         40
   Office buildings                         L eq                   --                       --                       45                          --
   Schools, libraries, museums              L eq                   --                       --                       45                          --
   Playgrounds, parks                       L eq                  65                        --                        --                         --
__________
Notes: Each of the noise levels specified above shall be lowered by 5 dB for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or
         recurring impulsive noises. These noise-level standards do not apply to residential units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial
         uses (e.g., caretaker dwelling
City of Fairfield General Plan                   HS - 15                                 October 2004
Supporting Text
In many cases there are existing documents in addition to the General Plan that will
guide the community's response to hazardous conditions. In such cases this
Element seeks to support these programs and assist in their implementation. Major
additional policy documents concerning health and safety issues are identified below:
•   Alquist-Priolo Act: This act sets guidelines for development in areas adjacent
    to faults known to be active. The Alquist-Priolo Act of 1971 defines "active" faults
    as well-defined features that show geologic or historic evidence of activity in the
    past 11,000 years. In general, no habitable structures are allowed within 50 feet
    of an active fault. Prior to developing land in a Special Study Zone, detailed
    geologic studies are required to locate and assess any active fault tracers.
•   Solano County Comprehensive Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
    (ALUCP): Developed by Solano County, this report seeks to minimize conflicts
    between urban land uses and air base operations.
•   Solano County Hazardous Waste Management Plan (CHWMP): Developed
    under state mandated guidelines, the Solano CHWMP will address hazardous
    waste management issues through the year 2000.
•   Multi-Hazards Disaster Plan: This plan, developed by the City of Fairfield,
    addresses responses to events ranging from earthquakes and flooding relief to
    nuclear catastrophe.
Seismic and Geologic Hazards
The City of Fairfield is located along the eastern edge of the seismically active Coast
Ranges of California. The Bay Area contains numerous near-parallel active faults.
Active faults within the Bay Area include the Green Valley and Cordelia faults near
Fairfield. (See Exhibit HS-1.)
Most large earthquakes in the Bay Area have occurred along the major faults,
including the San Andreas, Hayward, and Calaveras faults, which are located 20 to
45 miles west and south of Fairfield. The largest recorded earthquake in the Fairfield
area occurred on April 19, 1892 with a large aftershock on April 21, 1892 with an
estimated magnitude range of 6.0 to 6.5.
Buildings most at risk from a medium to large earthquake are un-reinforced concrete
and masonry buildings constructed before the 1940's. Older houses
City of Fairfield General Plan           HS - 16                            October 2004

 (pre-1940) are sometimes not bolted down to their foundations and may slide off their
 foundations, causing significant damage. Buried pipelines may be damaged during
 ground shaking, especially pipelines in soft ground and pipelines which make a
 sudden transition between very firm and relatively soft ground.
 Soil/Slope Stability Hazards
 Expansive soils are a common source of moderate damage to houses and light
 structures in the Bay Area. Clay-rich topsoil with a high shrink-swell potential is
 common on the hillsides and valleys of the Fairfield Planning Area. Damage to
 structures, such as cracking of foundations, may result from repetition of the shrink-
 swell cycle.
 Landsliding and debris-flow hazards exist to various degrees in all of the hillside
areas around Fairfield. The immediate cause of a landslide is usually excess water
due to heavy rainfall or channelized water flows. In the more unstable hillside areas
very large, probably ancient, landslides are common. Old landslides may be
reactivated or new landslides may be caused by poorly designed grading or by
concentrated runoff from new development in or near ancient landslide deposits.
 A common cause of damaging landslides in the Bay Area is improper grading within
hillside developments. These landslides are often expensive to repair due to their
proximity to buildings and developed areas. Future development pressures may lead
to increased hillside development, and additional landslide damage of this nature can
be expected.
 Landslide Susceptibility
 The hill and valley regions of the planning area have been divided into four general
 slope stability zones, which are identified on the Geological Hazards Map (Exhibit
 HS-1). A brief description of the four zones follows:
      Zone 1       Areas of 0 to 5 percent slope, which are not underlain by known
                   landslides. This zone is generally limited to the near level alluvial
                   valleys. For the most part, soil stability is not a limiting factor in Zone
                   1.
      Zone 2       Slopes of 5 percent or greater which generally contain few, usually
                   small landslides. The landslides are often concentrated in relatively
                   small areas. This zone is mapped in the generally resistant rocks of
                   the Sonoma Volcanics. Soil stability must be considered in Zone 2,
                   although it is not generally a major concern and engineering solutions
                   will solve most problems.
 City of Fairfield General Plan              HS - 17                              October 2004
     Zone 3       Slopes of 5 percent or steeper which contain occasional to moderate
                  numbers of landslides. The landslides are often concentrated in
                  relatively small areas. Slope stability can be a major concern in parts
                  of Zone 3. Site design and engineering will be strongly influenced by
                  site conditions in Zone 3.
     Zone 4       Slopes of 5 percent or greater, which contain many to very many
                  landslides. This Zone is mapped in the gentle, rolling hills west of
                  Interstate 680 which are generally composed of Markley Sandstone.
                  Slope stability is the major concern in Zone 4 and severely limits all
                  developments. Any development in Zone 4 will require very careful
                  design considerations. Large-scale developments should be strongly
                  discouraged in Zone 4.
Flooding Hazards
The potential for flood damage in the Fairfield area has increased with urbanization
over recent years. Five streams which periodically overflow in the Fairfield area are
Ledgewood, Pennsylvania Avenue, Union Avenue, Laurel, and McCoy creeks. In the
lower reaches of this creek system, flood hazards are intensified by high tides that
result in restricted drainage.
The Federal Emergency Management Association (FEMA) prepares and updates
100-year flood maps. The flood map is intended to identify areas with a 1% chance
of flooding in any given year. Sites within the flood areas should be considered to be
at higher risk than sites outside of the areas, although all sites within the 100-year
flood zone should not experience flooding at the same time. Existing and future
drainage improvements should reduce the risk of flooding. It is also possible for
flooding to occur outside of the designated flood areas.
The majority of flood-prone lands in the Fairfield Planning Area are downstream lands
which are subject to inundation during heavy rainfall along Suisun Valley, Dan Wilson,
and Green Valley Creeks. The major cause of flooding in southern Fairfield and in
the Cordelia area is the low lying nature of the land and the associated effects of high
tides.
Fairfield Vicinity Streams Project
The City of Fairfield, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, has
completed the Fairfield Streams Flood Control Project. The project consists of
modifications to Ledgewood, Laurel and McCoy Creeks and the diversion of three
creeks - Pennsylvania Avenue Creek into Ledgewood Creek, Union Avenue Creek
into Laurel Creek and Laurel Creek into McCoy Creek.
City of Fairfield General Plan             HS - 18                           October 2004
Dam Failure
The Office of Emergency Services has compiled a list of 19 dams existing in Solano
County. Dams with the potential to cause property damage, injury, or loss of human
life in the Fairfield Planning Area are found at Lake Curry, Lake Frey, and Lake
Madigan.
Canal Failure
Putah South Canal has the potential for earthquake-induced flooding due to
slumping, landslides, and liquefaction. If a large landslide were to block or rupture
the canal during a period of high flow, flooding would occur before repairs could be
made. Canal crossings at Ledgewood Creek on Suisun Valley Road and at Laurel
Creek north of Fairfield are specific areas where liquefaction could occur.
Fire Hazard
Rural/Hillside Areas Fire Potential
Significant portions of the foothill watershed areas surrounding Fairfield are
threatened with wildfire risk, and these areas present a dangerous combination of
factors. Hazards related to wildfire include risk of personal injury and property
damage as well as the danger fire fighters must face to combat fires. For these
reasons, development in areas subject to wildfire is strongly discouraged.
Factors contributing to risk of fire include dense and fire-prone vegetation, wind
funneling effects of steep topography, poor access for fire-fighting equipment, lack of
adequate water pressure and service at fire-prone elevations, and seasonal
atmospheric conditions (warm, dry seasons and strong afternoon winds). Three fire
potential zones are identified on the Fire Hazards Map (Exhibit HS-2). Brief
descriptions of these zones follow.
     Extreme Wildfire Risk Areas are those lands where severe burning conditions
     prevails (chaparral and heavy woodland, steep slopes, poor access, winds). This
     includes hilly areas to the west and northwest of Fairfield, the Cement Hill area,
     the hills above Green Valley and the hills above Interstate 80 and 680 just south
     of Cordelia.
     High Wildfire Risk Areas are those lands where high potential for burning
     prevails due to mixed woodland-grassland, grassland, steep slopes, poor access,
     and winds. Areas of high fire risk are intermixed within areas of extreme fire risk.
City of Fairfield General Plan           HS - 19                            October 2004
     High Grassfire Risk Areas are areas which have a high ignition potential in
     combination with periodic high winds. Fire risk is significant here, although not
     as severe as the mountainous wildfire risk areas.
The risk of fire danger must be carefully considered when reviewing plans for
residential development in the rural hillsides surrounding Fairfield.
Urban Fire Potential
Urban fires represent a greater threat of property damage and personal injury than
rural fires for several reasons. The urban fire most commonly involves structures,
and therefore has greater damage potential than rural fires. There is also a greater
risk of vehicle fires in the urban setting due to the greater number of vehicles present.
Within the urban setting, there is also a greater risk of conflagration, an uncontrollable
fire, involving structures. Such a fire could destroy whole areas of the City, leading
to greater loss of life and property.
Urban fire also present a greater risk of releasing toxic fumes due to materials used
for industrial processes and manufacturing, as well as potentially toxic products being
stored for future retail sales. The industrial and manufacturing processes themselves
can be the cause of fire due to the volatile chemicals used or the nature of the
manufacturing process. For these reasons, such industrial land uses are
incompatible with residential land uses and shall require adequate buffer areas to
avoid land use conflicts.
In order to respond to an emergency situation, high-density portions of development
projects should be located away from the center of the development and adjacent to
a major arterial roadway. In addition, no development project should rely on a single
entry/exit road. Rather, multiple entrance and exit roads should be provided to
ensure emergency vehicle access.
Among the greatest risk situations existing within the City of Fairfield are the shingle
roofs common among older homes. The City requires roofs on new homes and any
replacement roofs to be of fire resistant materials, but until all older roofs are replaced
they will present an added fire hazard.
Please refer to the Public Facilities Element for additional discussion of fire protection
facilities and services.
Aircraft Related Hazards
Travis Air Force Base (AFB) is the only airport facility in Fairfield and is the largest
airport facility in Solano County. It has been used by the Department of Defense for
military operations since the early 1940's and is home of the world's largest military
airlift unit. The six different aircraft assigned to Travis perform approximately 170
daily operations.
City of Fairfield General Plan             HS - 20                              October 2004
The aircraft operations of Travis AFB pose potential crash hazards to persons and
property in the vicinity of the facility. Conversely, the development and use of property
in the vicinity of Travis AFB may create hazards for aircraft approaching or departing
the facility.
To address these concerns, the Solano County Airport Land Use Commission
(ALUC) adopted the Land Use Compatibility Plan (LUCP) for Travis AFB on June 13,
2002. The LUCP contains criteria and policies related to the compatibility of the
Travis AFB facility and surrounding land uses.
Exhibit HS-3 shows the LUCP's Referral Area and five Compatibility Zones: A, BI,
B2, C, D and the Height Review Overlay Zone.
    •    Compatibility Zone A is the most critical safety zone. These clear zones are
         located at the ends and along the sides of the runways immediately below the
         initial take-off and final approach flight paths and are exposed to the greatest
         potential for aircraft accidents.
    •    Compatibility Zones B1 and B2 are also within the initial take-off and final
         approach flight paths but are less critical than the Compatibility Zone A.
         Significant danger due to the potential for aircraft accidents still exists.
    •    The C Zone encompasses the general area around TAFB. This area is
         subject to issues of aircraft noise, risks to people on the ground, and airspace
         protection.
    •    The D Zone encompasses most of central Fairfield. It must be kept clear of
         flight path obstructions and hazards to flight. Limitations on the height of
         structures are the only compatibility factors within this zone.
    •    The Height Overlay Zone covers locations where the terrain exceeds or
         comes within 35 feet oft any of the airspace protection surfaces for Travis AFB.
         This zone overlays portions of the other compatibility zones.
Should the ALUCP become invalid or be set aside, the protection zones as shown in
Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) shall govern.
Also contained in the LUCP are Land Use Compatibility policies and criteria. These
policies and criteria categorize specific land uses and their appropriateness in each
of the Compatibility Zones above.
Travis Aero Club is located on the northwestern corner of Travis AFB. The facility
consists of a 2,000-foot runway, parallel taxiway, aircraft apron for sixteen
airplanes, and two buildings. Use of the Aero Club is limited; the airport is open
only to Aero Club members, Travis AFB military and civilian personnel who have
their own aircraft, and other users who obtain prior permission to land. On March
13, 1997, the Solano County ALUC adopted the Land Use Compatibility Plan for
City of Fairfield General Plan              HS - 21                            October 2004

Travis Aero Club. The Land Use Compatibility Plan contains policies related to the
compatibility of the Aero Club facility and surrounding land uses.
Hazardous Materials and Waste Management
State law has directed all counties to prepare a plan for the management of
hazardous wastes. Solano County has prepared a Hazardous Waste Management
Plan (CHWMP), which was adopted on August 31, 1989. The Solano CHWMP
provides for environmentally sound management of all hazardous wasted projected
to be generated in Solano County through the year 2000. The State Department of
Health Services (DHS) is the agency responsible for administering and overseeing
the hazardous waste management process; it has approved the County's plan.
The Solano CHWMP was prepared for the purpose of complying with federal and
state laws that mandate an improvement in the management of hazardous wastes;
to assist in expediting the land-use permitting process for new treatment, storage and
disposal facilities; and to assist in identifying California's hazardous waste
management needs. Data from the Solano CHWMP will be incorporated into the
state HWMP.
To comply with provisions of state hazardous waste management law, the City chose
to adopt the applicable portions of the CHWMP. The sitting criteria, policies,
objectives and programs have been incorporated by reference into the General Plan.
Those portions of the CHWMP that affect the City of Fairfield will be addressed, while
those portions which are not relevant will not be incorporated.
Siting Criteria
Solano County adopted a modified version of the DHS siting criteria for locating
hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal facilities. DHS criteria are grouped
into four categories: location, hazard potential, public safety and physical site
limitations. The criteria are used to determine suitable locations for two general types
of facilities, Transfer/Storage/Treatment Facilities and Residual Repositories
(disposal sites). Where applicable, maps were prepared to assist in the
determination.
Solano County modifications to DHS criteria relate to the distance from residences
and immobile populations, the siting of facilities on prime agricultural lands and the
definition of appropriate zoning. Of primary importance to the City is that the modified
criteria require a minimum 2000-foot buffer area between disposal sites and
residences and immobile populations, which include schools, hospitals,
convalescent homes, prisons etc. In addition, a risk assessment must be prepared
that considers the type of waste, the design features of the facility, and the adequacy
of the 2000-foot buffer. The County's requirements are more stringent than those
required by DHS.
City of Fairfield General Plan           HS - 22                             October 2004
Solano CHWMP Policies, Objectives and Programs
The Solano CHWMP identifies seventeen policy areas. The policies, objectives and
programs contained within the Solano CHWMP direct the County to create certain
conditions and/or undertake various hazardous waste management actions. Cities
within the county are also identified as participants within several of the policies and
programs.
The CHWMP policies are written both to function independently and in concert with
each other. The first policy promotes source reduction and on-site waste reduction
as the preferred hazardous waste strategy. Other policies promote the establishment
of a comprehensive education program to increase awareness of hazardous waste
issues, provide an adequate and convenient means for disposal of hazardous
wastes, encourage development of sufficient and necessary facility capacity for
treatment transfer and disposal of hazardous wastes, encourage multi-county and
regional efforts to plan for hazardous waste management through fair share
agreements, promote programs that prevent emergency incidents and respond to
accidental and illegal discharge of hazardous materials, and ensure that
contaminated sites are identified and that aggressive and timely remedial action is
taken.
Hazardous Materials Transport
Hazardous materials are transported through Fairfield on a regular basis along the
major transportation corridors. Interstates 80 and 680 in Fairfield and 780 and 505
in Solano County are all part of the national network for STAA trucks (Surface
Transportation Assistance Act, which regulates large trucks), which are used for the
transportation of hazardous materials. In addition, the Southern Pacific Railroad
(SPRR), a major rail line bisecting Fairfield, transports hazardous materials both to
local industry and to other cities. The City's Multi-Hazards Disaster plan outlines the
procedures and agencies involved in responding to hazardous materials spills on
highways and railways. Planning concerns focus on setbacks for residential uses
and immobile populations from major transportation corridors such as the interstates
and rail lines. Risk associated with the transport of hazardous materials can be
reduced by promoting industries which utilize source reduction and on-site reuse and
waste disposal of hazardous materials.
City of Fairfield General Plan          HS - 23                             October 2004
Emergency Preparedness
In 1987 the City of Fairfield prepared and adopted the Multi-Hazard Disaster Plan to
guide emergency relief efforts in the event of a disaster. The plan is required by the
State for those communities wishing to be eligible for disaster funding. The plan
includes provisions for all City services during anticipated disasters and outlines
evacuation plans, emergency response guidelines, and other operating procedures.
With acceptance of this plan by the State, the City's Department of Public Safety will
be prepared to respond to anticipated disaster events.
The plan addresses the City of Fairfield's response to extraordinary emergency
situations associated with natural disasters, technological incidents, and nuclear
defense operations. The plan describes the responsibilities of the emergency
management organizations. Emphasis of the Plan is placed on emergency planning,
coordination with Federal, State, and local agencies, training of emergency relief
personnel (full-time, volunteer, and reserve), and public awareness and education. It
also addresses mitigation measures to reduce losses from disasters, including land
use, design, and construction regulations.
Noise
The purpose of the Noise Element is to provide information and mechanisms to
mitigate existing noise conflicts and to minimize future noise conflicts.
State Policy and Authorization
The contents of a Noise Element are governed by Section 65302(f) of the California
Government Code, and by the Noise Element Guidelines published in 1987 by the
California Office of Planning and Research (OPR). The OPR Guidelines require the
community to identify both major noise sources and areas sensitive to noise levels.
These areas are to be mapped via generalized noise exposure contours for existing
and projected conditions. Noise levels are to be described in terms of either
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) or the Day-Night Average Sound Level
(L dn ). Both measures are descriptors of total noise exposure at a given location for
an annual average day.
The use of CNEL, which requires special consideration of evening hours, introduces
additional complexities in calculations and uncertainty in data collection as compared
to the Day-Night Level (L dn ), which typically is within 1 dB of the CNEL in a given
situation. (The L dn is employed in State regulations and Federal guidelines, and its
use is recommended by the State Noise Element Guidelines.) Thus, the CNEL
descriptor could be supplemented with the simpler L dn descriptor with no significant
adverse consequences.
City of Fairfield General Plan           HS - 24                            October 2004
Another common noise descriptor is the Equivalent Sound Level (L eq ). This is a
measurement of the average sound level, typically over a one-hour period.
The noise exposure information developed for the Noise Element is to be
incorporated into the General Plan to serve as a basis for achieving land use
compatibility within the community. Further, the noise exposure information is to be
used to provide baseline levels for use in the development and enforcement of a local
noise control ordinance. The Noise Element does not apply to workplace noise
exposures, which are regulated by Federal and State agencies.
Relationship to the General Plan
The Noise Element is related to the Land Use, Housing, Circulation and Open Space
Elements of the General Plan. Recognition of the interrelationship of the Noise
Element and these four mandated elements is necessary to prepare an integrated
general plan. The relationship between these elements is briefly discussed below:
Land Use
An objective of the Noise Element is to provide noise exposure information for use in
the Land Use Element. When integrated with the Noise Element, the Land Use
Element will show acceptable land uses in relation to existing and projected noise
levels.
Housing
The Housing Element considers the provision of adequate sites for new housing and
standards for housing stock. Since residential land uses are noise-sensitive, the
noise exposure information of the Noise Element must be considered when planning
the locations of new housing. The State Noise Insulation Standards may influence
the locations and construction costs of multi-family dwellings, which should be
considered by the Housing Element.
Circulation
The circulation system, which is a major source of noise, must be correlated with the
Land Use Element. Noise exposure will thus be a decisive factor in the location and
design of new transportation facilities, and in the mitigation of noise produced by
existing facilities upon existing and planned land uses.
Open Space
Excessive noise can adversely affect the enjoyment of recreational pursuits in
designated open space, particularly in areas where quiet is a valued part of the
recreational experience. Thus noise exposures should be considered in planning for
City of Fairfield General Plan           HS - 25                         October 2004
this kind of open space use. Conversely, open space can be used to buffer noise-
sensitive uses from noise sources by providing setbacks and screening.
Existing Noise Conditions in Fairfield
Exhibits HS-3 and HS-4 depict the existing noise environment in the planning area.
This noise environment is defined primarily as vehicular traffic on highways and
arterial roadways, operations on the Southern Pacific Railroad, and aircraft
operations at Travis Air Force Base. Industrial noise sources also contribute to the
noise environment, but to a lesser extent. These noise sources were quantified by a
combination of noise measurements, review of existing noise literature, and
application of accepted modeling techniques. A community noise survey was also
performed to evaluate existing noise levels in residential sections of the planning
area.
Sensitive Land Uses
Noise-sensitive land uses in the Fairfield planning area were considered to include
residential areas, schools and parks. Hospitals, auditoriums, churches and meeting
facilities are noise sensitive land uses for interior noise levels, but are generally not
as sensitive to exterior noise as land uses without outdoor activity areas. In some
cases, office uses may be considered noise sensitive land uses for interior noise
levels. The community noise survey results indicate that typical noise levels in noise
sensitive areas of the City of Fairfield range from 50 dB to 55 dB L dn.
Travis Air Force Base Noise
The Travis Air Force Base (AFB) Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) study
is an evaluation of the noise and accident potential environment in the air base
vicinity, and is designed to be used in the planning process to ensure that the safety
and operational capabilities of Travis AFB are preserved. A Comprehensive Airport
Land Use Compatibility Plan (LUCP) was prepared for the Solano County Airport
Land Use Commission (ALUC) with comprehensive land use planning policies and
guidelines intended to protect the safety and general welfare of people in the vicinity
of the Air Base and assure the safety of air navigation. The noise contours for the
LUCP were prepared in terms of CNEL and are included in Exhibit HS-3.
Travis Aero Club Noise
The Land Use Compatibility Plan for the Travis Aero Club was prepared for the ALUC
to assure that future development of adjacent property remains compatible with Aero
Club aircraft activity. The Compatibility Zones included in the Compatibility Plan
incorporate noise impacts for the Aero Club.
Railroad Noise
City of Fairfield General Plan            HS - 26                            October 2004
Railroad activity in Fairfield consists of Amtrak and freight activity on the east/west
Southern Pacific Railroad trackage. Based upon the measured single event noise
levels and the operational information provided by the railroad company, the L dn due
to railroad operations was calculated to be 76 dB at a reference distance of 100 feet
from the railroad centerline.
Vehicular Traffic Noise
Interstate 80, State Route 12 and the major arterial roadways are major contributors
to the existing noise environment in the Plan Area. The distance to the existing 65
dB Ldn noise contours for I-80 and SR-12 were computed to be about 800 feet and
270 feet respectively.
Industrial and Other Noise Sources
Noise is inherent in many industrial processes, even when the best available noise
control technology is applied. Noise production within an industrial facility is
controlled by Federal and State employee health and safety regulations (OSHA and
Cal-OSHA), but exterior noise emissions from industrial operations have the potential
to exceed locally acceptable standards for noise sensitive land uses.
From a land use planning perspective, industrial noise control issues focus upon two
objectives. The first is to prevent the introduction of new noise-producing uses in a
noise sensitive area. The second is to prevent encroachment of noise sensitive uses
upon existing industrial facilities. The first objective can be achieved by applying
noise performance standards to proposed new industrial uses. The second objective
can be met by requiring that new noise sensitive uses in proximity to existing
industrial facilities include mitigation measures to ensure compliance with noise
performance standards.
City of Fairfield General Plan           HS - 27                            October 2004
                      EXHIBIT B
                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                      2014-2022
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                   DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                I
                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
DRAFT JUNE 2014                            CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                           II
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction .................................................................................................................. 1 
   State Requirements ........................................................................................................................... 1 
   Contents of the Housing Element ................................................................................................. 2 
   Community Profile ........................................................................................................................... 3 
   Summary of Housing Needs ........................................................................................................... 4 
   City of Fairfield Housing Goal ....................................................................................................... 6 
Objectives, Policies, and Programs .............................................................................. 7 
   Housing Opportunities .................................................................................................................... 7 
   Infill Development ......................................................................................................................... 10 
   Affordability..................................................................................................................................... 11 
   Relocation Assistance ..................................................................................................................... 17 
   Preservation ..................................................................................................................................... 18 
   Special Needs ................................................................................................................................... 22 
   Energy Conservation ...................................................................................................................... 29 
New Construction Quantified Objective .................................................................... 31 
   Spring 2014-October 2022 ............................................................................................................ 31 
Other Housing Objectives .......................................................................................... 34 
   Newly Affordable Units ................................................................................................................. 34 
   Housing Rehabilitation .................................................................................................................. 34 
   Conservation .................................................................................................................................... 34 
Public Participation .................................................................................................... 35 
   Public Workshop ............................................................................................................................ 36 
   Planning Commission Second Workshop .................................................................................. 37 
   City Council Meeting ...................................................................................................................... 37 
General Plan Consistency ........................................................................................... 38 
   Train Station Specific Plan ............................................................................................................ 38 
   80 to 80 Corridor Plan ................................................................................................................... 38 
   The General Plan and the Housing Element ............................................................................. 38 
Evaluation of 2009 Housing Element ......................................................................... 41 
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                                         DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                            III

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                 APPENDIX B- VACANT LAND INVENTORY MAPS
                 APPENDIX C – PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
                 LIST OF TABLES
                 Table 1 2014-2022 Regional Housing Needs Allocation* .............................................................. 5 
                 Table 2 Quantified Objectives ..........................................................................................................33 
                 Table 3 Other Quantified Objectives...............................................................................................34 
                 Table 4 Review of Previous Housing Element...............................................................................41 
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                            IV

 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Fairfield Housing Element addresses housing development, rehabilitation, and
conservation. It sets forth actions the City will undertake to assist residents to maintain their
homes and to help ensure that there is an adequate supply of safe, affordable housing for
existing and future residents. The element also addresses the special housing needs of
individuals requiring assistance, such as elderly residents, single mothers with children, low-
income and large families, military personnel, the homeless, and mobility-impaired residents.
The policies and programs for housing bear a close relationship to City policies contained in
the Land Use Element. The amount of housing needed, for example, depends in part on the
amount of commercial and industrial development planned. A direct link exists between jobs
and the demand for housing. The Land Use Element also dictates the distribution and
density of housing throughout the city. In sum, the Housing Element determines how much
and what type of housing is needed, while the Land Use Element provides for the location,
distribution, and density of housing.
STATE REQUIREMENTS
The State of California has adopted specific requirements for housing elements. The
cornerstone of these requirements is the allocation of statewide housing needs on a regional
basis and the adoption by each community of its share of the projected regional need. The
state requires that the housing element contain an identification and analysis of existing and
projected housing need for individuals of all levels of income; a statement of goals, policies,
and quantified objectives; programs to address identified housing needs; and identification of
adequate sites for all types of housing (including rental, factory built and mobile homes). The
assessment of housing needs must include:
         Analysis and projections of population and employment.
         Analysis of household characteristics and housing condition, including a comparison
          of housing costs and household income.
         An inventory of vacant sites suitable for residential development and an analysis of
          the effect of zoning requirements and the availability of public facilities and services
          on the use of sites.
         Analysis of the potential and actual governmental and non-governmental constraints
          to the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing, including an analysis
          of constraints to the development of housing for persons with disabilities.
         Evaluation of opportunities for energy conservation.
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                               1

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                          Analysis of the housing needs of special groups, such as elderly residents, disabled
                           individuals, large families, farmworkers, single mothers with children, and homeless
                           individuals or families.
                          Identification of sites suitable for homeless shelters and transitional housing to meet
                           the identified need for such housing.
                          Quantification of the City’s existing and projected housing needs for all income
                           levels
                          An analysis of low income housing that will be converting to market rent status
                 Once these housing needs have been identified and the factors influencing housing
                 production evaluated, the Housing Element must include a proposed program with
                 quantified, time-oriented objectives to address the City’s housing needs. The program should
                 identify how sites will be made available to meet new construction needs, how the City can
                 assist in the provision of low- and moderate-income housing, how constraints to meeting the
                 City’s housing needs can be removed, and how the existing housing stock can be preserved.
                 CONTENTS              OF THE        HOUSING ELEMENT
                 The Housing Element is divided into two parts, a Policy Document and accompanying
                 Appendices. The Policy Document contains the City’s goals, policies, and programs for
                 housing. The goals and policies direct the specific program actions Fairfield intends to
                 undertake to meet its identified housing needs during the 2014-2022 planning period. The
                 City’s proposed program, including a five-year schedule of quantified objectives, provides
                 the detailed description of actions the City proposes to undertake to meet its identified
                 housing needs. The Policy Document also includes a description of the public outreach
                 efforts taken in drafting the Housing Element, a review of the previous accomplishments of
                 the 2009 Housing Element, a General Plan Consistency evaluation describing the
                 relationship between the Housing Element and the General Plan, and a summary of the
                 City’s housing needs identified in Appendix A Housing Needs Assessment. Appendix A
                 contains the background information which identifies Fairfield’s housing needs including an
                 analysis of population and housing characteristics, employment trends, a vacant land
                 inventory, information on special housing needs, an evaluation of constraints to housing
                 production (including the production of accessible housing for persons with disabilities), and
                 a discussion of energy conservation opportunities. Appendix B includes detailed Vacant
                 Land Inventory Maps. Appendix C includes a copy of the City’s online housing needs survey
                 described in further detail in the Public Participation section of this document.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                    CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                      2

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
COMMUNITY PROFILE
The City of Fairfield is estimated to have a population of 105,321 in 2010 (U.S. Census),
which is approximately 25 percent of the total population of Solano County (Department of
Finance). According to the Association of Bay Area Governments Projections 2013, the City is
expected to experience a population increase of 12% percent between 2010 and 2020,
growing to 117,920. ABAG projects the population will continue to increase during the
following decade, with population ultimately reaching 142,800. The Solano County median
income for a household of four in 2014 was $76,700. This represents a small change from
2008 ($75,400) reflecting the slower economy over recent years.
The City’s population remains dominated by family households. According to the ABAG
data analysis, 76% of the households in the 2007-2011 ACS were “family households”. This
percentage has not changed substantially since the 2000 Census or the previous Housing
Element.
Reflecting a relatively affordable housing stock, homeowners are a majority of the
households, with 60.4% of the population occupying ownership housing in 2010. Despite
the recent recession and problems with the housing market, this is actually a slight increase
in homeownership rates from 2000, when 59.7% of the population were reported as
homeowners. These homeownership rates are slightly below the county-wide percentages
(63.2% in 2010 and 65.2% in 2000)As would be expected in a market dominated by
homeowners, single family homes make up a majority of the local housing market, with 69%
of the market in 2010, a slight increase from the 67% in 2000. This reflects the lack of new
apartment construction during the decade.
New home development is an important part of the local economy and housing market.
Over 18% of the total housing stock of 35,095 units in Fairfield (2010) was built since 2000.
This rate of new home development fell after the economic crisis. While the City’s
development market began to recover in 2007 (with 206 permits issued), residential
development remained well below earlier levels. For example, the City issued 180 permits in
2010, 185 permits in 2011, 277 permits in 2012, and 219 building permits in 2013. These
levels are below the 1,050 building permits issued in 2004 and 841 permits issued in 2005.
In addition to the reduction in building permits, the cost of housing also significantly
dropped. According to the Trulia Real Estate website and other sources, homes that were
once selling for upwards of $600,000 were available in the mid $300,000s. While housing
prices began to recover after 2010, prices are lower than the peak, and Fairfield remains a
relatively affo4rdable community, with some houses affordable to moderate and, in some
cases, low income households, with credit and a down payment. A brief review of the Trulia
website (April 2014) showed 60 results for homes below $150,000, including both
townhouses and single family detached homes. These homes would be potentially affordable
to low and moderate income households without direct subsidy. The market has also been
impacted, however, by the entry of investment money into the housing market. All-cash
sales to investors has had impacts on the local and regional housing markets, as moderate
income families find themselves outbid by investors.
Prices are beginning to recover in Fairfield. According to DQ News, the average Fairfield
home price in 2013 was $270,500, an increase of 23% from the 2012 average of $220,000. At
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                           DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                            3

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 this price, however, the average home sold in Fairfield is still theoretically affordable to a
                 moderate income household of four persons, per the current (2014 HUD income limits).
                 Foreclosures and short sales remain another avenue for home ownership in the Fairfield
                 market.
                 Currently, the City has available enough sites to build over 10,000 housing units, which is
                 well over the Regional Housing Needs Allocation. Interest in previously approved projects
                 is returning
                 SUMMARY            OF   HOUSING NEEDS
                 The following is a brief summary of some of the special housing needs identified in further
                 detail in Appendix A, the Housing Needs Assessment. Households with special needs
                 include elderly households, persons with physical and mental disabilities, large households,
                 single-parent households (female-headed households with children under the age of 18),
                 homeless persons, and Farm workers and Military employees of Travis Air Force Base.
                 Special Housing Need Populations
                         Special needs populations discussed in this Housing Element included extremely
                          low income households, persons with disabilities, female-headed families), large
                          households, the elderly, farm workers, and Travis Air Force Base personnel,
                          Extremely low income households. Households earning less than 30% of the
                          median income are classified as “extremely low income households”. According to
                          the American Community Survey/CHAS, there were approximately 3,458 persons
                          (half of the very low income population) that could meet this definition.
                         Disabled households. According to the ACS 2007-2011 survey, 10.4% (9,633
                          persons) of the civilian, non-institutionalized population in Fairfield had a disability.
                          The majority of those between the ages of 5 and 64 reporting a disability reported
                          having an employment, physical, or go-outside-the-home disability.
                         Female-headed families. According to the 2010 Census, approximately 20.1%
                          (5,203) of the total number of families were “female-headed families. These families
                          face higher poverty levels and have lower incomes than all families or all
                          households.
                         Large households
                         The elderly
                         Agricultural workers make up a small percentage of the households in the City and
                          mostly comprise seasonal workers. Many of these workers have low or very low
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                   CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                     4

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
           incomes and face some of the same issues as other low income groups. They also
           face issues of seasonal work.
          The City has also chosen Military Employees as a special needs category. Currently,
           Travis Air Force Base employs 7,260 active military personnel, 3,770 civilians, and
           4,250 reserves. Foreclosure Crisis. Travis personnel vary significantly in income,
           permanence of tenure, and other factors. They also benefit from housing options on
           Travis Air Force Base.
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
State law requires the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) to determine
projected regional housing needs for persons at all income levels. ABAG then determines
local jurisdictions’ share of the regional need for housing. The jurisdictions in Solano County
formed a “subregion” to review the draft ABAG numbers and allocate housing units among
the participating jurisdictions. This share must be considered in the Housing Element
update. Table 1 shows the ABAG projected housing needs by income categories for Solano
County. The City has estimated that HALF the Very Low Income category should be
addressed as Extremely Low Income. The ABAG allocation covers from January 1, 2014, to
December 31, 2022 (8 years).
                                                        TABLE 1
 2014-2022 REGIONAL                                    HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION*
                                 Very Low                     Low                     Moderate     Above Moderate
 Benicia                       29%            94       17%             54          17%         56  38%     123
 Dixon                         25%            50       12%             24          15%         30  47%      93
 Fairfield                     25%           779       13%            404          15%        456  47%     1461
 Rio Vista                     15%            45       12%             36          16%         48  57%     170
 Suisun City                   29%           147       11%             57          12%         60  48%      241
 Vacaville                     26%           287       12%            134          16%        173  45%     490
 Vallejo                       21%           283       13%            178          15%        211  51%     690
 Unincorporated                25%            26       15%             15          18%         19  42%      43
 Solano County                 25%          1,711      13%            902          15%       1,053 47%     3311
Source: Association of Bay Area Governments
*An estimated half of the City’s very low-income housing needs are for extremely low-income.
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                      5

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 CITY      OF     FAIRFIELD HOUSING GOAL
                 The overall Goal for the City of Fairfield Housing Element is to encourage a high quality
                 residential environment with a wide range of housing opportunities throughout the City
                 affordable to a diverse population of renters, owners, and people with special needs. The
                 City will promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion, sex,
                 marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status, or disability.
                 The City will continue to focus on preserving and improving existing housing and
                 neighborhoods by directing resources to physical rehabilitation, neighborhood revitalization,
                 and upgrading property management to improve living conditions for residents. Examples of
                 key programs have included:
                         Housing Rehabilitation Program. Redevelopment, federal Community Development
                          Block Grant (CDBG) and State CalHome funds provided funding for this grant and
                          loan program. This program has been reduced in scale due to the elimination of
                          Redevelopment funding. The City anticipates funding the rehabilitation of 25 single
                          family homes per year, with multifamily projects completed when funding is
                          available.
                         North PACE development. The City acquired and demolished a neighborhood of
                          26 crime-ridden, dilapidated four-plex apartment buildings and is seeking a
                          development partner to construct new housing on this site. The City anticipates
                          development of a new neighborhood of 21 single family homes.
                         Crime Free Multifamily Housing Program. Working with property owners and
                          management companies citywide, this program focuses on improving the safety of
                          apartment complexes and neighborhoods. This program does not create new
                          housing units but helps ensure the livability of existing communities and
                          neighborhoods.
                         Foreclosure Prevention and Neighborhood Preservation. During the housing
                          market crisis, the City devoted resources to mitigate some of the worst impacts of
                          the current housing crisis. Some of the key programs include foreclosure prevention
                          workshops, housing counseling, rental deposit assistance, and a vacant building
                          ordinance to prevent neighborhoods from becoming blighted.
                         Affordable Homeownership. The City also offers programs to help low and
                          moderate-income citizens to participate in the private housing market, including the
                          Mortgage Credit Certificate program and the Silent Loan (down payment assistance)
                          Program. The City has also worked with local mobile home communities to
                          facilitate resident ownership to preserve affordability.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                    CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                     6

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
A focus on neighborhood preservation and rehabilitation enables the City to leverage its
limited funding to obtain the most affordable housing for the dollar. Projects which receive
City assistance record covenants to provide long-term affordability of their units. In
addition, these programs can help stabilize existing neighborhoods, reduce social problems,
improve livability and prevent the decay and loss of affordable housing stock.
The City also supports new construction. The City has zoned adequate sites to meet our
Regional Fair Share of housing for all income categories. The City works closely with private
developers interested in building market rate and affordable housing. The City has also
worked with nonprofit groups, including Resources for Community Development, Caminar
Solano, and Mission Solano, to plan for, and in many cases build, special needs housing.
OBJECTIVES, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
This section of the Housing Element sets forth the Objectives, Policies, and Programs the
City intends to implement to address Fairfield’s housing needs. The City has seven
Objectives with accompanying policies and programs to implement the overall Objective
discussed above.
HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
Objective HO 1
Provide for varied housing opportunities, in terms of type, price, amenities,
neighborhood design, and location, for all income groups and family types.
Policy HO 1.1
Encourage multifamily housing at appropriate locations and densities, focusing where
possible such new housing near employment, transportation, services, and recreational
amenities.
Program HO 1.1 A
The City will update the Multi-family Housing Sites Survey periodically as needed to inventory sites for
higher density housing. The City will also provide information via the quarterly Residential Development
Activity Report on active and potential projects.
The Sites Study will also reassess the potential for infill multi-family development, including commercially
zoned properties. The study will address specialized housing needs, including senior housing, housing for the
disabled and developmentally disabled, and housing sites for agricultural workers. The Survey will also assess
development trends, the type of housing developed, and affordability of the units developed.
          .Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: Ongoing. Update the study periodically after major changes in the General Plan or
          Zoning or after major annexations. Staff anticipates the next update will occur in 2015.
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                            DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                         7

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 Program HO 1.1 B
                 Implement the concepts in the Train Station Specific Plan which call for the development of higher density
                 housing near the train station/Town Center and the Lake Park.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time frame: Ongoing.
                 Program HO 1.1 C:
                 Facilitate development in large planning areas which include sites designated for high-density housing, in
                 particular the planning areas identified in the Train Station Specific Plan Area, by communicating with
                 developers regarding opportunities for developing affordable housing on these sites. Where appropriate, use the
                 Master Planned Unit Development Permit process (as described in the Fairfield Train Station Specific Plan
                 and the Fairfield Zoning Ordinance to facilitate affordable unit development. During the Master Planned
                 Unit Development Permit process, work with land owners and developers to create sites ranging from one to
                 10 acres in size that are feasible and appropriate for the development of affordable housing.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time Frame: The Specific Plan and associated Zoning Ordinance amendments have been
                           adopted. Initial applications are under review for the first planning areas. Staff will work with
                           applicants as Master Planned Unit Development Permit applications are received.
                 Program HO 1.1 D
                 After adoption of the Downtown South/West Texas Street Specific Plan, the City will amend the Zoning
                 Code to facilitate implementation of higher density housing at appropriate locations.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time frame: After adoption of the Specific Plan in 2016.
                 Program HO 1.1 E
                 The City will continue to monitor development activity, including density levels, types of projects, and
                 affordability, on sites with high density zoning. If RH parcels are proposed to be rezoned to a lower density,
                 or proposed for development at a lower density than 20 dwelling units per acre, City staff shall prepare an
                 analysis of the impact on the City’s ability to meet housing needs.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time frame: Ongoing, during project review by Planning Division.
                 Program HO 1.1 F
                 Continue requiring identification signs on multi-family sites and buyer notification for single-family
                 homebuyers near multi-family sites. Such signs can help reduce neighborhood opposition because new
                 homeowners will be aware of potential developments prior to moving into a neighborhood.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                           8

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time frame: Ongoing
Policy HO 1.2
Encourage mixed use development that provides unique housing types, pedestrian friendly
design, home ownership, opportunities for entrepreneurship and employment, and access to
transit and services such as childcare.
Program HO 1.2 A
The Train Station Specific Plan envisions the development of a traditional town center near the train station
with higher density housing and a greater emphasis on transit, pedestrians, and mixed use. Implement these
objectives in the Train Station Specific Plan to provide innovative transit-oriented development in the
Fairfield market.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time frame: Underway. The Train Station Specific Plan will be implemented as proposals
           come forward
Program HO 1.2B
The City will complete the Downtown South/West Texas Street Specific Plan to identify opportunities for
higher density housing and mixed-use development with access to the Suisun-Fairfield Train Station and the
Fairfield Transportation Center.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time frame: Underway, with completion anticipated for 2016.
Program HO 1.2C
Support appropriate developer proposals for innovative housing prototypes not included in the current Zoning
Ordinance by coordinating pre-submittal meetings, prioritizing funding and offering incentives. Innovative
prototypes will be developed in the Downtown South/West Texas Street Specific Plan.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time frame: Ongoing, Incorporate into forthcoming Specific Plan (June 2016)
Program HO 1.2 D
Develop and implement design standards suitable for new mixed use and pedestrian-oriented development
projects in Fairfield. The standards should address street design, architecture, site planning, pedestrian
infrastructure, standards for mixed use development, and public space design. Work with developers interested
in building experimental projects in Fairfield. Amend the current Design Guidelines as needed.
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                           DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                      9
                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: The City has adopted the Train Station Specific Plan and will work with
                            developers to encourage innovative design which meets the intentions of the plan. The Downtown
                            South/West Texas Street Specific Plan will also include design standards for new infill
                            development and redevelopment. The City will consider extending design concepts and standards to
                            other neighborhoods in the City as appropriate.
                 Program HO 1.2E
                 Continue to implement development standards for mixed-use “live-work” development, incorporating retail,
                 office, and residential uses into single buildings or sites.
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: Ongoing, as projects are submitted.
                 INFILL DEVELOPMENT
                 Objective HO 2
                 Encourage infill housing in developed areas of the City.
                 Policy HO 2.1
                 Encourage property owners of adjoining parcels to consolidate or otherwise cooperatively
                 develop their parcels.
                 Program HO 2.1A
                 Educate developers and property owners about successful smaller infill housing projects and flexibility in the
                 City’s Zoning Ordinance to support the development of infill housing development including a conceptual
                 review process. Use design guidelines and any development prototypes included in the City’s adopted Specific
                 Plans to guide development projects.
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: Ongoing,
                 Policy HO 2.2
                 Encourage property owners of smaller parcels (less than two acres) to work with the City to
                 develop affordable ownership housing where rental housing is infeasible.
                 Program HO 2.2A
                 Develop incentives programs to facilitate lot consolidation, particularly in infill neighborhoods. These
                 incentives might include fee reductions or use of the Fee Credit Bank, density bonuses, flexibility in
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                             CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                            10

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
development standards, and assistance in marketing small parcels. Implement the planning process in the
Train Station Specific Plan, which encourages and facilitates land consolidation and comprehensive planning.
The Work Program for the Downtown South/West Texas Street Specific Plan addresses lot consolidation.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time frame: A development incentives program will be a key element in the Downtown
           South/West Texas Street Specific Plan scheduled for completion by June 2016. In addition, as an
           ongoing effort, the City will continue to work with landowners in the Train Station Specific Plan
           Area to encourage consolidation and coordinated planning efforts.
Policy HO 2.3
Support infill housing through public outreach efforts in existing neighborhoods.
Program HO 2.3A
The City will continue to provide information about options for flexibility in development standards and
continue to encourage developers of multi-family housing and affordable housing to conduct extensive
community outreach programs prior to submittal of their projects. Staff will help notify neighborhoods and will
assist developers and the neighborhood in organizing meetings. Community outreach should focus on reducing
fear about multi-family housing and can include providing examples of successful projects elsewhere in the City
and the Bay Area. In addition, the City will work with nonprofit housing groups such as BRIDGE, Mid-
Peninsula Housing, and the Solano Affordable Housing Foundation to develop informational materials.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time frame: Ongoing.
AFFORDABILITY
Objective HO 3
Meet the housing needs of extremely low-, very low-, low- and moderate-income
households identified in the Regional Housing Needs Allocation.
Policy HO 3.1
Assist developers interested in developing new affordable housing for all income groups
(extremely low-, very low-, low- and moderate- income households).
Program HO 3.1 A
Amend the Density Bonus Ordinance to bring into conformance with current State law. Continue offering
density bonuses and other incentives to builders who include affordable units within residential developments.
           Responsibility: Community Development
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                             DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                       11
                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                           Time frame: Amend the Ordinance by fall 2014. Continue to offer density bonuses on an
                           ongoing, basis, depending on developer interest.
                 Program HO 3.1 B
                 Continue to implement flexible development standards to facilitate development of affordable housing.
                 Implement the flexible standards in the Train Station Specific Plan and the forthcoming Downtown
                 South/West Texas Street Specific Plan.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time frame: Ongoing, depending on developer interest.
                 Program HO 3.1 C
                 Continue to aggressively seek grants to assist in funding infrastructure in Priority Development Areas and for
                 affordable housing projects. Use these grants to reduce infrastructure-related impact fees.
                           Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
                           Time frame: Ongoing, according to annual and periodic grant funding cycles.
                 Program HO 3.1 D
                 When available, apply for funding from the Strategic Growth Council Affordable Housing and
                 Sustainable Communities (AHSC) Program. Potential projects will include:
                          Financing infrastructure in the Train Station Specific Plan Area and the forthcoming Downtown
                           South/West Texas Street Specific Plan Area.
                          Improving streetscapes in the Downtown South/West Texas Street Specific Plan Area to enhance
                           walkability and provide incentives for the development of infill housing in the area
                          Providing gap financing for affordable rental housing in the Train Station and Downtown/West
                           Texas Street areas.
                          Establishing home ownership programs in these planning areas.
                           Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works, Strategic Growth Council
                           Time Frame: First funding cycle (2016)
                 Policy HO 3.2
                 Support the use of state and federal programs and local and nonprofit funding sources as
                 funding for affordable housing construction and rehabilitation.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                         12

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
Program HO 3.2 A
Work with developers to identify funding sources that reduce financing costs for projects in exchange for
affordable units. As appropriate, the City will prioritize funding for projects that include units affordable to
extremely low-, very low-, and low- income households. Currently, the Housing Rehabilitation budget has
available $1.2 million
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time frame: Ongoing.
Program HO 3.2 B
Use state and federal programs for which the City would be the applicant, or a co-sponsor, and work with
nonprofit and for-profit developers to make use of those programs directed to homebuilders. In particular, the
City will seek available funding or support funding applications by others to provide for housing for
extremely-low income households. For some of these programs, the City would act as a sponsor for an
interested developer. The City may use Community Development Block Grants, California Rental Housing
Construction Program funds, California Housing Finance Agency programs, Department of Housing and
Urban Development programs to finance housing, and State and federal programs aimed at providing housing
and related services to homeless individuals.
          California Rental Housing Construction Program,
          California Housing Finance Agency programs,
          Department of Housing and Urban Development programs to finance housing, and
          State and federal programs aimed at providing housing and related services to homeless individuals.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time frame: Ongoing apply for funds as Notice of Funds Availability (NOFAs) are released.
Program HO 3.2 C
Continue seeking financial commitments from lending institutions to provide financing for affordable housing.
Support activities of nonprofit housing corporations, such as Caminar Solano, National CORE,
Community Housing Opportunities Corporation (CHOC), and Solano Affordable Housing Foundation.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time frame: Ongoing.
Program HO 3.2 D
Continue the City’s Fee Credit Bank program to collect and distribute fee credits to developments which
provide affordable housing.
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                      13

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Time frame: Ongoing
                 Program 3.2 E
                 Use revenues obtained from the sale of PACE properties by the Successor Agency to assist in the development
                 of affordable housing in Fairfield.
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: Sale should occur by spring 2015, with over $1 million in potential revenues
                            available for housing programs and projects.
                 Program HO 3.2 F
                 Continue offering the City of Fairfield Fee Deferral Program for affordable housing development as outlined
                 in Chapter 5 of the Fairfield City Code
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time Frame: Ongoing
                 Policy HO 3.3
                 Encourage homeownership for moderate- and low-income homebuyers.
                 Program HO 3.3 A
                 Continue the City’s active mortgage credit certificate program, which reduces financing costs, for income-eligible
                 first-time homebuyers. The City will market the mortgage credit certificate program through radio and
                 newspaper announcements and notification to lending institutions and the Northern Solano County
                 Association of Realtors. The City will also provide lender training.
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: Ongoing: apply each year for certificate authorization.
                 Program HO 3.3 B
                 Continue the City’s down payment assistance program. The primary funding source will continue to be Cal
                 HOME grants. The City received $400,000 from this program in 2011. The program provides assistance
                 to first-time, lower-income homebuyers. The loans are deferred for 30 years if the household still owns and
                 resides in the home.
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: Ongoing. The City will continue to apply for CalHome funding every year.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                         14

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
Program HO 3.3 C
Provide staff and funding support in locating sites, technical assistance, and funding to agencies like Habitat
for Humanity who specialize in owner-occupied self-help housing. This support could include money from
CDBG “Support Activity” funding, which is currently at $50,000 per year. The City also has available up
to $3,000,000 in its fee credit bank potentially available for developers of affordable housing.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: Ongoing, as project opportunities arise.
Program HO 3.3 D
Continue to position the City to take advantage of upcoming funding opportunities from local, state and
federal funding sources. The City will continue to work with the California Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD), the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD),
Unity Council, and Legal Services of Northern California to implement the Section 8 Homeownership
Program targeted to low- and very low-income households.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: Ongoing.
Policy HO 3.4
Implement state requirements regarding the location of manufactured homes.
Program HO 3.4A
Continue to allow manufactured homes on foundations on residential land, subject to the same development
standards as site-built housing.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: Ongoing.
Policy HO 3.5
Use Successor Housing Agency revenues to fund housing rehabilitation programs and home
buyer assistance efforts
Program HO 3.5A
Implement the City of Fairfield Real Property Asset Management and Disposal Plan for Housing
Authority Owned Properties to fund housing rehabilitation, and first time homebuyer assistance programs.
          Responsibility: Housing Authority, Community Development
          Timeline: Ongoing
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                             DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                        15

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 Program H.O. 3.5 B
                 Work with real estate professionals, interested developers, and nonprofit organizations to identify and sell
                 appropriate properties suitable for housing development. Where appropriate, include an affordability
                 component in these transactions.
                             Responsibility: Housing Authority, Community Development
                             Time Frame: Within the statutory timeframe established by the State.
                 Policy H. O. 3.6
                 Support the Housing Choice Voucher Program for very low-income households.
                 Program HO 3.6A
                 Working with very low-income households, local social agencies, and community organizations maximize the
                 effectiveness and utilization of the Housing Authority’s current Housing Choice Voucher Program.
                             Responsibility: Community Development
                             Time frame: Ongoing requests when available.
                 Policy HO 3.7
                 Maintain the affordability of existing affordable housing developments.
                 Program HO 3.7 A
                 Work with organizations that acquire, rehabilitate, and manage substandard, vacant, or abandoned dwelling
                 units. Units rehabilitated with City assistance will be rented to low-income households.
                             Responsibility: Community Development
                             Time frame: Ongoing program.
                 Program HO 3.7B
                 As funding permits continue to monitor the status of affordable housing projects in Fairfield. For projects
                 considering conversion to market rents, offer programs to assist property owners in exchange for affordability
                 covenants or guarantees.
                            City assistance with building or property rehabilitation.
                            The City will help identify potential new owners for the project, possibly nonprofit
                             housing corporations looking to acquire and maintain privately owned affordable
                             housing projects.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                            CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                         16

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
         New financing.
         Such programs will be potentially funded through the following sources:
         CDBG Grants (project-specific funding).
         City assistance to developers participating in the federal Tax Credit program.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: Ongoing
Policy HO 3.8
Encourage long-term housing affordability.
Program HO 3.8A
Require projects receiving City assistance to ensure long-term affordability. Many funding sources used by the
City and property owners require affordability be retained from 45-55 years. When funding permits, the City
will pursue agreements with property owners to ensure long-term preservation of affordable units. Where
appropriate, as a condition of assistance the City may impose resale controls on ownership units. Resale
controls may incorporate a shared-equity arrangement to permit unit purchasers to share in any equity gains.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: Ongoing.
Program HO 3.8B
As funding and staff resources permit, monitor unit condition and participant incomes to ensure that
affordability requirements are met. Monitoring includes reviewing tenant files and rent rolls.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: Ongoing, monitoring on an annual basis.
RELOCATION ASSISTANCE
Objective HO 4
Provide relocation assistance and, where appropriate, replacement of affordable
housing removed in the City.
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                            DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                       17

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 Policy HO 4.1
                 Assist lower income households displaced by the removal of affordable units.
                 Program HO 4.1 A
                 Evaluate demolitions of multi-family housing projects of 4 or more units. If the housing is occupied, City
                 Ordinance requires the owner to pay displaced households relocation assistance including two months rental
                 assistance for a comparable unit.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time frame: Ongoing program.
                 Program HO 4.1 B
                 Require owners of dwellings vacated for violation of housing and building codes to pay relocation expenses to
                 displaced residents and provide former tenants with right of first refusal to return to the unit upon its repair.
                           Responsibility: Building Division, Police Department Code Enforcement Division
                           Time frame: Implemented on a case-by-case basis.
                 Program HO 4.1 C
                 Assess the impact on tenants prior to conversion or removal of a mobile home park. A copy of the assessment
                 must be provided to all tenants affected by the closure. The City may require that comparable, standard
                 condition replacement housing affordable to low- and moderate-income tenants be provided on the site or
                 elsewhere in the City.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time frame: Depends on action by owner of park.
                 PRESERVATION
                 Objective HO 5
                 Improve and conserve the existing supply of housing and the City’s neighborhoods
                 Policy HO 5.1
                 Continue to enforce the City’s Community Preservation Ordinance and building codes.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                         18

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
Program HO 5.1 A
Improve neighborhood quality of life and encourage neighborhood revitalization through Code Enforcement,
the Quality of Life Task Force, and the Crime Free Multifamily program. Emphasize a broad based
community focused approach, including community clean-ups, neighborhood outreach, and compliance with
Building Codes.
          Responsibility: City Manager’s Office, Community Development, Police, Code Enforcement
          Time frame: Ongoing.
Program HO 5.1 B
As funding permits, continue to provide free inspections and construction management to households receiving
rehabilitation assistance. In addition, the City will provide inspections on a complaint basis for rental units.
          Responsibility: Building Division, Code Enforcement
          Time frame: Ongoing.
Program HO 5.1 C
As funding permits, continue to purchase long term or permanent affordability covenants to preserve housing
affordable or potentially affordable to extremely-low- and very-low-income residents.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: Ongoing.
Policy HO 5.2
Use available state and federal funds for rehabilitation assistance for low-income households,
focusing where appropriate on projects benefiting seniors, the disabled, and veterans
Program HO 5.2 A
The City will continue its active housing rehabilitation program, proactively searching for and obtaining new
funding as needed. The program is currently funded through the following sources, and the City intends to
continue using these funds when available:
         Cal HOME grants (state), when available. The City received a Cal HOME grant of
          $600,000 in 2011.
         CDBG Revolving Loan Fund: The fund has $532,000in 2013 available as needed for
          minor rehabilitation projects.
         Community Development Block Grants: Beginning with fiscal year 2014/2015, the
          Housing Rehabilitation Program will automatically receive $200,000 per year for
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                         19

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                           Revolving Loan Fund recapitalization. The City has also received an Administrative
                           Grant of $100,000
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time frame: Ongoing.
                 Policy HO 5.3
                 Continue to monitor housing conditions.
                 Program HO 5.3 A
                 The City will maintain information on conditions as part of its housing rehabilitation programs and
                 neighborhood revitalization efforts.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time frame: Establish a database by December 2015then update it continually.
                 Policy HO 5.4
                 Reduce the impacts of the Housing Finance Crisis on neighborhood livability, appearance,
                 and public safety.
                 Program HO 5.4 A
                 Implement the Vacant Building Ordinance to limit the blighting effects of abandoned properties in foreclosure.
                           Responsibility: Code Enforcement, Building Division,
                           Time frame: Ongoing.
                 Program HO 5.4 B
                 Continue to implement the Neighborhood Stabilization Program (SNP-3) for the target neighborhoods in
                 Fairfield proper and Solano County. The City administers a $1.6 million grant program for the City and
                 Solano County.
                           Responsibility: Community Development, Code Enforcement
                           Time frame: Ongoing.
                 Policy HO 5.5
                 Preserve the affordability of housing which received federal, state, and/or local support,
                 including projects which are at risk of converting from affordable housing to market rents.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                           CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                      20
HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
Program HO 5.5 A
The City will continue to monitor the status of apartment complexes with project-based subsidies and
affordability requirements. The City will annually contact the owner(s) of Monument Arms, Rockwell
Manor and Parkside Villa to determine if they intend to convert their projects to market-rate status. The
City will offer appropriate support and assistance to the owners of Rockwell Arms in their efforts to obtain
new funding support from HCD and HUD.
If property owners decide to convert to market-rate status, the City will respond with the following programs
as appropriate:
          • City assistance with building or property rehabilitation.
          •The City will help identify potential new owners for the project, possibly nonprofit housing
          corporations looking to acquire and maintain privately owned affordable housing projects.
          • New financing.
          •The City will offer assistance to tenants of projects being converted to market rent status. The City
          will work with tenant assistance organizations such as Legal Services of Northern California to
          assist the tenants of projects facing conversion. This assistance may include offering portable
          enhanced vouchers.
Such programs will be potentially funded through the following sources:
          • CDBG Grants (project-specific funding).
          • City staff assistance to developers participating in the federal Tax Credit program.
          • HUD funding for tenant-based assistance programs such as enhanced vouchers.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: Ongoing.
Program HO 5.5 B
The City will work with the owners of Monument Arms and the project’s tenants to implement the new
enhanced vouchers program.
          Responsibility: Housing Authority
          Time frame: October 2014, and ongoing tenant assistance
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                          21

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 SPECIAL NEEDS
                 Objective HO 6
                 Create housing opportunities for people with special needs.
                 Policy HO 6.1
                 Support the efforts of Solano County and local social service providers to increase their
                 capacity to serve the homeless
                 Program HO 6.1 A
                 Pursue funding from available sources for homeless services. Assist community groups that provide service, and
                 assist such groups in applying for funding from other agencies. The City will consider applying for grants
                 where appropriate or will encourage/partner with local and regional nonprofit organizations that wish to
                 apply for such grants.
                           Responsibility: Community Development, City Manager’s Office
                           Time frame: Ongoing. Depends on funding and requests from community groups.
                 Program HO 6.1 B
                 Address homelessness and other special needs through the broad-based coalition associated with the County’s
                 Continuum of Care program. Continue to work with organizations like Community Action Partnership of
                 Solano County where appropriate. The City will continue to participate in County efforts to address
                 transitional housing programs and projects for homeless persons as an intermediate step to self-sufficiency in
                 permanent housing. The City will also participate in the Re-Entry Council Planning Group, the Inter-
                 Agency Planning Group on Disaster Preparedness, and the Homeless Shelter Collaborative, local agencies
                 charged with coordinating responses to homelessness.
                           Responsibility: City Manager’s Office
                           Time frame: Ongoing
                 Program HO 6.1 C
                 Work with the County to assess on an ongoing basis the success of local, countywide, and regional efforts to
                 address the homeless and special needs populations, as mandated by HUD and the HEARTH Act.
                           Responsibility: City Manager’s Office
                           Time frame: Ongoing
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                             CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                         22

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
Program HO 6.1 D
Facilitate development of private sector employment opportunities for homeless people including job training
and search programs, coordinating our efforts with the Workforce Investment Board.
            Responsibility: Economic Development
            Time frame: Ongoing.
Program HO 6.1 E
Work with public agencies, local religious and social organizations, and the development community to
facilitate operation of and appropriate expansion of the Mission Solano Bridge to Life facility.
            Responsibility: Community Development, City Manager’s Office
            Time frame: Mission Solano has completed the residential facilities at the Bridge to Life Center.
            Forthcoming projects include a commercial kitchen to facilitate serving the population Mission
            Solano anticipates completing the kitchen in late 2015.
Policy HO 6.2
Comply with all State legal requirements, including SB 2, pertaining to zoning provisions for
homeless shelters, transitional housing, and supportive housing.
Program HO 6.2 A
To insure compliance with SB2, by January 2015, the City will amend the Zoning Ordinance to create an
overlay district which will be assigned to several parcels in the City that allows expansion of the City’s
existing emergency shelters as a permitted use (without a Conditional Use Permit). These parcels include the
City’s existing emergency shelters (Bridge to Life Center) as well as adjacent parcels. The parcels with
Emergency Shelter Overlay Zoning will provide adequate land to meet the need for emergency shelter beds in
the City identified in this Housing Element through point-in-time surveys (at least 300 persons). Any
standards for development of new shelter space and beds will be consistent with Government Code Section
65583(a) (4) that address operational and design criteria that may include:
           Lighting
           On-site management
           Maximum number of beds or persons to be served nightly by the facility
           Off-street parking based on demonstrated need
           Supportive services provided on-site a level commensurate with the number of beds
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                           DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                      23

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 The Overlay District Ordinance will also include monitoring provisions to ensure that
                 adequate sites remain available for the development of or expansion of emergency shelters I
                 Fairfield.
                           Responsible Agency: Community Development
                           Time frame: Spring 2015
                 Program HO 6.2 B
                 Implement the Zoning Ordinance provisions permitting single room occupancy (SRO) and boarding houses in
                 permitted zoning districts. Single-room occupancy projects and boarding houses as permitted by right in the
                 CM Zoning District. Conversion of older motels to SRO housing is also permitted in the CT Zoning
                 District (North and West Texas Streets). Boarding Houses are permitted by right in the Commercial Mixed
                 (CM) district and allowed with a conditional use permit in the Residential High Density district (RH),),
                 and Commercial Downtown (CD) district. The City will work with the owners of older motels on West
                 Texas and North Texas Streets to encourage appropriate redevelopment as high quality, safe SRO housing.
                           Responsible Agency: Community Development
                           Time frame: Ongoing. The City will continue to market this option to local motel
                           owners who might be interested in providing affordable SRO housing.
                 Program HO 6.2 C
                 The City will amend the Zoning Ordinance to eliminate transitional and supportive housing as separate land
                 uses. The amended ordinance will instead regulate these activities no differently than occupancies in similar
                 housing structures.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Timeframe: January 2015
                 Policy HO 6.3
                 Support nondiscrimination in the sale, rental, and financing of housing.
                 Program HO 6.3 A
                 Continue to support through referrals fair housing programs offered by agencies in the County and nonprofits,
                 including programs offered by Pacific Community Services, a HUD-certified nonprofit corporation.
                           Responsibility: Community Development, Housing Authority
                           Time frame: Ongoing. The City does not currently support these programs with funding.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                             CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                        24
HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
Policy HO 6.4
Provide for needed social services in new and rehabilitated affordable housing, including
services for single mothers as well as families. All multifamily projects that include
Redevelopment Agency or City funding shall address social services and amenities, such as
childcare, counseling, and education.
Program HO 6.4 A
Support the development of child care centers in conjunction with larger multi-family housing developments in
order to better serve the residents, improve a parent’s access to employment, and reduce vehicle trips.
            Responsibility: Community Development in cooperation with County agencies and nonprofit
            organizations.
            Time frame: Ongoing, depending on developer interest and project timing.
Program HO 6.4 B
Continue to work with nonprofit organizations and social service agencies to provide after school programs for
childcare in low-income neighborhoods.
            Responsibility: Community Development, Housing Authority, in cooperation with County
            agencies and nonprofit organizations.
            Time frame: Ongoing, depending on developer interest and project timing.
Policy HO 6.5
Support housing programs targeted to older adults, 55 years of age and above, taking into
account lifestyle, health issues, and income
Program HO 6.5 A
Work with developers specializing in housing for older adults. Assist developers interested in converting
existing residential buildings to meet the needs of older low-income adults. Assistance could include technical
assistance in applying for state and federal funding, local financial assistance through redevelopment housing
set-aside funds, and the waiving of certain fees and/or development requirements to increase the financial
feasibility of such housing.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Time frame: Ongoing.
Policy HO 6.6
Support efforts to meet the housing needs of Travis Air Force Base personnel.
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                             DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                         25

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 Program HO 6.6 A
                 Participate in the Travis Regional Armed Forces Committee (TRAFC) to discuss the needs of military
                 personnel and their families.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time frame: Ongoing, the Travis Regional Armed Forces Committee meets monthly.
                 Program HO 6.6 B
                 Cooperate with Travis Regional Armed Force Base during any future reevaluation of housing services on and
                 off-base. Monitor the base’s privatization program and provide assistance as needed for off-site housing
                 programs.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time frame: Ongoing.
                 Policy HO 6.7
                 Ensure that new residential developments include housing accessible to persons with
                 disabilities and others with physical conditions that make it difficult for them to use
                 conventional housing.
                 Program HO 6.7 A
                 Implement state and federal requirements for accessibility and adaptability in new residential buildings.
                           Responsibility: Building Division
                           Time frame: Ongoing.
                 Program HO 6.7 B
                 Assist organizations seeking to develop or convert residential buildings for use as group homes for persons
                 with physical or psychological conditions that prevent them from using conventional housing. Assistance could
                 include participation in applying for state or federal funding, waiving of certain fees or development standards,
                 and financial participation through redevelopment housing set-aside funds.
                           Responsibility: Community Development
                           Time frame: Ongoing, dependent on applications.
                 Program 6.7 C
                 The City will adopt a reasonable accommodation ordinance to provide for exceptions in development
                 standards for housing for persons with disabilities. This procedure will be a ministerial process, with minimal
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                          26

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
or no processing fee, subject to approval by the Community Development Director applying the following
decision-making criteria:
         The request for reasonable accommodation will be used by an individual with a disability protected
          under fair housing laws.
         The requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an individual with a
          disability protected under fair housing laws.
         The requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the
          City.
         The requested accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the
          City's land-use and zoning program.
Additionally, the City will provide information to individuals with disabilities regarding reasonable
accommodation policies, practices, and procedures based on the guidelines from the California Department of
Housing and Community Development (HCD). This information will be available through postings and
pamphlets at the City and on the City’s website.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time Frame: January 2015
Policy HO 6.8
Encourage housing for larger families.
Program HO 6.8 A
Work with private and nonprofit developers to target subsidies and programs, including the Density Bonus
Ordinance, to encourage the inclusion of three- and four-bedroom units in affordable rental projects.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: Ongoing, depending on market and developer interest.
Program HO 6.8 C
Continue the City’s single-family rehabilitation programs, preserving homes suitable for larger households.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: Ongoing, depending on applications and funding availability.
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                           DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                       27

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 Program HO 6.8 D
                 Support self-help housing groups’ efforts to develop affordable homes suitable for larger families, such as
                 Habitat for Humanity’s self-help housing projects.
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: Ongoing, depending on interest from developers.
                 Policy HO 6.9
                 Support regional and County efforts to meet the needs of migrant and seasonal farm
                 workers and their families.
                 Program HO 6.9 A
                 Work with nonprofit housing developers who build affordable housing in Fairfield to address any special
                 needs of farm workers, such as on-site childcare and community rooms. Such community rooms can facilitate
                 education, outreach, and job training services. Funding would be provided through the state and federal
                 programs.
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: Ongoing, depending on developer interest.
                 Program HO 6.9 B
                 Cooperate with Solano County, the County Farm Bureau the Solano County Agricultural Commissioner,
                 and the California Human Development Corporation in efforts to meet housing needs of migrant and
                 seasonal farm workers. The California Human Development Corporation operates farm worker housing
                 located throughout California (although not in Fairfield). The City will seek appropriate CHDC
                 participation in any proposed very low-income farm worker housing developed during the 2015-2023 period.
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: Ongoing, depending on interest.
                 Program HO 6.9 C
                 Work with Solano County and local agricultural interests to identify sites appropriate for migrant farm
                 worker housing. These sites may be located outside the City Limits near employment.
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: Ongoing.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                           CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                         28

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
Program HO 6.9 D
The City shall amend the Zoning Ordinance to specifically allow employee housing for six or fewer residents
as a permitted use in residential zoning districts, in compliance with Health and Safety Code Section
17021.5.
          Responsibility: Community Development
          Time frame: January 2015
Policy HO 6.10
Address the needs of developmentally disabled individuals.
Program HO 6.10A
Work with the North Bay Housing Coalition, Solano County, and other nonprofit partners to maximize
and leverage available funding to assist in the development, preservation, and rehabilitation of affordable
housing to meet the needs of the developmentally disabled.
          Responsibility: Community Development, Solano County
          Time Frame: Ongoing.
Program HO 6.10 B
When funding becomes available, work with the forthcoming National Housing Trust Fund to target
affordable housing projects which would be suitable for individuals with developmental disabilities (who receive
SSI benefits and other support).
          Responsibility: Community Development, Solano County, nonprofits
          Time Frame: Once the Trust Fund has been established and a California State agency has
          been identified to receive funds, the City will identify opportunities for funding local projects in
          Fairfield. Once funding is available and project guidelines developed, the City will work with
          interested developers seeking to complete projects.
ENERGY CONSERVATION
Objective HO 7
Promote energy conservation.
Policy HO 7.1
Implement state energy conservation standards.
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                       29
                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 Program HO 7.1 A
                 Check building plans for compliance with state energy conservation standards for new residential buildings.
                            Responsibility: Building Division
                            Time frame: Ongoing, as projects are submitted to the Planning Department.
                 Policy HO 7.2
                 Encourage energy-conserving development patterns.
                 Program HO 7.2 A
                 Encourage energy conservation through energy-reducing landscaping, orientation and configuration of buildings
                 site, and other factors affecting energy use as listed in the Urban Design Guidelines and Zoning Ordinance.
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: Ongoing, as projects are submitted to the Planning Division.
                 Policy HO 7.3
                 Assist low-income households in weatherproofing their homes.
                 Program HO 7.3 A
                 Help low-income homeowners apply for assistance from other agencies to make energy conservation
                 improvements. Available programs include Block Grants, California Housing Rehabilitation Program,
                 Pacific Gas & Electric, Special Circumstances Grants (specified homeowners on Social Security only), and
                 North Coast Energy Services.
                            Responsibility: Community Development
                            Time frame: The City will apply for funding when available, The City will work with PG&E
                            and other local agencies to develop and promote programs that help homeowners make energy
                            efficiency improvements.
                 Program HO 7.3 B
                 Encourage first time homebuyers to use the Energy Efficient Mortgage program to facilitate weatherproofing
                 their homes.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Time frame: Ongoing
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                              CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                           30
HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
NEW CONSTRUCTION QUANTIFIED
OBJECTIVE
SPRING 2014-OCTOBER 2022
The City of Fairfield (3-11- 2014 Forecast) projects that 3,062 single family units, and 1,541
multifamily units will be developed between 2014 and 2022 (a total of 4,422 units).
Projected housing units can be divided into the following zoning/density categories:
Lower Density Single Family Homes. While housing built at these densities will typically be
market price housing affordable to above moderate income residents, affordable units may
include self-help housing built by organizations like Habitat for Humanity, second dwelling
units and small infill developments.
Medium Density Housing: This category includes attached and detached single family homes
as well as low density garden apartments. Some attached and detached units may be
affordable to moderate income households.
         High Density/Multifamily housing: This category includes primarily apartments and
          condominiums at a higher density. High density multifamily housing can be
          brought to the market at a variety of rents or purchase prices, including units
          affordable to moderate, low, and with subsidies very low income households.
Lower Density Single Family
The City is projecting construction of 2,471 lower density single-family homes during this
time period. In general, these homes will be priced for above-moderate income households.
However, the City anticipates that Habitat of Humanity will develop three single family
homes in downtown Fairfield which will be affordable to low income households. An
additional five single family homes will be constructed through their self-help housing
program during the time frame of this Housing Element.
The City’s Zoning Ordinance is permissive towards the construction of secondary dwelling
units on existing residential properties. A modest “granny flat” could be rented at price
affordable to very low, low, and moderate income residents. We are estimating an additional
32secondary dwelling units could be constructed during this time period.
Medium Density Housing
Medium density housing includes denser single family projects and attached townhouses.
The City projects 470 medium density single family homes and 144 multifamily medium
density units (614 units) will be developed during this time frame. Most of the ownership
housing units will continue to be built for above moderate income households; units under
construction such as Madison in northeastern Fairfield are currently priced for above-
moderate income buyers. However, some smaller units in new projects may be affordable
  CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                            DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                            31

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 for moderate income households, depending on pricing when they come on the market. In
                 addition, planning is underway for the first phases of development in the approved and
                 zoned Train Station Specific Plan Area. The medium density housing anticipated in this
                 planning area may include some units affordable to moderate income residents. This land
                 use category is not anticipated to produce a significant number of low income units in this
                 planning period.
                 High Density Housing (Multifamily)
                 Multifamily projects may provide housing units affordable to moderate and even low income
                 residents.
                 The Lewis development in Northeastern Fairfield (Villages at Fairfield) includes two sites
                 designated for high density housing. City of Fairfield projections show potentially 200 high
                 density (RH) units constructed during this time period.
                 The Fairfield Train Station Specific Plan includes multiple sites zoned for high density
                 housing. City of Fairfield projections show 414 high density housing units potentially
                 constructed during this time period in the Specific Plan area.. Projections show another 111
                 RM (medium density) multifamily housing units could be constructed in the Specific Plan
                 area during the planning period.
                 The City also approved two apartment projects in Cordelia/Green Valley: Paesino Verde )
                 (284 apartments) and Seeno Homes’ Villas at Havenhill (324 units). Another smaller project,
                 Campus Estates, envisions up to 33 townhomes in the Cordelia area. In the two apartment
                 projects, the 218 one- and two- bedroom units will be potentially affordable to low-) and
                 moderate-income households.
                 In addition to the above planning areas, there remain a variety of other infill sites suitable for
                 multifamily development. Some of these sites will be of interest to developers building
                 affordable housing, given the availability of fee credits, tax credits, and other assistance.
                 Other Housing Production
                 In general, the City’s focus will continue to be on rehabilitation, neighborhood revitalization
                 and preservation. When funding is available, the City will acquire and monitor affordability
                 covenants on properties which receive city assistance.
                 The City of Fairfield acquired and demolished abandoned poor quality housing in the North
                 PACE neighborhood. The City anticipates private builders will develop up to 80 units of
                 housing in this neighborhood.
                 Based on past experience, the City can also anticipate that up to ten new housing units
                 (affordable to moderate- or low-income households) will be constructed on scattered infill
                 sites during the time frame of this element. In addition, the City will continue to work with
                 Habitat for Humanity to develop up to five additional affordable housing units.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                    CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                    32

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                             TABLE 2
                                   QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
                                       Extremely Very
         New Construction                Low     Low  Low    Mod  Above Total
Lower Density Single Family
Market Price Housing                        0      0    0       0 2,463 2,463
Secondary Dwelling Units                    2      5    5     20    0     32
Non Profit Housing                         0      0    8       0    0     8
Total                                       2     5    13     20  2,463 2,503
Medium Density Housing
Market Price Housing                        0      0    5      50  517   572
Inclusionary Housing (10% Rule)             0      0    0     47    0     47
Non-Profit Housing                                 5   20     50    0     75
Total                                      0      5    25    147   517   689
High Density Housing
Market Rent Housing                         0      0  140     800  600  1,540
Non-Profit Housing                         25     50  100     200   0    375
Total                                      25     50  240    1000  600  1,915
Other Housing
PACE Redevelopment Project                  0      5   10      7    58    80
Infill, Other Projects                      0      5    5       5    5    20
TOTALS                                     27     70  293    1179 3,643 5,222
Source: City of Fairfield, March 2014
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                            DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                          33
                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 OTHER HOUSING OBJECTIVES
                 While State Law limits the Quantified Objective to new construction and specific programs
                 that preserve housing units, the City of Fairfield always projects the number of units that are
                 likely to be rehabilitated or added to the affordable housing stock. These programs will
                 create housing opportunities for low- and moderate-income residents in Fairfield. Table 34
                 summarizes the affordable housing units which will be produced or preserved by the City’s
                 various housing programs.
                 NEWLY AFFORDABLE UNITS
                 The City will issue mortgage credit certificates for 75 units of owner-occupied housing. 40
                 percent of these (30) will be granted to low-income households. The remaining 45 will be
                 allocated to moderate-income households.
                 Based on current program participation, 15 low-income households and 2 moderate income
                 households (17 total units) will participate in the City’s silent loan down payment assistance
                 program.
                 HOUSING REHABILITATION
                 Based on current trends, the City will rehabilitate 15 single-family units and 20 multifamily
                 units per year between 2014 and 2022, for a total of 315 units.
                 CONSERVATION
                 Where possible, the City will use a variety of funding sources to preserve the affordability of
                 existing housing. Potential programs include tax credits, and HOME funds.
                                                                          TABLE 3
                                             OTHER QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
                                                        Extremely          Very
                       New Affordability                    Low            Low         Low          Mod            Above         Total
                   MCC Program                                0              0          30            45              0            75
                   Silent Loan                                0             0           15             2              0            17
                   Section 8 Ownership                        0              3           3             0              0             6
                   Housing Rehabilitation                     0             90         225             0              0           315
                   Total, other programs                      0             93         273            47              0           413
                   Source: City of Fairfield,2014
                   1 Fairfield Housing Authority administers 830 tenant-based Housing Choice Vouchers, 21 Project-Based Vouchers at Laurel
                   Gardens Apartments, 6 vouchers with the Home Ownership Option,75 Family Self-Sufficiency Program participants, and the
                   remaining vouchers are used to rent market-rate units.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                         CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                34

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
There was a significant amount of public participation efforts made in drafting this Housing
Element update.
Through mailings, the City contacted the following public and nonprofit agencies, including:
        Independent Living Resources
        Community Housing Opportunities Corporation
        Solano Affordable Housing Foundation
        BRI DGEBRIDGE Housing Corporation
        CAMINAR Solano
        Mid-Peninsula Housing Corporation
        Solano County Health and Social Services
        Fairfield/Suisun Community Action Council
        Vallejo Neighborhood Housing Services
        Children’s Network
        Coalition Against Homelessness
        Interfaith Council
        Youth and Family Services
        Legal Services of Northern California
        Art Engell, Salsman-Engell Real Estate
        Lynn Waslohn, Premier Commercial
        Building Industry Association of Northern California
        Northern Solano County Association of Realtors
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                           DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                           35

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                   During the development of this Housing Element, City staff also contacted several
                    persons and organizations directly involved in the provision of services and housing
                    to low income and homeless individuals. These conversations included:
                   Ron Marlette, Executive Director of Mission Solano, who provided information on
                    the Bridge to Life Center (the City’s largest emergency shelter) and his opinions on
                    the number of homeless in Fairfield.
                   The City’s consultant, PMC, contacted the Solano Affordable Housing Foundation
                    to discuss the feasibility of developing affordable housing in Fairfield. SAHF
                    indicated that they continued to look for opportunities. In addition, they confirmed
                    that the City’s development fees, while high, are typical for Northern California and
                    do not represent an unusual burden in the regional context.
                   Mr. Raymond Cortemanche, outreach coordinator with Mission Solano, on the
                    special needs and challenges facing homeless individuals in Fairfield.
                   Caminar Solano, regarding the services and needs facing potential and formerly
                    homeless individuals facing difficulties due to mental illness
                   Heather House, regarding the services provided to homeless families and individuals
                    in Fairfield.
                   Dawn La Bar, Assistant City Manager, on the City’s role in county-wide and regional
                    efforts to address the needs of low income and special needs populations, including
                    the homeless, including Housing First Solano and Continuum of Care.
                   Via letter and email Mary Eble and Brooke Robinson of the North Bay Housing
                    Coalition (via email) to discuss the needs of persons with developmental disabilities
                   Mr. James Pappas, of the California Housing Partnership, for information on “at
                    risk” housing units in Fairfield
                   Via letter and email, Mr. Gerry Raycraft, to discuss ways of encouraging affordable
                    home ownership.
                   Seeno Homes and Richmond American Homes to discuss the impacts of the City’s
                    development fees and impact assessments on housing development
                   A.G. Spanos to discuss total costs of building multifamily housing in Fairfield.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                            CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                              36

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
PUBLIC WORKSHOP
The City solicited input through mailings to the above agencies. City staff conducted a public
workshop on May 14, 2014. Ron Marlette and Raymond Courtemanche of Mission Solano
spoke regarding homeless issues in the City of Fairfield. Alvina Sheely, a private citizen,
expressed her opinion that all new multi-family housing be designated as no smoking. Staff
has addressed homeless services in the Draft Housing Element.
Subsequent to the meeting, Gerry Raycraft, representing Habitat for Humanity, presented a
comment letter recommending policies and programs aimed at supporting affordable
ownership housing.
PLANNING COMMISSION SECOND WORKSHOP
The City staff presented the Draft Housing Element to Planning Commission on June 25,
2014 for input prior to submittal for initial review by HCD. Copies of the presentation are
available from City staff.
The Planning Commission received comments from Rochelle Sherlock, representing the
Senior Coalition, advocating the development of housing for seniors and adults with
developmental disabilities. Staff has incorporated into the Housing Element several
programs promoting the establishment of housing for residents with developmental
disabilities.
MEETING WITH LEGAL SERVICES
On October 21, 2014, City staff met with attorneys from Legal Services of Northern
California to review the revised draft Housing Element. The revised draft incorporated
changes recommended by HCD. Key issues addressed during the meeting included the
density transfer process in the Train Station Specific Plan, issues related to the At Risk
projects in Fairfield (Monument Arms, specifically), affordable unit incentives for the
Specific Plan Area, and reasonable accommodation requirements.
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                             DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                           37
                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                 GENERAL PLAN CONSISTENCY
                 The 2014 Housing Element is fully consistent with the adopted Fairfield General Plan,
                 which incorporates the Train Station Specific Plan discussed below. The Housing Element
                 envisions housing development on land designated for such development in the General
                 Plan. The Housing Element is also consistent with the overall vision for the community
                 established in the General Plan, which emphasizes infill development, transit-oriented
                 development (near the proposed Fairfield-Vacaville Train Station), and limited growth areas
                 long planned for development in the City’s General Plan and Zoning Map. The Housing
                 Element, as with the General Plan as a whole, provides for mixed use and pedestrian-
                 oriented development
                 TRAIN STATION SPECIFIC PLAN
                 The City of Fairfield is currently constructing infrastructure for a new train station near the
                 intersection of Peabody and Vanden Roads in northeastern Fairfield. In conjunction with
                 this transportation project, the City adopted a Specific Plan for the land around the station
                 site. The Train Station Specific Plan permits over 6,000 housing units and a mixed use town
                 center centered on the new Capital Corridor Train Station
                 80    TO   80 CORRIDOR PLAN
                 The 80-to-80 Corridor Plan was a land use, economic development, and design study of the
                 City’s “Main Street,” West Texas Street/Texas Street/North Texas Street, which transects
                 central Fairfield from the west side to the north.. The corridor is characterized by a mix of
                 older “strip commercial” development, a small town traditional downtown , and some
                 higher density residential (apartments) The Plan identified strategies for encouraging
                 redevelopment along the corridor and includes prototypes and feasibility analyses for mixed
                 use development. The Plan was completed in 2008.
                 Due to the economy, implementation of the recommendations in this plan did not occur.
                 Given changing market conditions, the City determined that an updated Specific Plan for
                 Downtown Fairfield and West Texas Street, the areas most likely to see redevelopment,
                 would be useful to facilitate infill development.
                 THE GENERAL PLAN                        AND THE      HOUSING ELEMENT
                 The City of Fairfield has ensured that the Housing Element is consistent with the General
                 Plan adopted in 2002. The following conclusions apply to the General Plan:
                      1. The City can meet the allocated housing needs within the classifications of the
                          General Plan Land Use Element and Zoning.
                      2. Residential development will create traffic impacts, but these impacts were
                          considered in the development of policies and actions for the General Plan
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                 CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                      38

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
        Circulation Element. Open space and agricultural areas have been identified in the
        Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element. For the City to meet its
        regional share of housing needs, no land identified for open space in the Open
        Space, Conservation and Recreation Element needs to be designated for conversion
        to residential use.
   3. Environmental and natural resources conservation has been considered in the Open
        Space, Conservation and Recreation Element. Policies and programs to mitigate the
        effect of development have been incorporated into the City’s development review
        process. Potential constraints to the production of housing as a consequence of
        environmental and resource protection have been identified and addressed in the
        Housing Element.
   4. Natural and human-created hazards were addressed in the Health and Safety
        Element. The City has identified mitigation measures to address potential safety
        hazards, but these are not expected to create impediments to housing production or
        substantially impact housing costs.
   5. The Health and Safety Element addresses noise issues. Noise sensitive development,
        such as residential uses, must be designed to comply with noise standards in the
        Noise Element. Major noise sources in Fairfield could potentially include Travis Air
        Force Base, railroads, and major highways. The City’s land use pattern does not
        generally permit residential uses immediately adjacent to heavy industrial uses which
        could generate heavy noise levels. The operation of Travis is not expected to
        negatively affect housing development or cost in the City. Sites impacted by road or
        highway noise can still be developed, given adequate site design and building
        construction.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                             DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                           39

                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                           This page intentionally left blank.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                              40
                          HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
EVALUATION OF 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
The 2009 Housing Element was certified by HCD. Government Code, Section 65588(a)(2) “Review and Revision” requires that each
local government review its Housing Element as frequently as appropriate to evaluate the effectiveness of the Housing Element in
attainment of the community’s housing goals and objectives. This section reports on housing activities that were accomplished since
certification of the last Housing Element.
                                                                       TABLE 4
                                     REVIEW            OF      PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                 Responsible                                                          Continue/
                             Housing Program                                  Time Frame             Accomplishments
                                                                Agency/Dept.                                                       Modify/Delete
                   Housing Opportunities
                   HO 1.1 A                                     Community    Update the study Progress: Staff continued to         Continue. Specific
                   The City will update the Multi-family        Development  every two years; monitor the status of existing      time frames are not
                   Housing Sites Study every two years to                    the next update  multifamily sites. No changes to      needed-the Study
                   reassess the potential for infill multi-                  will occur in    the current inventory occurred,      will be updated as
                   family      development,         including                2009.            except for annexation of the         conditions change,
                   commercially zoned properties. The study                                   Train Station Specific Plan Area.   sites are developed,
                   will also be expanded to include an                                        The next update of the Sites            and new sites
                   inventory of housing sites for agricultural                                Study will incorporate all of the         identified
                   workers.                                                                   sites in this Specific Plan Area as
                                                                                              well as updating the inventory of
                                                                                              sites along West Texas Street
                                                                                              and in Downtown Fairfield. .
                                                                                              Effectiveness: This information
                                                                                              continued to be useful for
                                                                                              developers and real estate agents
                                                                                              interested in land availability.
                                                                                              Appropriateness:          Ongoing,
                                                                                              with updates for special needs
                                                                                              populations and as planning for
                                                                                              the Train Station Specific Plan
                                                                                              Area continues.
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                                     DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                       41

                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                             Responsible                                                   Continue/
                          Housing Program                                Time Frame        Accomplishments
                                                            Agency/Dept.                                                Modify/Delete
                HO 1.1 B                                    Community      Ongoing  Progress: Due to lack of market       Modify. Zoning
                The City will amend the Zoning Code to      Development             demand, the City did not           Ordinance and Map
                eliminate the RVH (Residential Very         Department              institute this comprehensive       amendments will be
                High) zoning district and re-designate all                          zoning ordinance amendment.        implemented as the
                parcels with RVH Zoning as RH                                       Due to the economic slowdown,           Downtown
                (Residential High) zones. The City will                             the City had limited interest in    South/West Texas
                also remove the maximum density cap (22                             development of new housing.         Street Specific Plan
                dwelling units per acre) on the RH zone                             The three projects which did          is adopted and
                to allow densities of 15 units per acre and                         receive City approvals were at     implemented and as
                higher to encourage the development of                              the existing RH densities, and         more detailed
                affordable housing. The City will then                              there was no requests for higher     planning for the
                monitor the development of parcels with                             density. The Density Bonus             Train Station
                RH (Residential High) zoning to ensure                              Ordinance remains in place to          Specific Plan
                that they are developed with higher                                 permit higher densities for              continues.
                density housing, including affordable                               projects serving special needs
                housing… The City shall also prepare an                             populations.
                annual assessment of parcels with the                               The City also completed the
                higher density, RH, and RM (Residential                             Train Station Specific Plan
                Medium) zoning. This report shall assess                            annexation. The Specific Plan
                development trends, the type of housing                             includes flexible provisions to
                developed, and affordability of the units                           allow densities at up to 50
                developed…                                                          dwelling units per acre in the
                                                                                    Town Center near the Train
                                                                                    Station. In high density areas,
                                                                                    minimum start at 20 dwelling
                                                                                    units per acre, above current
                                                                                    density minimums.
                                                                                    Staff continues to assess impacts
                                                                                    on higher density residential land
                                                                                    availability. No formal reports
                                                                                    have been prepared, but
                                                                                    rezonings of RH zoned sites
                                                                                    have been nonexistent during
                                                                                    the time period except in the
                                                                                    case of The Villages project.
                                                                                    Effectiveness: High in the
                                                                                    Train Station Specific Plan area,
                                                                                    where the City approved new
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                              CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                              42

                         HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                              Responsible                                                    Continue/
                             Housing Program                               Time Frame        Accomplishments
                                                             Agency/Dept.                                                  Modify/Delete
                                                                                      concepts for higher density,
                                                                                      transit-oriented development.
                                                                                      Appropriateness: Modify to
                                                                                      reference     the     forthcoming
                                                                                      Downtown South/West Texas
                                                                                      Street Specific Plan and the
                                                                                      opportunities for appropriate
                                                                                      higher density housing in this
                                                                                      corridor.
                  HO 1.1 C                                   Community    Ongoing     Ongoing program. Will be                  Continue
                  Continue requiring identification signs on Development              implemented in new growth
                  multi-family sites and buyer notification                           areas.
                  for single-family homebuyers near multi-                            Effectiveness/Appropriatenes
                  family sites. Such signs can help reduce                            s: Serves as an effective
                  neighborhood opposition because new                                 communication          tool      for
                  homeowners will be aware of potential                               neighbors about future land uses
                  developments prior to moving into a                                 in their community. Also
                  neighborhood.                                                       identifies sites for developers
                                                                                      and real estate agents touring the
                                                                                      community
                  HO 1.2 A                                   Community    2011        Market conditions made many          Modify to reference
                  Implement...the 80-to-80 Corridor Plan,    Development              of       the    concepts        and     forthcoming
                  including adoption of new development                               recommendations          infeasible.   Specific Plans
                  regulations                                                         Appropriateness: The City has
                                                                                      initiated a Specific Plan for West
                                                                                      Texas Street and Downtown
                                                                                      which will address infill
                                                                                      development. This Specific Plan
                                                                                      may incorporate concepts in the
                                                                                      80-to-80 Plan.
                  HO 1.2 B                                   Community    2010        The City has initiated a Specific    Modify to reference
                  The City will complete a study of          Development              Plan for West Texas Street and          forthcoming
                  downtown Fairfield south of Texas Street                            Downtown which will address            Specific Plans
                  to identify opportunities for higher                                infill development
                  density     housing     and     mixed-use
                  development with close access to the
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                  43
                                                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                            Responsible                                                   Continue/
                           Housing Program                               Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                           Agency/Dept.                                                 Modify/Delete
                Suisun-Fairfield Train Station.
                HO 1.2 C                                   Community    Ongoing     Progress/Effectiveness/                 Continue
                Support appropriate developer proposals    Development              Appropriateness:       The    City
                for innovative housing prototypes not                               continues to offer pre-submittal
                included in the current Zoning Ordinance                            consultation      through       its
                by coordinating pre-submittal meetings,                             Conceptual Review process. The
                prioritizing    funding     and   offering                          City has also adopted the Train
                incentives. (For example, the Train                                 Station Specific Plan which
                Station Master Plan has proposed a                                  envisions the development of a
                variety of new prototypes suitable for a                            transit-oriented       community
                mixed-use transit-oriented development.)                            through a mixture of housing
                                                                                    types and creative neighborhood
                                                                                    design.      The      forthcoming
                                                                                    Downtown South/West Texas
                                                                                    Street Specific Plan will develop
                                                                                    innovative housing prototypes
                                                                                    for use in these Specific Plan
                                                                                    areas which can facilitate
                                                                                    development        review     and
                                                                                    processing.
                HO 1.2 D                                   Community    Ongoing     Progress/Effectiveness: The         Modify to reference
                Develop urban design standards suitable    Development              City has adopted standards for       future Specific
                for new mixed use and pedestrian-                                   innovative community planning             Plans
                oriented development projects in                                    and housing prototypes in the
                Fairfield. Areas …                                                  Train Station Specific Plan and
                                                                                    will include such standards in
                                                                                    the forthcoming Downtown
                                                                                    South/West       Texas      Street
                                                                                    Specific Plan.
                Program HO 1.2E                            Community    Ongoing     In addition to the standards            Continue
                Continue to implement development          Development              already     in     the     Zoning
                standards for mixed-use “live-work”                                 Ordinance, the City has already
                development, incorporating retail, office,                          adopted standards for the Train
                and residential uses into single buildings                          Station Specific Plan Area and
                or sites.                                                           will be developing standards for
                                                                                    Downtown/West Texas Street.
                                                                                    The City will implement these
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                             CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                                44

                        HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                             Responsible                                                    Continue/
                             Housing Program                              Time Frame        Accomplishments
                                                            Agency/Dept.                                                   Modify/Delete
                                                                                     standards and existing zoning
                                                                                     and design review requirements.
                  HO 2.1A                                   Community    Ongoing     City staff continues to work             Continue
                  Educate developers and property owners    Development              closely with developers and
                  about successful smaller infill housing                            builders to address the specific
                  projects and flexibility in the City’s                             issues      created    by      infill
                  Zoning Ordinance to support the                                    development. The Fairfield
                  development        of     infill  housing                          Zoning        Ordinance     adjusts
                  development including a conceptual                                 certain parking and setback
                  review process                                                     standards for infill housing
                                                                                     where appropriate.
                  HO 2.2 A                                  Community       Ongoing  The Train Station Specific Plan          Continue
                  Develop incentives programs to facilitate Development              process encourages lot and
                  lot consolidation. These incentives might                          property consolidation. The
                  include density bonuses, flexibility in                            forthcoming            Downtown
                  development standards, and assistance in                           South/West         Texas     Street
                  marketing small parcels.                                           Specific Plan will address this
                                                                                     critical issue.
                  HO 2.3A                                   Community    Ongoing     The Zoning Ordinance provides             Modify
                  The City will continue to provide         Development              flexibility. The City continues to
                  information about options for flexibility                          work with developers through
                  in development standards and continue to                           the pre-application process. The
                  encourage developers of multi-family                               City          also       facilitates
                  housing and affordable housing to                                  neighborhood meetings and
                  conduct extensive community outreach                               works with interested applicants
                  programs prior to submittal of their                               to ensure design acceptable to
                  projects.                                                          neighborhoods                   and
                                                                                     communities.
                  HO 3.1 A                                  Community    Ongoing     There has been very limited              Continue
                  Provide density bonuses to homebuilders   Development              interest in density bonuses in
                  who include lower-income dwelling units                            Fairfield. To date, standard
                  within residential developments.                                   density ranges meet the market
                                                                                     demand. The City still offers a
                                                                                     density bonus program for
                                                                                     certain populations,
                  HO 3.1 B                                  Community    Ongoing     There has been limited interest       Modify to address
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                            DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                 45

                                                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                              Responsible                                                 Continue/
                           Housing Program                                 Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                             Agency/Dept.                                               Modify/Delete
                Continue      to     implement      flexible Development              in       flexible    development  new standards in
                development standards to facilitate                                   standards in Fairfield. The City Specific Plan Areas.
                development of affordable housing.                                    has worked closely with
                                                                                      property owners downtown to
                                                                                      approve two infill projects,
                                                                                      including one affordable
                                                                                      housing project. The City will
                                                                                      continue to work with interested
                                                                                      developers.
                HO 3.2 A                                     Community    Ongoing     The City operated a variety of    Continue. Modify
                Work with developers to identify funding     Development              programs with redevelopment          to remove
                sources that reduce financing costs for                               funding, including housing          references to
                projects in exchange for affordable units.                            rehabilitation, and neighborhood   Redevelopment
                As appropriate, the City will prioritize                              revitalization.      No      new       Agency
                funding for projects that include units                               construction was funded with
                affordable to extremely low-, very low-,                              these programs, and the State
                and low- income households. The City                                  has eliminated Redevelopment
                and the Redevelopment Agency will                                     Agencies, eliminating this major
                pursue a variety of funding sources                                   funding source. The City will
                                                                                      continue to pursue other
                                                                                      funding sources as available.
                                                                                      However, these funding sources
                                                                                      are very limited.
                HO 3.2 B                                     Community    Ongoing     While no housing funds were           Continue
                Use state and federal programs for which     Development              used to directly fund the
                the City would be the applicant, or a co-                             construction of new housing, the
                sponsor, and work with nonprofit and                                  City        used      Community
                for-profit developers to make use of                                  Development Block Grant
                those programs directed to homebuilders.                              (CDBG) funds for rehabilitation
                In particular, the City will seek available                           of housing stock available to
                funding or support funding applications                               low-income families. Grant
                by others to provide for housing for                                  funds were also used to support
                extremely- low income households,                                     staff in program delivery. Total
                including transitional housing.                                       funding included $200,000 for
                                                                                      Projects and $107,200 for
                                                                                      Staffing.
                                                                                      The City assisted Mission Solano
                                                                                      with its efforts to tap into
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                             CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                                  46
                          HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                               Responsible                                                 Continue/
                             Housing Program                               Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                              Agency/Dept.                                               Modify/Delete
                                                                                      federal housing funds for the
                                                                                      Bridge to Life Homeless Shelter
                                                                                      and Multi-services Center.
                                                                                      The City should continue to
                                                                                      pursue funding when available
                                                                                      and to work with interested
                                                                                      developers and service providers
                                                                                      when possible
                  HO 3.2 C                                    Community      Ongoing  The City worked with CHOC to          Continue
                  Continue seeking financial commitments      Development             rehabilitate           affordable
                  from lending institutions to provide        Community               multifamily properties in its
                  financing for affordable housing. Support   Resources               PACE       neighborhood      (two
                  activities   of     nonprofit     housing                           projects). The city will continue
                  corporations                                                        working with lenders to channel
                                                                                      funding to interested developers.
                  HO 3.3 A                                    Community      Ongoing  The Mortgage Credit Certificate       Continue
                  Continue the City’s active mortgage credit  Resources               program provided funding for
                  certificate program, which reduces                                  69 homebuyers between 2007
                  financing costs, for income-eligible first-                         and 2012. The City will continue
                  time homebuyers.                                                    offering the program as funding
                                                                                      permits.
                  HO 3.3 B                                    Community      Ongoing  The City continued to offer this     Continue, as
                  Continue the City’s down payment            Resources               program on a limited basis.       funding is available
                  assistance program. The primary funding                             Between 2007-2012 the program
                  source will continue to be Cal HOME                                 assisted     67      homebuyers.
                  grants….                                                            Funding sources did include Cal
                                                                                      HOME ($1,000,000).
                  HO 3.3 C                                    Community      Ongoing  The city worked closely with          Continue
                  Provide staff support in locating sites,    Resources               Habitat for Humanity to develop
                  technical assistance, and funding to                                two affordable single family
                  agencies like Habitat for Humanity and                              homes in Fairfield. The City has
                  Mercy Housing who specialize in owner-                              maintained a relationship with
                  occupied self-help housing.                                         Habitat for Humanity, which is
                                                                                      pursuing an additional project in
                                                                                      Downtown Fairfield. A project
                                                                                      with Mercy Housing did not
                                                                                      proceed and the City has
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                            DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                 47

                                               HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                            Responsible                                                    Continue/
                          Housing Program                                Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                           Agency/Dept.                                                  Modify/Delete
                                                                                    reacquired the      property     for
                                                                                    future sale.
                HO 3.3 D                                   Community    Ongoing     The City continues to administer         Continue
                Continue to work with the California       Resources                its Section 8 Housing Program.
                Department of Housing and Community                                 In 2012, the Fairfield Housing
                Development (HCD), the federal                                      Authority (FHA) administered
                Department of Housing and Urban                                     851 Housing Choice Vouchers
                Development            (HUD),     Vallejo                           (HCV) and 12 portable vouchers
                Neighborhood Services, and Legal                                    from other jurisdictions. When
                Services of Northern California to                                  available, the FHA will apply for
                implement the Section 8 Homeownership                               additional vouchers from the
                Program targeted to low- and very low-                              U.S. Department of Housing
                income households.                                                  and Urban Development that
                                                                                    benefit      the     FHA       local
                                                                                    preferences (i.e. elderly, disabled,
                                                                                    or veterans). In addition to
                                                                                    rental assistance, the FHA offers
                                                                                    the Family Self-Sufficiency (FSS)
                                                                                    Program to interested Housing
                                                                                    Choice       Voucher        holders.
                                                                                    Currently      there     are      81
                                                                                    participants that have signed a
                                                                                    five year contract. There are 6
                                                                                    HCV homeowners and another
                                                                                    22 graduates who became
                                                                                    homeowners without the HCV
                                                                                    program.
                HO 3.4 A                                   Community    Ongoing     No units were built with these            Delete.
                Use Fairfield Redevelopment Agency         Resources                funds, and the Redevelopment          Redevelopment
                Housing Set-Aside Funds to support                                  Agency was eliminated in 2011.       Agency eliminated.
                private developers interested in building
                affordable rental and ownership housing
                projects. Project areas may include
                scattered site infill, Downtown Fairfield,
                Train Station Master Plan Area, North
                PACE, and 80-to-80 Corridor Housing.
                HO 3.4B                                    Community    Ongoing     The focus of the Strategy Plan           Continue
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                             CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                                48
                           HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                  Responsible                                                      Continue/
                                Housing Program                                Time Frame           Accomplishments
                                                                 Agency/Dept.                                                     Modify/Delete
                  Implement the Strategy Plan adopted in         Resources                    has remained on rehabilitation
                  1999, which          emphasizes housing                                     of existing housing, which
                  rehabilitation and new construction on                                      continued during this timeframe.
                  infill sites.                                                               Between 2007 and 2012, the City
                                                                                              funded through grants and loans
                                                                                              the rehabilitation of 107
                                                                                              multifamily units and 100 single
                                                                                              family homes.
                  HO 3.5 A                                       Community    Ongoing         The existing Zoning Ordinance         Continue
                  Continue to allow manufactured homes           Resources                    permits the placement of mobile
                  on foundations on residential land,                                         homes         in        residential
                  subject to the same development                                             neighborhoods,        but      no
                  standards as site-built housing.                                            homeowners took advantage of
                                                                                              this option. However, the City
                                                                                              supported one infill project
                                                                                              downtown.
                  HO 3.6 A                                       Community    Ongoing         The City continued to manage          Continue
                  Working        with     very     low-income    Resources                    this program and will continue
                  households, local social agencies, and                                      to pursue funding when
                  community organizations maximize the                                        available. Over 800 certificates
                  effectiveness and utilization of the                                        managed by City.
                  Housing Authority’s current Housing
                  Choice Voucher Program.
                  HO 3.7 A                                       Community    Ongoing, as     The City provided funding to          Continue
                  Work with organizations that acquire,          Resources    projects become the property owners in South
                  rehabilitate, and manage substandard,                       available       PACE for the acquisition and
                  vacant, or abandoned dwelling units.                                        comprehensive renovation of
                  Units rehabilitated with City assistance                                    apartments in the neighborhood.
                  will be rented to low-income households.                                    Covenants were placed on the
                  For example, the City will allocate $9                                      property for 55-years to ensure
                  million in Low/Mod funds to its partners                                    long term affordability.
                  in the South PACE neighborhood, which
                  will result in the acquisition, rehabilitation
                  and long term affordability of 93 rental
                  apartments on Tabor Avenue and Bristol
                  Lane in central Fairfield.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                        49

                                                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                            Responsible                                                      Continue/
                           Housing Program                               Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                           Agency/Dept.                                                   Modify/Delete
                HO 3.7 B                                   Community       Annually The ownership of at-risk                   Modify to
                The City will annually contact the         Resources                identified      complexes        has       emphasize
                owner(s) of Rockwell Manor and Parkside                             changed and the new owners               monitoring of
                Villa to determine if they intend to                                have         reaffirmed         their    affordability
                convert their projects to market-rate                               commitments to affordability.           commitments.
                status…the City will respond with…
                programs…:
                HO 3.8 A                                   Community       Ongoing  The City continues to impose          Modify to address
                Require projects receiving City assistance Resources                and      monitor       affordability    funding issues
                to ensure long-term affordability…                                  covenants on projects receiving         associated with
                                                                                    local, federal, or state assistance.       long term
                                                                                    As a condition of City assistance,         covenants
                                                                                    the      City     also     obtained
                                                                                    affordability covenants for low
                                                                                    income households at South
                                                                                    PACE and on the CHOC
                                                                                    project on Pennsylvania Avenue
                                                                                    (Gateway Gardens) (55-years).
                                                                                    The City continues to monitor
                                                                                    affordability      covenants       at
                                                                                    existing single family, moderate
                                                                                    income projects such as
                                                                                    Centennial Walk and Whitney
                                                                                    Park. Staff reductions due to the
                                                                                    loss of Redevelopment limit this
                                                                                    monitoring program.
                HO 3.8 B                                   Community    Ongoing     City staff continue to monitor        Modify to address
                Monitor unit condition and participant     Resources                project                affordability  funding issues and
                incomes on an annual basis to ensure that                           requirements for both rental and          the costs of
                affordability requirements are met.                                 ownership units. Due to                   monitoring
                Monitoring includes reviewing tenant files                          limitations     in     staff,    this
                and rent rolls.                                                     monitoring program focused on
                                                                                    rental housing and is limited to
                                                                                    projects funded by HOME
                                                                                    funding and does not include
                                                                                    monitoring          of        former
                                                                                    Redevelopment-funded projects.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                              CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                                50

                         HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                               Responsible                                                   Continue/
                             Housing Program                                  Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                              Agency/Dept.                                                Modify/Delete
                  HO 4.1 A                                    Community      Ongoing     No demolitions were proposed.         Continue
                  Evaluate demolitions of multi-family        Resources                  The City will evaluate any
                  housing projects of 4 or more units. If the                            project that involves the
                  housing is occupied, City Ordinance                                    demolition of units. City
                  requires the owner to pay displaced                                    Ordinance requires the owner to
                  households relocation assistance including                             pay     displaced    households
                  two months rental assistance for a                                     relocation assistance including
                  comparable unit.                                                       two months rental assistance for
                                                                                         a comparable unit.
                  HO 4.1 B                                    Building, Code Ongoing      Temporary relocation was             Continue
                  Require owners of dwellings vacated for     Enforcement                necessary in the South PACE
                  violation of housing and building codes to                             neighborhood              during
                  pay relocation expenses to displaced                                   renovations.
                  residents and provide former tenants with
                  the right of first refusal to return to the
                  unit upon its repair.
                  HO 4.1 C                                    Community      Ongoing     No mobile home parks were             Continue
                  Assess the impact on tenants prior to       Resources                  converted or removed.
                  conversion or removal of a mobile home
                  park. A copy of the assessment must be
                  provided to all tenants affected by the
                  closure. The City may require that
                  comparable,        standard       condition
                  replacement housing affordable to low-
                  and moderate-income tenants be
                  provided on the site or elsewhere in the
                  City.
                  HO 4.1 D                                    Redevelopment  Ongoing     No Redevelopment funds were            Delete
                  The Redevelopment Agency anticipates        Agency                     used to remove housing during
                  using housing set-aside funds and other                                the planning period. The
                  funding sources to replace housing                                     Redevelopment Agency has
                  removed by action of the Redevelopment                                 been eliminated.
                  Agency, in accordance with California
                  Redevelopment Law.
                  HO 5.1 A                                    QNT Team          Ongoing  The QNT team successfully        Delete references to
                                                                                         continued to work with property    QNT. Modify
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                     51
                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                              Responsible                                                      Continue/
                            Housing Program                                Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                             Agency/Dept.                                                  Modify/Delete
                Continue implementing neighborhood                                    owners       in       the     target policy to focus on
                revitalization through the Quality                                    neighborhoods to address issues,          Crime Free
                Neighborhood Team (QNT) program,                                      positively improving the quality          Multifamily
                emphasizing neighborhood outreach,                                    of life in several communities.            program.
                cooperative management, and tenant                                    However, with the elimination
                education. If an individual QNT area                                  of Redevelopment, the formal
                property owner wishes to renovate their                               QNT program was eliminated.
                properties, then the Agency can provide                               The City initiated the Crime Free
                revolving loan funds.                                                 Multifamily Housing Program to
                                                                                      work with property owners to
                                                                                      address security issues and the
                                                                                      property       management         of
                                                                                      apartments in Fairfield. This
                                                                                      program       is     focused     on
                                                                                      communities which primarily
                                                                                      serve low income residents and
                                                                                      continues today.
                HO 5.1 B                                     Community    Ongoing     Projects         funded        with  Continue. Modify
                Continue to provide free inspections and     Resources                Redevelopment               Agency,     to clarify that
                construction management to households                                 HOME, CDBG, and Cal Home              funding is more
                receiving rehabilitation assistance. In                               monies continue to be inspected        limited and the
                addition, the City will provide inspections                           as required by the programs.          Redevelopment
                on a complaint basis for rental units.                                Inspections have become more         Agency has been
                                                                                      limited due to the loss of staff          eliminated.
                                                                                      and      the      elimination     of
                                                                                      Redevelopment funding.
                HO 5.1 C                                     Community     Ongoing    During the Planning Period, the      Continue. Modify
                Continue to purchase long term or            Resources                City or its Redevelopment               to clarify that
                permanent affordability covenants to                                  Agency acquired affordability           covenants will
                preserve housing affordable or potentially                            covenants for the North PACE         require additional
                affordable to extremely-low- and very-                                project.                                    funding
                low-income residents.
                HO 5.2 A                                     Community     Ongoing    The City regularly uses the State       Continue with
                The City will continue its active housing    Resources                and federal funding programs.         limited funding.
                rehabilitation    program,       proactively                          In 2011 the city was awarded               Eliminate
                searching for and obtaining new funding                               $1,000,000 in Cal Home                   references to
                as needed. The program is currently                                   funding; and $500,000 in              Redevelopment
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                               CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                                  52
                         HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                              Responsible                                                  Continue/
                             Housing Program                              Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                             Agency/Dept.                                                Modify/Delete
                  funded through the following sources,                              HOME funding from HCD.              Housing Set Asides
                  and the City intends to continue using                             The CDBG Program allocates
                  these funds when available:                                        $307,200 in CDBG funding for
                  •Cal HOME grants (state), when                                     housing     rehabilitation     and
                  available. The City received a Cal HOME                            program        staffing.       The
                  grant of $900,000 in 2008.                                         Redevelopment Agency was
                                                                                     eliminated. Between 2009 and
                  •CDBG Revolving Loan Fund: The fund                                2013, 99 single family and
                  has $240,871 as of July 2008 available as                          multifamily       units       were
                  needed for minor rehabilitation projects.                          renovated.
                  •Community Development Block Grants:
                  Beginning with fiscal year 2008/2009, the
                  Housing Rehabilitation Program will
                  automatically receive $200,000 per year
                  for Revolving Loan Fund recapitalization.
                  •Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside
                  Funds: The City has budgeted $2,084,000
                  between Fiscal Years 2008/2009 and
                  2011/2012.
                  HO 5.3 A                                   Community    Ongoing    Staff does monitor conditions at        Continue
                  The City will maintain information on      Resources               properties    which       received
                  conditions as part of its housing                                  HOME funding. Staff began
                  rehabilitation        programs         and                         work on a new database for all
                  neighborhood revitalization efforts.                               Affordable Housing loans.
                  HO 5.3 B                                   QNT Team     Ongoing    The City continued to operate            Delete
                  Continue to evaluate neighborhoods for                             the program during the initial
                  inclusion in the Quality Neighborhood                              time period of the Housing
                  Program.                                                           Element. The City was also
                                                                                     evaluating               additional
                                                                                     neighborhoods for inclusion in
                                                                                     the program. After the 2007
                                                                                     economic crisis led to severe
                                                                                     budgetary constraints, the City
                                                                                     was unable to expand the
                                                                                     program, and with the loss of
                                                                                     staff and funding, the program
                                                                                     has now been eliminated and
                                                                                     subsumed into other programs
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                           DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                 53

                                               HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                            Responsible                                                  Continue/
                           Housing Program                              Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                           Agency/Dept.                                               Modify/Delete
                                                                                   like Crime Free Multifamily.
                HO 5.3 C                                   Community    Biannually The City operated Pride in               Delete
                Continue the Pride in Fairfield Program,   Development             Fairfield Program in 2009 and
                which recognizes community efforts in                              2010, but eliminated funding in
                maintaining quality neighborhoods.                                 2011.
                HO 6.1 A                                   Community    Ongoing    The city worked with Mission           Continue
                Pursue funding from available sources for  Resources               Solano to establish the Bridge to
                homeless services. Assist community                                Life Center, a new emergency
                groups that provide service, and assist                            shelter which can provide up to
                such groups in applying for funding from                           200 beds when fully developed.
                other agencies. The City will consider                             Over the past decade, Heather
                applying for grants where appropriate or                           House has received CDBG
                will encourage/partner with local and                              funding         for        various
                regional nonprofit organizations that wish                         rehabilitation and improvement
                to apply for such grants.                                          projects. They also receive
                                                                                   support through CDBG for
                                                                                   operational      and      program
                                                                                   functions. Currently they receive
                                                                                   30% of the annual Public
                                                                                   Service allocations from the
                                                                                   City’s CDBG entitlement.
                HO 6.1 B                                   Community    Ongoing    The City participated in the       Modify to address
                Continue to be an active member on the     Resources               Countywide efforts to address      new structure for
                Executive Board of the Community                                   the homeless and other special         programs
                Action Partnership of Solano County                                needs        populations.     The
                (CAC Solano), a joint powers authority, to                         Countywide program is now
                coordinate homeless services and develop                           organized under a broader based
                a regional response to homeless needs.                             “Continuum of Care” approach
                                                                                   mandated by the HEARTH Act
                                                                                   and implemented by HUD
                HO 6.1 C                                   Community    Ongoing    The City participated in the       Combine with 6.1
                The City will continue to participate via  Resources               Countywide efforts to address       B. Create a new
                CAC Solano to develop the capacity of                              the homeless and other special      program which
                community groups and private parties to                            needs        populations.     The  emphasizes local,
                operate appropriate transitional housing                           Countywide program is now          countywide, and
                programs and projects for homeless                                 organized under a broader based     regional efforts.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                          CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                               54

                          HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                Responsible                                                       Continue/
                              Housing Program                                  Time Frame         Accomplishments
                                                               Agency/Dept.                                                    Modify/Delete
                  persons as an intermediate step to self-                                 “Continuum of Care” approach
                  sufficiency in permanent housing. The                                    mandated by the HEARTH Act
                  City will also participate in the Re-Entry                               and implemented by HUD
                  Council Planning Group, the Inter-
                  Agency Planning Group on Disaster
                  Preparedness, and the Homeless Shelter
                  Collaborative, local agencies charged with
                  coordinating responses to homelessness.
                  HO 6.1 D                                     Economic        Ongoing     The City continues to work with           Continue
                  Facilitate development of private sector     Development                 the Workforce Investment
                  employment opportunities for homeless                                    Board on educational and job
                  people including job training and search                                 training programs
                  programs, coordinating our efforts with
                  Workforce Investment Board.
                  HO 6.1 E                                     All Departments     2010    The Bridge to Life Center          Modify to focus on
                  Work with public agencies, local religious                               successfully opened and is            supporting the
                  and social organizations, and the                                        serving homeless residents. The         facility and
                  development community to facilitate the                                  City is working with the Center          facilitating
                  development of the new Mission Solano                                    to expand services which meet           appropriate
                  Bridge to Life facility.                                                 special needs.                         expansion of
                                                                                                                                      services
                  HO 6.2 A                                     Community         June 2010 While homeless shelters remain      Modify to discuss
                  The City will amend the City Zoning          Development                 only a Conditionally Permitted     the specific actions
                  Ordinance to allow emergency shelters as                                 Use, the City did assist the        the City has taken
                  a permitted use in the Light Industrial                                  development of the Bridge to       or is in the process
                  Zoning district without a conditional use                                Life Center. With Heather               of taking in
                  permit or other discretionary review. Sites                              House, these facilities should       compliance with
                  located in the Light Industrial District are                             meet a majority of the City’s             State law.
                  the most appropriate sites to allow for                                  need for emergency shelters.
                  emergency shelters due to their close                                    In summer 2014, the City
                  proximity to transit and services including                              initiated amendments to the
                  the Health and Human Services                                            Zoning Ordinance to permit
                  Department. In addition, City will                                       emergency shelters on key sites
                  evaluate adopting standards consistent                                   in the City. These amendments
                  with Government Code Section 65583(a)                                    should facilitate the operation of
                  (4) that address operational and design                                  and expansion of the City’s
                  criteria that may include:                                               emergency shelter system and
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                                  DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                      55

                                                HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                            Responsible                                                       Continue/
                           Housing Program                              Time Frame         Accomplishments
                                                           Agency/Dept.                                                    Modify/Delete
                                                                                     should meet the requirements of
                                                                                     SB 2.
                HO 6.2 B                                   Community       June 2010 The City amended its Zoning           In consulting with
                The City will amend the Zoning             Development               Ordinance to permit transitional    HCD staff, the City
                Ordinance to explicitly allow both                                   and supportive housing in single    determined that the
                supportive and transitional housing types                            family zoning districts and             code should be
                in all residential zones. The Zoning                                 conditionally permit these uses      amended to clarify
                Ordinance update will also include                                   in higher density districts         that transitional and
                specific definitions of transitional and                                                                  supportive housing
                supportive housing…Transitional and                                                                         are not land uses
                supportive housing will be allowed as a                                                                       but the use of
                permitted use, subject only to the same                                                                   housing units. The
                restrictions on residential uses contained                                                                   Ordinance will
                in the same type of structure.                                                                              clarify that such
                                                                                                                           occupancy will be
                                                                                                                          treated the same as
                                                                                                                         other occupancy of
                                                                                                                               the housing
                                                                                                                            permitted in the
                                                                                                                          Zoning Ordinance.
                HO 6.2 C                                   Community    June 2010    The City amended its zoning                Modify to
                …The city will amend the Zoning            Development               ordinance to facilitate the                emphasize
                Ordinance to explicitly allow single-room                            conversion of existing older              monitoring.
                occupancy units (SROs) in all zones                                  motels, already being used
                where boarding houses are permitted.                                 informally     as      transitional
                Boarding Housing and SRO units will be                               housing, to SRO housing in the
                permitted by right in the Commercial                                 CT Commercial Thoroughfare
                Mixed (CM) district and allowed with a                               Zoning District. The City also
                conditional use permit in the Residential                            amended its Zoning Ordinance
                High Density district (RH), and                                      to permit outright SRO housing
                Commercial Downtown (CD) district.                                   in the CM Commercial Mixed
                                                                                     Zoning District. The City will
                                                                                     monitor interest in SRO housing
                                                                                     and     will     make       further
                                                                                     amendments as needed.
                HO 6.3 A                                   Community        Ongoing  Due to budgetary constraints,              Modify to
                Continue to fund a fair housing program,   Resources                 the City no longer funds PCS.       emphasize referrals,
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                               56

                         HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                Responsible                                                 Continue/
                             Housing Program                                Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                               Agency/Dept.                                                Modify/Delete
                  implemented by Pacific Community                                     City staff can still serve as a      not funding.
                  Services, a HUD-certified nonprofit                                  referral service for services for
                  corporation or other similar organization.                           those facing foreclosure or
                  Also provide financial counseling to                                 eviction.
                  residents experiencing challenges in the                             The City sponsored a series of
                  current housing market, including                                    workshops in 2011 to address
                  foreclosure prevention counseling and                                foreclosure prevention.
                  foreclosure workshops. This organization
                  provides        complaint,        mediation,
                  educational, legal referral, and testing
                  services. Residents are informed of their
                  services through City referrals.
                  HO 6.4 A                                     Community    Ongoing    Interest in new multifamily           Continue
                  Support the development of child care        Development,            development has been very
                  centers in conjunction with larger multi-    Community               limited during this time period.
                  family housing developments in order to      Resources               Child care will certainly be
                  better serve the residents, improve a                                addressed during project review
                  parent’s access to employment, and                                   when interested developers
                  reduce vehicle trips.                                                approach the City, especially for
                                                                                       affordable housing projects.
                                                                                       Note that the City’s Zoning
                                                                                       Ordinance is permissive when it
                                                                                       comes to the development of
                                                                                       off-site child care facilities, and
                                                                                       the City approved two new child
                                                                                       care centers (as well as multiple
                                                                                       family day care centers),
                                                                                       including centers in lower
                                                                                       income neighborhood.
                  HO 6.5 A                                     Community    Ongoing    Interest in senior housing was        Continue
                  Work with developers specializing in         Resources               limited during the time period.
                  housing for older adults. Assist                                     The City did work with a
                  developers interested in converting                                  developer to entitle a project,
                  existing residential buildings to meet the                           Paramount Park, which will
                  needs of older low-income adults.                                    provide assisted living and
                  Assistance could include technical                                   memory care units. The project
                  assistance in applying for state and federal                         has not proceeded as of April
                  funding, local financial assistance through                          2014. The City also amended its
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                        DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                   57

                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                            Responsible                                                       Continue/
                           Housing Program                                   Time Frame        Accomplishments
                                                           Agency/Dept.                                                    Modify/Delete
                redevelopment housing set-aside funds,                                  Zoning Ordinance to permit
                and the waiving of certain fees and/or                                  Assisted Living facilities near
                development requirements to increase the                                planned medical offices in the
                financial feasibility of such housing….                                 Industrial Business Park zoning
                                                                                        district
                HO 6.6 A                                   Community           Ongoing  The City Manager’s Office has           Continue
                Participate in the Travis Regional Armed   Resources                    taken the lead on these ongoing
                Forces Committee (TRAFC) to discuss                                     efforts.
                the needs of military personnel and their
                families.
                HO 6.6 B                                   Community           Ongoing  The Air Force has largely          Modify to reference
                Cooperate with Travis Regional Armed       Development,                 completed its on-base housing        current on-base
                Force Base during their current            Community                    renewal program. A private          programs and to
                reevaluation of housing services on and    Resources                    operator now manages the               emphasize
                off-base. Monitor the base’s privatization                              remaining Travis Air Force Base     cooperation with
                program and provide assistance as                                       housing stock. The Patriot          the Air Force on
                needed.                                                                 Village development north of        off-base housing
                                                                                        the base is now closed.                   issues
                HO 6.7 A                                   Building Division Ongoing    The City implements State               Continue
                Implement state and federal requirements                                building codes which address
                for accessibility and adaptability in new                               ADA accessibility.
                residential buildings.
                HO 6.7 B                                   Community           Ongoing  The City’s Zoning Ordinance             Continue
                Assist organizations seeking to develop or Resources                    permits assisted living housing,
                convert residential buildings for use as                                licensed      group        homes,
                group homes for persons with physical or                                transitional    housing,       and
                psychological conditions that prevent                                   supportive housing. The City
                them from using conventional housing.                                   also supported Paramount Park,
                Assistance could include participation in                               which will provide assisted living
                applying for state or federal funding,                                  and memory care units. The City
                waiving of certain fees or development                                  also supported Caminar Solano
                standards, and financial participation                                  in their transitional housing
                through redevelopment housing set-aside                                 programs for mentally disabled
                funds. The Redevelopment Agency has                                     persons and those transitioning
                specifically budgeted $580,000 for                                      out of acute psychiatric care
                rehabilitation and acquisition, including
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                                   58

                         HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                Responsible                                                        Continue/
                             Housing Program                                 Time Frame        Accomplishments
                                                               Agency/Dept.                                                    Modify/Delete
                  ADA accessibility improvements after
                  2008.
                  HO 6.8 A                                     Community       Ongoing  Construction of new units was           Modify to reflect
                  Work with private and nonprofit              Development,             almost nonexistent during the            current budgets.
                  developers to target subsidies and           Redevelopment            time frame. Private developers
                  programs, including the Density Bonus        Agency                   did     provide       some      units
                  Ordinance, to encourage the inclusion of                              affordable to moderate income
                  three- and four-bedroom units in                                      households. These market rate
                  affordable       rental    projects.    The                           affordable units were larger
                  Redevelopment Agency has budgeted for                                 three and four bedroom units.
                  projects that may include larger units.                               South       PACE          apartment
                                                                                        rehabilitation      (Signature     at
                                                                                        Fairfield) mostly involved two
                                                                                        bedroom units. The earlier
                                                                                        project,     Gateway         Village,
                                                                                        included six three-bedroom
                                                                                        units.      Note        that      the
                                                                                        Redevelopment Agency has
                                                                                        been eliminated.
                  HO 6.8 B                                     Community       Ongoing  Limited. Most larger units which        Delete. Focus on
                  Target multi-family rehabilitation to        Resources                received City assistance were            rehabilitation of
                  apartment complexes and fourplexes with                               actually single family homes, not     single family homes
                  larger     units.     Where     appropriate,                          apartments. Larger apartments           for lower income
                  encourage the conversion of substandard                               are in limited availability in              residents.
                  smaller units to larger units suitable for                            Fairfield, often in complexes or
                  larger families                                                       communities         with     serious
                                                                                        physical        and/or         social
                                                                                        conditions. Funding for the
                                                                                        conversion of smaller units was
                                                                                        nonexistent, and no units were
                                                                                        converted during this time
                                                                                        period
                  HO 6.8 C                                     Community       Ongoing  The          City’s         Housing          Continue
                  Continue       the    City’s   single-family Resources                Rehabilitation program assisted
                  rehabilitation programs, preserving homes                             99 single family and multifamily
                  suitable for larger households.                                       units. These were larger units
                                                                                        suitable for families and larger
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                                  DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                   59

                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                              Responsible                                                   Continue/
                            Housing Program                               Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                             Agency/Dept.                                               Modify/Delete
                                                                                     households.
                HO 6.8 D                                     Community    2009-2012  Progress: Mercy Housing did              Modify.
                Support self-help housing groups’ efforts    Development,            not elect to move forward with       Redevelopment
                to develop affordable homes suitable for     Community               the Santa Monica Street project    Agency funding is
                larger families. The Redevelopment           Resources               and returned the property to the   no longer available
                Agency budgets $4,000,000 for all types                              Fairfield Housing Authority in
                of infill housing, including but not limited                         2013. The City helped Habitat
                to self-help projects over the next three                            for Humanity complete a two-
                fiscal years. Mercy Housing is currently                             unit project on Acacia Street in
                completing approvals for an 18-unit self-                            central Fairfield.
                help housing property purchased with                                 Habitat for Humanity was able
                Agency assistance.                                                   to complete two homes on
                                                                                     Acacia Street
                                                                                     The Redevelopment Agency was
                                                                                     eliminated.
                HO 6.9 A                                     Community    Ongoing    No developers approached the      Delete.          Farm
                Work with nonprofit housing developers       Development,            City or the County with projects  workers can take
                who build affordable housing in Fairfield    Community               which focus on farm worker        advantage of more
                to address any special needs of farm         Resources               housing. No funding was           general       housing
                workers, such as on-site childcare and                               available which targeted this     programs and there
                community rooms. Such community                                      population.                       is         insufficient
                rooms can facilitate education, outreach,                            The City did support recent       funding to focus
                and job training services. Funding would                             Solano County General Plan        projects specifically
                be provided through the state, federal and                           Amendments         that  support  on this population
                Redevelopment Agency programs.                                       agricultural industries in the
                                                                                     County and include limited
                                                                                     opportunities for farm worker
                                                                                     housing.
                HO 6.9 B                                     Community       Ongoing No applications for affordable           Delete or
                Cooperate with Solano County, the            Development,            housing focusing on farm             incorporate into
                County Farm Bureau the Solano County         Community               workers were submitted in either     other programs.
                Agricultural Commissioner, and the           Resources               the unincorporated County or          Given limited
                California       Human         Development                           the City of Fairfield. Lack of      funding, focusing
                Corporation in efforts to meet housing                               funding and lack of applicant       explicitly on farm
                needs of migrant and seasonal farm                                   interest were the primary issues.   worker housing is
                workers.      The      California   Human                            As the City was not approached      less valuable than
                                                                                     by developers during the time           supporting
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                                 60

                         HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                Responsible                                                       Continue/
                             Housing Program                                     Time Frame        Accomplishments
                                                               Agency/Dept.                                                    Modify/Delete
                  Development Corporation operates farm                                      period, the City did not seek     affordable housing
                  worker housing located throughout                                          supporting CHDC funding                in general.
                  California (although not in Fairfield). The                                during this time period.
                  City will seek appropriate CHDC
                  participation in any proposed very low-
                  income farm worker housing developed
                  during the 2009-2014 period.
                  HO 6.9 C                                     Community            Ongoing  The City supported the County           Continue
                  Work with Solano County and local            Development                   General         Plan,       which
                  agricultural interests to identify sites                                   strengthened the commitment to
                  appropriate for migrant farm worker                                        agriculture in the County. The
                  housing. These sites may be located                                        General Plan and related Zoning
                  outside the City Limits near employment.                                   Ordinance amendments permit
                                                                                             farmworker        housing     and
                                                                                             caretaker housing in locations
                                                                                             where services are available.
                  HO 7.1 A                                     Building Division Ongoing     The Building Division continued         Continue
                  Check building plans for compliance with                                   to implement the requirements
                  state energy conservation standards for                                    of the State Building Code
                  new residential buildings.                                                 related to energy compliance.
                  HO 7.1 B                                     Building Division 2010        The City adopted the Green               Delete
                  Adopt a “Green Building Code” which                                        Building Code in 2010.
                  improves energy efficiency, thus reducing
                  energy costs.
                  HO 7.2 A                                     Community         Ongoing     City review of all development          Continue
                  Encourage energy conservation through        Development                   proposals encourages energy and
                  energy-reducing landscaping, orientation                                   water reducing landscaping.
                  and configuration of buildings site, and                                   Public Works has an active water
                  other factors affecting energy use as listed                               conservation program which
                  in the Urban Design Guidelines and                                         also has energy benefits.
                  Zoning Ordinance.                                                          Building orientation and other
                                                                                             factors are considered by staff
                                                                                             during project review.
                  HO 7.3 A                                     Community             Ongoing The         City’s       Housing       Modify to
                  Help low-income homeowners apply for         Resources                     Rehabilitation Program included       incorporate
                                                                                             upgrades to energy efficiency in   references to the
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                                 DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                        61

                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                              Responsible                                                     Continue/
                           Housing Program                                 Time Frame         Accomplishments
                                                             Agency/Dept.                                                  Modify/Delete
                assistance from other agencies to make                                 the 99 homes and apartments           Climate Action
                energy     conservation     improvements.                              assisted by the City.                 Plan and other
                Available programs include Block Grants,                               The City is also participating in   programs identified
                California     Housing        Rehabilitation                           the development of a Climate            in this plan.
                Program, Pacific Gas & Electric, Special                               Action Plan which places new
                Circumstances        Grants      (specified                            emphasis on partnering with
                homeowners on Social Security only), and                               PG&E and other Solano County
                North Coast Energy Services.                                           jurisdictions to develop outreach
                                                                                       to improve energy efficiency and
                                                                                       reduce expenses for low income
                                                                                       households.
                HO 7.3 B                                     Community     Ongoing, as Due to lack of continued                  Modify.
                Provide first time homebuyers with           Resources     funding is  funding, the City did not              The City now
                assistance in weatherproofing their                        available   continue this specific program.     emphasizes Energy
                homes, using Community Development                                     The City’s limited housing          Efficient Mortgages
                Block Grants and other available funding                               rehabilitation    program       did
                sources.                                                               address energy efficiency, but
                                                                                       not exclusively or primarily for
                                                                                       first time homebuyers.
                HO 8.1 A                                        Community  Ongoing     The City sponsored a series of             Delete
                Provide credit and mortgage finance              Resources             workshops on housing finance
                counseling and community workshops to                                  and foreclosure prevention. No
                residents facing foreclosure.                                          future        workshops         are
                                                                                       anticipated.
                HO 8.1 B                                     Community        2009 and The City received limited                  Delete
                Provide housing assistance to evicted        Resources         ongoing Neighborhood          Stabilization
                families through a rental deposit loan or                              Program (NSP-1 funding of $2.4
                grant. Fund the program through HOME                                   million. The City provided
                funds where available.                                                 assistance to 31 households. The
                                                                                       program is now completed and
                                                                                       all funds expended.
                HO 8.2 A                                     Code          Ongoing     The City adopted and is                  Continue
                Implement       the     Vacant    Building   Enforcement,              implementing a Vacant Building
                Ordinance to limit the blighting effects of  Building,                 Ordinance to reduce blighting
                abandoned properties in foreclosure.         Community                 impacts.
                                                             Resources
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                                   62

                         HOUSING ELEMENT POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                           Responsible                                         Continue/
                            Housing Program                            Time Frame       Accomplishments
                                                          Agency/Dept.                                        Modify/Delete
                  HO 8.2 B                                Community    Ongoing    The City administers $1.6     Continue
                  Apply to the State of California for    Resources               million in NSP-3 funding on
                  Neighborhood Stabilization Act funds to                         behalf of Solano County.
                  acquire and rehabilitate abandoned and
                  foreclosed houses.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                           DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                              63

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                ASSESSMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction .............................................................................................................. A-1 
I. Community Profile and Needs Assessment .......................................................... A-2 
   Community Profile ...................................................................................................................... A-2 
   Population Characteristics .......................................................................................................... A-2
   Household Characteristics .......................................................................................................... A-4
   Employment ................................................................................................................................. A-7
   Special Needs ................................................................................................................................ A-9
   Extremely Low Income Residents .......................................................................................... A-10
   Elderly Residents........................................................................................................................ A-10
   Persons with Disabilities ........................................................................................................... A-13
   Developmental Disabilities ...................................................................................................... A-14
   Large Families............................................................................................................................. A-15
   Female-Headed Families........................................................................................................... A-15
   Homeless Individuals and Families in Need of Shelter ....................................................... A-16
   Farm Workers............................................................................................................................. A-22
   Military Employees of Travis Air Force Base ....................................................................... A-23
   Projected Housing Need .......................................................................................................... A-24
   Regional Housing Needs Allocation ....................................................................................... A-24
   Housing market Characteristics ............................................................................................... A-25
   Housing Conditions Survey ..................................................................................................... A-29
   Housing Costs and Affordability............................................................................................. A-35
   Housing Affordability and Household Income .................................................................... A-38
   Affordable Projects in Fairfield ............................................................................................... A-40
II. Housing Constraints .......................................................................................... A-45
   Governmental Constraints ....................................................................................................... A-45
   Non-Governmental Constraints ............................................................................................. A-83
III. Housing Resources .......................................................................................... A-84
   Availability of Land ................................................................................................................... A-84
   Financial Resources ................................................................................................................... A-99
   Administrative Resources ....................................................................................................... A-102
   Homeless Resources ................................................................................................................ A-104
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                                     DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                            I

                       APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                  Energy Conservation ............................................................................................................. A-1067
                LIST    OF   TABLES
                Table A-1 Projected Population(2010-2040) ............................................................................... A-2 
                Table A-2 Age Characteristics (2010)............................................................................................ A-3 
                Table A-3 Population by Race (2000-2010) ................................................................................. A-4 
                Table A-4 Household Characteristics (2011) ............................................................................... A-5 
                Table A-5 HUD Income Levels by Size (Solano County 2014) .............................................. A-6 
                Table A-6 Income by Quartiles (2007-2011) ............................................................................... A-6 
                Table A-7 Employment Profile (2011) ......................................................................................... A-7 
                Table A-8 Largest Employers (2014) ............................................................................................ A-8 
                Table A-9 Vallejo-Fairfield MSA Projections of Employment................................................. A-9 
                Table A-10 Senior Population (2010).......................................................................................... A-11 
                Table A-11 Senior Household by Tenure (2010) ...................................................................... A-12 
                Table A-12 Senior Housing .......................................................................................................... A-12 
                Table A-13 Developmentally Disabled Residents, by Age, for Fairfield ............................... A-14 
                Table A-14 Solano County Point-in-time Population Estimates for Homeless Persons ... A-19 
                Table A-15 Fairfield Homeless Persons, 2013………………………………………. ..... A-20
                Table A-16 2014-2022 Fairfield Regional Housing Needs Allocation ................................. A-25 
                Table A-17 Household Tenure (2000-2010) .............................................................................. A-26 
                Table A-18 Housing Unit Type (2010) ...................................................................................... A-26 
                Table A-19 Overcrowded Households ..................................................................................... A-287 
                Table A-20 Vacancy Status by Tenure (2010)………………………………………… .. A-27
                Table A-21 Age of Housing Stock (2013) .................................................................................. A-28
                Table A-22 City of Fairfield Building Permits Issued (2003-2013) ........................................ A-29
                Table A-23 Housing Conditions Survey Results ....................................................................... A-31 
                Table A-24 Single-Family Attached/Detached ......................................................................... A-31 
                Table A-25 Duplexes ..................................................................................................................... A-32 
                Table A-26 Multi-Family Housing ............................................................................................... A-32 
                Table A-27 Foreclosures (2008) .................................................................................................. A-33 
                Table A-28 Home Sale Activity (2012) ....................................................................................... A-35 
                Table A-29 2008 Rents ................................................................................................................. A-37 
                Table A-30 Mobile Home Park Space Rents ............................................................................ A-37 
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                                                       CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                II

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                 ASSESSMENT
Table A-31 Affordable Renter-Occupied Housing Costs, Solano County ........................... A-38 
Table A-32 Affordable Owner-Occupied Housing Costs, Solano County .......................... A-39 
Table A-33 Households Overpaying by Income (2010) .......................................................... A-40 
Table A-34 Assisted Housing Inventory (2013) ........................................................................ A-41 
Table A-35 RVL and RL District Development Regulations ................................................. A-49 
Table A-36 RL and RLM District Development Regulations ................................................ A-51 
Table A-37 Multi-Family Residential Development Regulations ........................................... A-55 
Table A-38 RLM and RM Small-Lot Development Regulations ........................................... A-58 
Table A-39 Alternative Multifamily Development Regulations ............................................. A-60 
Table A-40 Residential District Land Uses ................................................................................ A-64 
Table A-41 Commercial District Land Uses .............................................................................. A-65 
Table A-42 Single-Family Housing Building Permit Fees (2014) ........................................... A-72 
Table A-43 Multi-Family Housing Building Permit Fees For a Typical 23 Unit Apartment
Building (2014) ................................................................................................................................ A-75 
Table A-44 Comparable Northern California Building Permit Fees (2014) ......................... A-77
Table A-45 Timelines for Permit Procedures ............................................................................ A-82 
Table A-46 Housing Affordability in High Density ................................................................. A-87 
Table A-47 Summary of capacity for housing development ................................................... A-92 
Table A-48 Sites Inventory ........................................................................................................... A-93 
Table A-49 City of Fairfield Housing Financial Resources ..................................................... A-99 
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                                      DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                            III


             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                     ASSESSMENT
INTRODUCTION
The needs assessment is organized into four sections. The first section, Community Profile
and Needs Assessment, summarizes key demographic and housing market information,
including population trends, race and ethnicity, age, household composition, income,
employment, housing characteristics, and housing needs for special segments of the
population. This section also discusses the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA),
which is Fairfield’s share of the anticipated regional housing growth allocated by the
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG). Overall, this section outlines the
characteristics of the community and identifies those characteristics that may have significant
impacts on housing needs in the community, including anticipated population and
household growth.
The second section, Housing Constraints, discusses governmental and non-governmental
constraints to the construction and rehabilitation of housing in Fairfield. The City has
planning, zoning, and building standards that guide residential development patterns and
influence housing availability and affordability. Non-governmental influences include
environmental and housing market conditions; the availability and cost of financing, land,
and material for building; natural conditions that affect the cost of preparing and developing
land for housing; and the business decisions of organizations and individuals in the home
building, finance, real estate, and rental housing industries.
The third section, Resources, addresses the resources available to meet the identified
community needs, including the RHNA numbers discussed above. This section includes the
Housing Sites Inventory required by State law to demonstrate that the city has enough
housing sites to meet the Regional Housing Need, and the section discusses how the City’s
sites can meet this need.
The final section is the energy conservation opportunities section. These opportunities may
reduce costs to homeowners and infrastructure costs to the City. A reduction in basic living
costs through energy savings will allow more households to afford adequate housing.
The data used in preparing the Housing Needs Assessment was primarily taken from Data for
Bay Area Housing Elements prepared by the Association of Bay Area Governments for use by
member agencies and jurisdictions. The City understands that HCD has reviewed and
approved this data set, which is based upon the2010 U.S. Census and recent 2007-2011
American Community Surveys. Other data was derived from the California Department of
Finance, the California Employment Development Department, City of Fairfield reports and
analysis, internet-based data sources such as Trulia.com, , and HUD.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                              A-1

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                          ASSESSMENT
                  I. COMMUNITY PROFILE AND NEEDS
                  ASSESSMENT
                  COMMUNITY PROFILE
                  Fairfield is shaped by the unique interaction of open space, agriculture, topography,
                  environment, traffic circulation, and military development. Major features include the hills to
                  the northwest, Suisun Marsh to the southeast, Travis Air Force Base to the east, and two
                  interstate freeways that bisect the city in a northeastern/southwestern and a southern
                  direction. Suisun Valley, a productive agricultural area, is located between central Fairfield
                  and Cordelia.
                  History and geography have combined to create distinct neighborhoods. Interstate 80
                  separates the generally older neighborhoods to the south and east from newer subdivisions
                  to the north and west. Interstate 680 also defines Cordelia, a neighborhood that has seen
                  substantial development since the 1970s. Cordelia residential neighborhoods can be found
                  off Lopes Road and Green Valley and Suisun Valley Roads.
                  The newest growth area will be located in northeastern Fairfield east of Peabody Road and
                  north of Travis Air Force Base. A new Capital Corridor Train Station will be the centerpiece
                  for this community, which when combined with other planned areas like The Villages at
                  Fairfield and Hawthorne Mill could ultimately include 10,000 housing units.
                  The City is also planning for redevelopment in existing neighborhoods. The Downtown
                  South/West Texas Street Gateway Specific Plan will address opportunities for
                  redevelopment and infill in the historic heart of Fairfield. This may involve new housing
                  development, including mixed use and live-work development.
                  POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                  According to the U.S Census, the total population of the City of Fairfield in 2010 was
                  105,231, an increase of 9.5% since 2000 (96,168). As shown in Table A-1, ABAG projects
                  that by 2040 the population of Fairfield will increase approximately 40 percent from the
                  2010 reported Census population. The City’s General Plan actually projected a buildout
                  population of approximately 136,600, but recent Specific Plans will potentially impact the
                  ultimate population of the City. The ABAG projections show a lower population in 2010
                  than the U.S. Census count.
                                                                  TABLE A-1
                                      PROJECTED                 POPULATION(2010-2040)
                             2010             2015          2020             2025      2030    2035      2040
                           102,832          108,900       115,100          121,400    128,200 135,400  142,800
                        Source: Association of Bay Area Governments, Projections 2013
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                     CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                      A-2

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                         ASSESSMENT
Population by Age
Current and future housing needs are usually determined in part by the age characteristics of
a community’s residents. Each age group has distinct lifestyles, family type and size, incomes,
and housing preferences. Consequently, evaluating the age characteristics of a community is
important in determining its housing needs.
According to the 2010 Census, the City’s median age is 33.7, which is 3 years younger than
Solano County’s median age of 36.9. The difference in median age suggests that the City of
Fairfield still has a younger population than the overall population of Solano County, which
reflects the younger families assigned to Travis Air Force Base and the attraction (which
could be location, affordable housing, industry, etc.) for younger households to relocate to
Fairfield at the beginning of their careers. The data in Table A-2 confirms that the young
adult and middle aged populations (ages 25-44, 45-60) continue to constitute the majority of
the City’s population (52 percent). The distribution has not changed significantly over the
last decade.
                                             TABLE A-2
                         AGE CHARACTERISTICS (2010)
                                             City of Fairfield              Solano County
          Age Group                                2010                          2010
                                      Persons          Percentage     Persons       Percentage
 Preschool (<5 yrs)                     7,789                7%        26,852           6%
 Child and Youth (5-19 yrs)            23,881               23%        86,370           21%
 College Age (20-24 yrs)                8,075                7%        28,761           7%
 Young Adults (25-44 yrs)              28,917               27%       109,337           26%
 Middle Age (45-64 yrs)                25,884               25%       115,117           28%
 Seniors (65+ yrs)                     10,775               10%        48,847           11%
 Total                                105,321              100%       394,542          100%
Source: ABAG Data Set for Housing Elements 2013
Race and Ethnicity
Table A-3 presents the racial and ethnic composition of the City of Fairfield’s population in
2010 as reported in the ABAG data sets, which are based on the U.S. Census. Fairfield is an
increasingly diverse city. As shown in Table A-3 the largest single ethnic group in the
population remains “white, non-Hispanic”, with 37,091 persons (a decrease of over 10,000
persons between 2000 and 2010, or 21%). Overall, the “non-white” population continued to
increase, with Asian populations increasing by 48%. The “Hispanic Origin” population also
increased significantly, by 10,739 persons, or 59%.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                  A-3

                             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                         ASSESSMENT
                                                                 TABLE A-3
                                       POPULATION BY RACE (2000-2010)
                                                                  City of Fairfield                   Solano County
                            Race                          2000                       2010                   2010
                                               Persons      Percentage     Persons     Percentage Persons      Percentage
                  White                         47,072           49%         37,091       35.2%   194,282          41%
                  Black or African
                                                13,695           14%         15,979        15.2%   57,597          14%
                  American
                  American Indian and
                                                  566             1%           462          <1%     2,194          <1%
                  Alaska Native
                  Asian                         10,348           11%         15,265        14.5%   49,399         14.3%
                  Native Hawaiian and
                                                  956             1%          1,049          1%     2,859          <1%
                  Other Pacific Islander
                  Some other race                 210           <1%            231          <1%      955           <1%
                  Two or more races              5,508            6%          6,455          6%    17,658           5%
                  Hispanic origin               17,813           19%         28,789       27.3%    69,598          12%
                  Total                         96,168          100%        107,892        100%   394,542         100%
                  Source: 2000 U.S. Census, 2010 U. S. Census, ABAG Housing Element Data Set
                  HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
                  Household Size
                  According to the ABAG Data (ACS 2007-2011), the average household size in Fairfield has
                  remained around 3 persons. This is slightly higher than the average for Solano County as a
                  whole (2.82) and the Bay Area (2.69), reflecting the larger number of young families in
                  Fairfield. However, a majority of both owners (66.8%) and renters (64.7%) consist of one,
                  two, or three person households, (a slight increase over 2000 percentages). Larger
                  households with more than six persons make up 7.2% of owners and 9.2% of renters.
                  Household Characteristics
                  A summary of household characteristics in the City of Fairfield and Solano County is
                  provided in Table A-4. A family household is a household consisting of two or more people
                  residing together and related by birth, marriage, or adoption. A non-family household
                  consists of a householder living alone (a one-person household) or where the householder
                  shares the home exclusively with people to whom he/she is not related. According to the
                  2010 U.S. Census/American Community Survey as analyzed by ABAG Data Set for Bay
                  Area Housing Elements, the majority (76 percent) of households in Fairfield is family
                  households. The percentage of family households is almost identical to that in Solano
                  County as a whole.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                        CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                     A-4
             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                        ASSESSMENT
                                             TABLE A-4
                  HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS (2011)
                                                                              2011
                            Household Type
                                                                     Number      Percentage
            Total Households                                          32,359        100%
            Family Households                                          24,665        78%
            Married Couple Households                                  20,493        59%
            Female Householder, with children <18                      3,064          9%
            Male Householder, with children <18                        1,037         3%
            Non-Family Household                                       1,705         5%
           Source: ACS Survey 2006-2011 as reported in the ABAG Data Set
Household Income
Household income is one of the most significant factors affecting housing choice and
opportunity. Income largely determines a household’s ability to purchase or rent housing.
While higher-income households have more discretionary income to spend on housing,
lower- and moderate-income households are limited in the range of housing they can afford.
Typically, as household income decreases, cost burdens and overcrowding increase.
For the purpose of evaluating housing affordability, housing need, and eligibility for housing
assistance, income levels are defined by guidelines adopted each year by the California State
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). For Solano County, the
applicable median income for a family of four in 2014 is $76,700. HUD has defined the
following income categories for Solano County, based on the median income for a
household of four persons for 2014.
        Extremely low-income: 30 percent and below ($0 to $23,000)
        Very low-income: 31 to 50 percent of median income ($23,001 to $38,350 )
        Low-income: 51 to 80 percent of median income ($38,351 to $61,350 )
        Moderate-income: 81 to 120 percent of median income ($61,350 to $92,040)
        Above moderate-income: 120 percent or more of median income ($92,040 or more)
Table A-5 shows the HUD definitions for Solano County’s maximum annual income level
for each income group, adjusted by household size. This data is used when determining a
household’s eligibility for federal, state, or local housing assistance and used when calculating
the maximum affordable housing payment for renters and buyers.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                 DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                      A-5

                            APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                      ASSESSMENT
                                                          TABLE A-5
                                           HUD INCOME LEVELS BY SIZE
                                                 (SOLANO COUNTY 2014)
                                                                 Maximum Income Level
                   Household Size
                                         Extremely Low       Very Low      Low         Median        Moderate
                        1 person              $16,100         $26,850    $42,950       $53,700         $64,440
                       2 persons              $18,400        $30,7000    $49,100       $61,400         $73,680
                       3 persons              $20,700         $34,550    $55,250       $69,100         $82,920
                       4 persons              $23,000         $38,350    $61,350       $76,700         $92,040
                       5 persons              $24,850         $41,450    $66,300       $82,900         $99,480
                       6 persons              $26,700         $44,500    $71,200       $89,000        $106,800
                       7 persons              $28,550         $47,000     $76,00       $94,000        $112,800
                       8 persons              $30,400         $50,650    $81,000      $101,300        $121,560
                  Source: HUD Income Limits 2014
                  While the ABAG data/ACS Survey does not divide Fairfield’s population by HUD income
                  categories, the data set does provide some insight into how the City’s household income is
                  distributed. This income data is based on the 2007-2011 U.S. Census ACS. The data for
                  Fairfield income distribution shows the percentages of households in each quartile is almost
                  identical to that for Solano County as a whole. The data also shows that a substantial
                  percentage (15%) of Fairfield’s households fall in the lowest quartile (below $25,000). Many
                  of these households can be considered “extremely low income” households by the HUD
                  standards, depending on household size (Table A-6).
                                                          TABLE A-6
                                     INCOME           BY QUARTILES (2007-2011)
                          Income Quartile         Number of Households    Percentage of Total Households
                          Less than $24,999              4,891                         15.1%
                           $25,000-$49,999               6,730                         20.8%
                           $50,000-$74,999               6,235                         19.3%
                           $75,000-$99,999               5,051                         15.6%
                            Over $100,000                9,452                         29.2%
                       Source: ABAG-ACS 2007-2011
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                               CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                  A-6

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
EMPLOYMENT
According to the California Employment Development Department, as of February 2014
there were a total of 50,000 persons in the labor force in the City of Fairfield. As shown
below in Table A-7, the largest category of employment was education, health, and social
services, followed by retail trade and manufacturing.
                                       TABLE A-7
                         EMPLOYMENT PROFILE (2011)
 Occupation of Residents                          Persons     Percentage Change Since 2000
 Agriculture, forestry, mining                       752                  167.6
 Construction                                       3,089                 10.2
 Manufacturing                                      4,330                  -2.4
 Wholesale Trade                                    1,372                 13.9
 Retail Trade                                       5,396                   7.6
 Transportation and Warehousing                     2,471                  -0.6
 Information                                         755                  -20.2
 FIRE                                               3,397                  13.1
 Professional, Management, Administration           3,571                   5.5
 Education, Health, Social Services                 9,299                  22.4
 Arts, Entertainment                                4,117                 31.1
 Other (misc) Services                              1.765                   8.1
 Public Administration                              3,779                 16.1
 Total                                             44,093                  12.5
Source: ABAG , 2007-2011 Census ACS
Table A-8 identifies the major employers in Fairfield by number of employees. Travis Air
Force Base is the leading employer with over 13,000 employees. The majority of Fairfield
businesses are smaller with less than 500 employees.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                          DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                          A-7
                             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                         ASSESSMENT
                                                                 TABLE A-8
                                                 LARGEST EMPLOYERS (2014)
                                                                200 – 499 Employees
                                     Anheuser-Busch Co.                         Solano County Superintendent of Schools
                                   Guittard Chocolate Co                               Westamerica Bancorporation
                                     Jelly Belly Candy Co.                                    Pride Industries
                                             Macy’s                                              Wal-Mart
                                Professional Hospital Supply                     California State Automobile Association
                                             Target                              Abbott Labs – Ross Products Division
                                              Sears                                             J.C. Penney
                                           Home Depot                                    Partnership Health Plan
                                        Sunnyside Farms                            Sutter Regional Medical Foundation
                                                                500 – 999 Employees
                                 Solano Community College                       Solano County Health and Social Services
                                    Solano County Sheriff                                     City of Fairfield
                                                              1,000 – 4,999 Employees
                                  NorthBay Medical Center                                    County of Solano
                                                      Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District
                                                             5,000 or more Employees
                                                                Travis Air Force Base
                  Source: City of Fairfield
                  Table A-9 shows employment projections from 2004 through 2014 as related to job growth
                  for the Vallejo-Fairfield Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). There are no new projections
                  available from the State, but the trends described by the analysis in this table are likely to
                  continue during the time period of this Housing Element. The state projections showed
                  Vallejo-Fairfield Metropolitan Statistical Area employment to be concentrated in a variety of
                  occupations ranging from construction occupations to management occupations. When
                  comparing these annual incomes to the median income for 2008 ($75,400), only one
                  occupational group was expected to be above the median income. Of these occupational
                  groups, the highest annual salary fell under the Management group at $81,452. The lowest
                  annual salary was within the Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations at $17,409.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                              CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                     A-8

                 APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                           ASSESSMENT
                                                TABLE A-9
               VALLEJO-FAIRFIELD MSA PROJECTIONS                                                       OF
                                             EMPLOYMENT
                              Estimated          Estimated
                                                                 Numeric Percentage Annual                   Income
 Occupation Group            Employment Employment
                                                                  Change            Change           Salary   Range
                                 (2004)             (2014)
Construction and
Extraction                       14,070            18,190          4,120              29%           $48,006    Low
Occupations
Sales and Related                                                                                           Extremely
                                 16,380            18,630          2,250              14%           $21,694
Occupations                                                                                                    Low
Office and
Administrative                   21,180            23,350          2,170              10%           $31,907 Very Low
Support Occupations
Healthcare
Practitioners and
                                  6,180              8,330         2,150              35%           $64,646 Moderate
Technical
Occupations
Transportation and
Material Moving                  10,180            12,260          2,080              20%           $25,043 Very Low
Occupations
Management
                                  8,080              9,660         1,580              20%           $81,452 Moderate
Occupations
Education, Training,
and Library                       8,810            10,190          1,380              16%           $46,716    Low
Occupations
Food Preparation and
                                                                                                            Extremely
Serving Related                  11,670            12,560           890                8%           $17,409
                                                                                                               Low
Occupations
Source: California Employment Development Department, HCD Income Limits for a four-person household
SPECIAL NEEDS
Certain groups have greater difficulty in finding decent affordable housing due to their
special needs and circumstances. This may be a result of employment and income, family
characteristics, disability, or household characteristics. Consequently, certain residents in the
City of Fairfield may experience more instances of housing cost burdens, overcrowding, or
other housing problems. The categories of special needs addressed in this Element include:
           Extremely-Low-Income households
           Elderly households
           Persons with physical and mental disabilities
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                     DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                         A-9

                            APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                           Large households
                           Single-parent households (female-headed households with children under the age
                            of 18)
                           Homeless persons
                           Farm workers
                           Military employees of Travis Air Force Base
                  EXTREMELY LOW INCOME RESIDENTS
                  California State Housing Law requires local governments to address the needs of “Extremely
                  Low Income” populations, households with incomes below 30% of the median income for
                  the community. These households also fall below federal definitions of “poverty,” and
                  federal statistics can help the City quantify the extent of the extremely low income
                  population. The federal government defines poverty as a minimum level of income (adjusted
                  for household size and composition) necessary to meet basic food, shelter, and clothing
                  needs. Factors affecting income include age, family status, number and age of children, and
                  the absence of one parent.
                  According to ABAG Data (Census ACS 2007-2011), poverty rates in Fairfield increased
                  from 9.3% in 2000 to 11.7% or 2.050 household in 2011. Of these, 474 (23.1%) were owner-
                  occupied and 1,576 (76.9%) were renter-occupied. This parallels the poverty rate for Solano
                  County as a whole (8.3% in 2000 to 10.6% in 2011), and all cities in Solano County except
                  for Rio Vista saw a similar increase in poverty during this time period.
                  ELDERLY RESIDENTS
                  Elderly residents have many different housing needs, depending on their age, level of
                  income, current tenure status, cultural background, and health status. Elderly households
                  may need assistance with personal and financial affairs, networks of care to provide services
                  and daily assistance, and even possible architectural design features that would accommodate
                  disabilities that would help ensure continued independent living. Some of the potential
                  elderly housing needs that may require a specific governmental response include:
                  Low incomes. According to the ABAG/ACS, in 2011, 8% (754 seniors) of the population
                  over 65 were below poverty. Significantly more can be assumed to meet the HUD
                  definitions for “very low” and “low” income households. While the poverty rate for senior
                  citizens is lower than for the population as whole, seniors also experience higher levels of
                  disability than the population as a whole, which can impose additional requirements for
                  housing design-and cost. Like all lower income residents, many elderly residents may be
                  facing overpayment problems or are unable to find affordable rental units at all. Low-income
                  elderly homeowners similarly may require assistance in maintaining their homes in sound
                  condition or rehabilitating homes to eliminate threats to health and safety.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-10

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                       ASSESSMENT
Assisted living facilities. Assisted living facilities provide elderly residents with the
opportunity to maintain an independent housing unit while receiving needed medical
services and social support. Congregate care facilities include housing with medical and
health services.
Relocation assistance. Some elderly residents need assistance in relocating to a dwelling that
better suits their space and income needs.
Mobility-impaired elderly residents requiring special accessibility features in their dwelling
units. Mobility impairment may require that special accessibility features be included in the
design and construction of a home. Mobility impairment can also create a need for a living
arrangement that includes health, meals, cleaning, and/or other services as part of the
housing package. A number of living arrangements are possible, from senior citizen
developments with individual dwelling units to assisted living facilities to 24-hour support
services.
Table A-10 below shows the breakdown by age of the senior population.
                                          TABLE A-10
                           SENIOR         POPULATION (2010)
                                     City of Fairfield                Solano County
       Age of Seniors
                             Number        Change since 2000 Number      Change since 2000
      65 to 69 years           3,210                20.8%      15,031            38%
      70-74 years              2,505                14.4%      10,966            18%
      75 to 79 years          2,058                 16.2%       8,584            6%
      80 to 84 years           1,536                 30%        6,254            21%
      85 years and over        1,466                 76%        6,012            54%
      Total Seniors           10,775               24.8%       37,371           25.2%
    Source: U.S. Census (ABAG Housing Element Data)
According to the 2010 U. S. Census, (Table A-11) in 2010 there were 6,351 households in
the City of Fairfield that had at least one person 65 years or older living in the household.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                             A-11
                              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                                ASSESSMENT
                                                                          Table A-11
                                      SENIOR HOUSEHOLD BY TENURE (2010)
                                                 Tenure                                      Number             Percentage
                   Renter Households
                   65 to 74 years                                                              690                  21%
                   75 to 84 years                                                              479                  22%
                   85 years and over                                                           427                  46%
                   Total                                                                      1,596                 21%
                   Owner Households
                   65 to 74 years                                                             2,560                 79%
                   75 to 84 years                                                             1,697                 78%
                   85 years and over                                                           498                  54%
                   Total                                                                      4,755                 79%
                  Source: ABAG Housing Element Data Set.
                  Senior Housing
                  Currently, the Fairfield has 1,112 units specifically reserved for senior housing (Table A-12).
                  Of that total, 383 units are restricted to be affordable. There are also facilities located nearby
                  in Vacaville, Suisun, Vallejo, Rio Vista, and Benicia providing a total of 3,856 additional
                  units. Thus, there is approximately 1 designated senior housing unit for every six senior
                  households in Fairfield. However, many senior households may prefer to stay in their
                  existing residences well into retirement. Senior housing may be most attractive to the oldest
                  cohort (85 years and older), and the 1,112 units may be adequate for current populations in
                  that cohort. However, the City will continue to support the construction of senior housing,
                  particularly near services such as shopping, medical care, and recreation.
                                                                         TABLE A-12
                                                                  SENIOR HOUSING
                              Facility Name                                      Address         Income Restricted     Capacity
                   Dover Woods                                            2880 Dover Road             Yes                 200
                   Jefferson Plaza                                          1050 Jefferson             Yes                 24
                   Parkway Plaza                                             188 E. Alaska             Yes                 99
                   Senior Manor                                         1101 Union Avenue              Yes                 60
                   Casa Nova Mobile Home Park                             2071 Martin Road            Some                131
                   Loyalton of Rancho 1                              3350 Cherry Hills Court           No                 175
                   Paradise Valley Estates 2                             2600 Estates Drive            No                 327
                   Woodcreek Commons                                  1625 Woodcreek Drive             No                  96
                   Total                                                                                                 1,112
                  Source: City of Fairfield, 2014
                  1 Includes assisted living 2 Housing for retired military officers
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                               CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                           A-12
              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                     ASSESSMENT
PERSONS           WITH       DISABILITIES
Persons with disabilities have physical or mental impairments that require special housing
design for self-sufficiency. In addition, Persons with Developmental Disabilities are
discussed in the subsection immediately following. According to the 2009-2011 U.S. Census
ACS, 9,633 persons (10.4% percent of the total population) in Fairfield had a disability. This
number represents a significant decline from the U.S. Census 2000 figures reported in the
previous Housing Element, which can be at least partially attributable to changes in
definition and methodology in defining “disabled” persons. The Census defines disability as
a mental, physical, or health condition that lasts over six months. There are three types of
disabilities: work disability, mobility limitation, and self-care limitation.
Work disability – Refers to a condition lasting more than six months that restricts a
person’s choice of work and prevents that person from working full-time.
Mobility limitation – Refers to a physical or mental condition lasting more than six months
that makes it difficult for a person to go outside the home alone.
Self-care limitation – Refers to a physical or mental condition lasting more than six months
that makes it difficult to take care of one’s personal needs.
There are two approaches to housing design for those residents with disabilities: adaptability
and accessibility. Adaptable housing is a design concept in which a dwelling unit contains
design features that allow for accessibility and use by mobility-impaired individuals with only
minor modifications. An accessible unit has the actual special features installed in the house
(grab bars, special cabinetry).
To address the need for the adaptability and accessibility of housing by mobility-impaired
individuals, the California Department of Housing and Community Development has
adopted a series of requirements for new rental housing. These regulations implement most
of the requirements of federal law for federally financed housing projects, plus several
additional requirements. California law requires that 5 percent of the dwelling units in a
newly constructed apartment building, hotel, motel, lodge, or other rental project include
design features for adaptable use by mobility-impaired individuals.
The state requirements address exterior and interior design features, such as walkways
leading to a dwelling unit, the gradient of the access way to the main entrance, changes in
level, entry width, threshold height, ramp and landing design, corridor widths, types of door
locks and latches, electrical outlet and switch heights, bathroom configuration and clear
space, ability to install grab bars in bathrooms, knee space under lavatories and sinks, the
height of countertops, the configuration of a kitchen, and other aspects of housing design.
The 2009-2011 ACS reported in the ABAG Data Set focuses on employment for disabled
persons. This data shows that 442 persons out of 1,606 total persons with a disability who
are “in the labor force” are unemployed-an unemployment rate of 22%. This will severely
impact income and the ability to afford any housing, let alone housing with often expensive
enhancements needed to meet the special needs of the disabled. An additional 2,409 persons
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                               A-13

                            APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                      ASSESSMENT
                  with a disability are reported as “not in the labor force”. This represents 19% of the disabled
                  population who are outside the job market. Altogether, disabled persons experience a
                  significantly higher unemployment rate than the workforce as a whole.
                  DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
                  SB 812 requires Housing Elements to address the needs of individuals with a developmental
                  disability within the community. According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions
                  Code a "Developmental disability" means a disability that originates before an individual
                  attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a
                  substantial disability for that individual which includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy,
                  epilepsy, and autism. This term shall also include disabling conditions found to be closely
                  related to mental retardation or to require treatment similar to that required for individuals
                  with mental retardation, but shall not include other handicapping conditions that are solely
                  physical in nature.
                  Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a
                  conventional housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living
                  environment where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may
                  require an institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are
                  provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in
                  supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s
                  living situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
                  The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community
                  based services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their
                  families through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and
                  two community-based facilities. Regional Centers are private, non-profit community
                  agencies y that contract with local businesses to offer a wide range of services to individuals
                  with developmental disabilities and their families.
                  The following information in Table A-13, provided by the North Bay Housing Coalition,
                  charged by the State of California with the care of people with developmental disabilities,
                  defined as those with severe, life-long disabilities attributable to mental and/or physical
                  impairments provides a closer look at the disabled population.
                                                             TABLE A-13
                      DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED RESIDENTS,                                        BY     AGE,
                                                0-14         15 -22   23-54     55- 65      65+
                       Zip Code Area                                                                     Total
                                               Years         Years   Years      Years      Years
                              94533             222            115     348        66         39           790
                              94534              67             29     55         8           1           160
                              Total             289            144     403        74         40           950
                      Source: North Bay Housing Coalition 2014
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                  A-14

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
There are a number of housing types appropriate for people living with a development
disability: rent subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family homes, inclusionary
housing, Section 8 vouchers, special programs for home purchase, HUD housing, and SB
962 homes. The design of housing-accessibility modifications, the proximity to services and
transit, and the availability of group living opportunities represent some of the types of
considerations that are important in serving this need group. Incorporating ‘barrier-free’
design in all, new multifamily housing (as required by California and Federal Fair Housing
laws) is especially important to provide the widest range of choices for disabled residents.
Special consideration should also be given to the affordability of housing, as people with
disabilities may be living on a fixed income.
In order to assist in the housing needs for persons with Developmental Disabilities, the City
will implement programs to coordinate housing activities and outreach with the Regional
Center, encourage housing providers to designate a portion of new affordable housing
developments for persons with disabilities, especially persons with developmental disabilities,
and pursue funding sources designated for persons with special needs and disabilities.
LARGE FAMILIES
Large families are those households of five or more related individuals. The special need of
this group is for housing of sufficient size and number of bedrooms that would prevent
overcrowding. For the purposes of this analysis, “overcrowding” is defined as an average
“persons per room” ratio that exceeds 1.01. Severe overcrowding can be defined as more
than 1.5 persons per room. Cost is an important consideration, as many large families do not
have sufficient income to afford larger homes or apartments.
The 2010 Census (ABAG) reported 5,981 “large households” with five or more members,
including 3,362 homeowners and 2,619 renters. 16.1% of “owner” households are
considered large households and 19.2% of renter households.
The Census Bureau defines “overcrowding” as greater than 1 but less than or equal to 1.5
persons per room and “severely overcrowded” as greater than 1.5 persons per room. As
reported by ABAG, the 2006-2010 ACS reports that 410 owner-occupied households are
experiencing overcrowding and 85 “severe” overcrowding. 900 rental units are overcrowded,
and 175 severely overcrowded.
FEMALE-HEADED FAMILIES
Female-headed families with children (single mothers) are identified as a special needs group,
because their level of income is often too low to pay for housing meeting their space and
lifestyle needs.
The 2010 Census identified 5,203 “female-headed families”, which represents approximately
20% of all families. 3,450 of these female-headed families reported children under the age of
18. The ACS data for 2009-2011 estimated that 20% of female-headed families were below
the Federal poverty level. This number, while an estimate, is very close to the estimated rate
of poverty (19%) in 2000.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                           A-15

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                  Single mothers have lower levels of income for a variety of reasons: the lower earning
                  potential of many women relative to men; the loss of financial support from fathers; the
                  young age at which many unmarried women become mothers, often resulting in dependency
                  on public assistance; and the lack of adequate childcare that would allow single mothers to
                  seek a better education or career training and therefore increase their earning potential. In
                  addition, single mothers often face discrimination in rental housing even though state law
                  prohibits rental property owners from discriminating against families with children. Because
                  of these problems, single mothers need rental family housing affordable to low- and very
                  low-income households in a non-discriminatory environment in which access to childcare
                  services is either provided on-site or nearby.
                  HOMELESS INDIVIDUALS                        AND       FAMILIES        IN    NEED      OF
                  SHELTER
                  Throughout Solano County, homelessness has become a major concern. Factors
                  contributing to the increase in homelessness include:
                          The lack of housing affordable to extremely low-, very low-, and low-income
                           persons;
                          Increases in unemployment or underemployment;
                          Reductions in government subsidies;
                          De-institutionalization of the mentally ill;
                          Domestic violence;
                          Drug addiction;
                          Dysfunctional families; and
                          Lifestyle choices made by individuals.
                  Solutions to homelessness are as difficult and varied as the problems listed above. The
                  shelter and housing needs of homeless persons are more difficult to measure and assess than
                  those of any other population subgroup. Since these individuals have no permanent
                  addresses, they are not likely to be counted in the census, and since they are far less likely to
                  have stable employment, there are few housing opportunities.
                  Identified below are the three types of facilities that provide shelter for homeless individuals
                  and families: emergency shelters, transitional housing, and permanent housing.
                          Emergency Shelter – Any facility where the primary purpose is to provide
                           temporary or transitional shelter for the homeless in general or for specific
                           populations of the homeless.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-16

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                   ASSESSMENT
        Transitional Housing – A range of shelter options that help a person or
         population displaced by conflict or natural disaster until they return to permanent
         accommodation. Residents of transitional housing are usually connected to
         supportive services designed to assist the homeless in achieving greater economic
         independence and a permanent, stable living situation. Services may include
         substance abuse treatment, mental and physical health care interventions, job
         training and employment services, individual and group counseling, and life skills
         training.
        Permanent Housing – Permanent housing that is affordable in the community or
         service-enriched permanent housing that is linked with ongoing supportive services
         (on-site or off-site) and designed to allow formerly homeless clients to live at the
         facility indefinitely.
Some homeless persons are temporarily without shelter because of a job loss, the demolition
or conversion of their dwelling unit, or because of some other economic circumstance. In
such cases, the solution is to provide temporary economic assistance (first and last month’s
rent, temporary rental assistance, security deposit, relocation assistance, etc.). Their long-
term need is for affordable housing, but the lack of housing is symptomatic of their
economic circumstance. Employment counseling may be helpful in conjunction with
housing assistance.
Another group of homeless persons could be called the “working poor.” These are
individuals or families with at least one part-time or full-time worker who do not earn a
sufficient income to afford suitable housing. Such persons or families do not have physical
problems that prevent them from working, but are simply unable to locate housing within
their economic means. This group requires subsidized housing or ongoing monthly rental
housing assistance, possibly in conjunction with educational and/or work training that would
allow them to improve their economic circumstances. Some individuals and families, such as
migrant farm workers, may need affordable housing on a seasonable basis but are unable to
locate such housing within their economic means.
Other homeless individuals lead unstable lives because of substance abuse and are unable to
maintain a permanent shelter or job. The homelessness of such persons cannot be resolved
until their substance abuse problems are resolved. These individuals need a program that can
provide temporary or transitional housing while they are undergoing medical treatment for
their substance abuse. “Half-way houses” or group homes are frequently established to meet
the needs of such individuals. Once the substance abuse problem is resolved, these
individuals may need temporary financial assistance in establishing a permanent residence
and employment.
A fourth category is women (often with children) escaping domestic violence. Such women
need temporary shelter until they can arrange for a separate residence. Because such women
often have no other place to stay and often no job, they need temporary financial assistance.
For these individuals, homelessness is a symptom but not a cause of their personal and
economic problems. Personal counseling and job training may also be necessary to resolve
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                          A-17

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                  long-term personal and economic problems. In Fairfield, SafeQuest, a nonprofit
                  organization funded through donations, the United Way, and City Community Development
                  Block Grant (CDBG) monies, provides temporary shelter, transport, and counseling for
                  battered women and children.
                  A fifth category of homeless persons is those with mental illnesses that either require
                  institutional or outpatient treatment. These individuals are mentally incapable of maintaining
                  an independent household and employment, either because they are not receiving proper
                  medical treatment or because the nature of their condition is so severe that no level of
                  treatment would be adequate to allow for an independent lifestyle. Those who can function
                  independently with outpatient medical treatment can be assisted in establishing a household
                  and employment so that they will be more productive members of society. This scenario
                  assumes, of course, that persons with less severe mental illnesses can receive the appropriate
                  medical treatment and caseworker counseling on an outpatient basis and will actually follow
                  through with such treatment. Those individuals with more severe mental illnesses must
                  either be placed in a setting that will guarantee 24-hour supervision and medical care or in a
                  group home setting that will ensure supervision and medical attention.
                  The final group of homeless individuals is the “drifters.” These are primarily single adult
                  males with no substantial physical or mental illnesses that would prevent them from working
                  and establishing a permanent household. For whatever reason, individuals in this group have
                  made a conscious decision to travel from place to place, seeking part-time and seasonal
                  work, but never establishing a permanent household. They often shun governmental
                  programs and public attempts at assistance, and they would prefer to live in temporary
                  shelters of their own making rather than in homeless shelters.
                  Solano County has a 10-year plan addressing homelessness for the 2008 to 2018 time frame.
                  According to their most recent data (January 2007), Solano County has approximately 328
                  homeless persons with an additional 172 homeless persons in correctional facilities being
                  released to the streets. The County is aware that there may be an estimated 1,500 to 2,000
                  persons who are homeless at any point in time and are not captured in the time of this
                  count. Solano County has 179 beds year round in emergency shelters, 118 beds year round in
                  transitional housing, and 99 beds year round in permanent housing. Even with these 396
                  beds, Solano County is looking at a need for over 3,000 homeless persons at any one time in
                  Solano County. Solano County has ten strategies addressing homelessness:
                           Discharge planning and decrease the number of people of being discharged into
                            homelessness by 25 percent;
                           Create new permanent housing beds for homeless and chronically homeless
                            persons;
                           Increase percentage of homeless persons staying in permanent housing over 6
                            months to 71 percent;
                           Increase percentage of homeless persons moving from transitional housing into
                            permanent housing by 61 percent;
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-18

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                         ASSESSMENT
         Increase percentage of homeless persons becoming employed by 11 percent;
         Ensure that the Continuum of Care has a functional Homeless Management
          Information System with 90 percent of the shelters and housing projects actively
          participating;
         Improve access to mainstream resources by 25 percent;
         Chronically homeless individuals will be fully engaged in the continuum of services
          and housing available of them;
         Chronically homeless people will not be forced to live on the street until permanent
          housing or affordable housing is available;
         Ensure sufficient outreach to homeless, at-risk families and non-chronically
          homeless individuals and provide for their basic needs;
         Further strengthen self-sufficiency supports for homeless people moving out of
          homelessness.
Developing an accurate count of homeless populations can be challenging. The ABAG Data
Set includes countywide data for homeless populations in the Bay Area over the past several
years (Table A-14). Many homeless individuals are not visible, and numbers vary with
seasons and economic conditions. In addition, the methodology used for counting homeless
persons has varied. As a result, the data shows significant swings in numbers during the past
five years.
                                            TABLE A-14
         SOLANO COUNTY POINT-IN-TIME POPULATION
                  ESTIMATES FOR HOMELESS PERSONS
            Sheltered          Unsheltered     Total   Chronic
 Year                                                                            w/Children
           Population           Population            Homeless      Veterans
 2013           440                 889        1,329     414           88             166
 2012           387                 235         622       50           28             244
 2011           334                 235         569      122           41             193
 2010           403                 426         829      105          NA              453
 2009           400                 428         828      105           72             361
Source: ABAG Data Sets for Housing Elements
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                            A-19

                          APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                      ASSESSMENT
                  The City of Fairfield represents 25% of the County’s population. While the data discussed
                  above has not been broken down by city, Fairfield’s share of the homeless population can
                  also be estimated to be 25% of the County total, or 332 persons in 2013. Note that these
                  need numbers were significantly smaller between 2009-2012.
                  Community Action Partnership of Solano (CAPS), also conducted a point in time survey in
                  December 2013. As shown in Table A-15, CAPS estimated approximately 300 homeless
                  persons in Fairfield in 2013.
                                                              TABLE A-15
                                   FAIRFIELD               HOMELESS PERSONS, 2013
                                                                                                  Total
                                                                                  Survey Observed
                                              Encampments                            44     12     56
                                              Heather House                          26     0      26
                                          Mission Solano Walk In                     26     0      26
                                  Mission Solano Continuum of Care                   46     1      47
                                              Bridges to Life                        84     5      89
                                            First Place 4 Youth                       6     37      43
                                               Joshua House                           4     0       4
                                         Children in Need of Hugs                     8     1       9
                                                   Total                                           300
                                Source: Community Action Partnership of Solano, 2013
                  For the purposes of this Housing Element, the City is using the CAPS survey to define the
                  need for emergency shelter.
                  The homeless population in Fairfield is served by the following organizations and facilities.
                  Heather House, Located on Ohio Street in central Fairfield near transit, employment, the
                  county Government Center and the Fairfield Civic Center, Heather House is a small
                  residential facility with a current capacity of 26 beds. The 7500 square foot lot is owned by
                  the Fairfield Housing Authority. Heather House also offers three apartments on site which
                  serve as transitional housing units.
                  Mission Solano is a local nonprofit organization whose mission includes services to the
                  homeless and potentially homeless.
                  Mission Solano operates The Bridge to Life Center, a shelter program in Fairfield which
                  currently offers up to 208 beds for intact homeless families, single men, single women and
                  women with children. Mission Solano is currently raising funds for the construction of a
                  commercial kitchen to better serve the population housed at the shelter.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                     CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                  A-20

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
Bridge to Life Center is located on a 7.5 acre parcel at 300 Beck Avenue in southern
Fairfield, the Bridge to Life Center is within ½ mile of County Social Services, transit,
employment, and other services. This project was originally approved by the City through a
Conditional Use Permit process.
Mission Solano also offers services at its facility on Travis Blvd. in central Fairfield.
Participants in these programs are also offered housing at area churches that volunteer
spaces within their existing sanctuaries. The average number of persons served in this day
program is over 73 individuals.
In 2007 Mission Solano participated in a homeless survey, which revealed that 46 percent of
Mission Solano’s clients had been homeless for less than one year even though 39 percent of
those said they had experienced homelessness once before. Of this count, 50 percent
indicated that they were veterans (7 percent served in Korea and 29 percent served in
Vietnam). Families made up 36 percent of the people seeking help
In addition to the two emergency shelters discussed above, three organizations provide
services to homeless youth and those struggling with additions:
Joshua House is a faith-based drug and alcohol rehabilitation organization which operates a
transitional housing/shelter in a residential neighborhood in Fairfield.
First Place 4 Youth focuses on youth transitioning out of the foster care system. In
addition to offering limited emergency shelter, First Place 4 Youth provides clients with
assistance in finding and furnishing housing as they transition into adulthood.
Children in Need of Hugs (CINOH) is a charitable organization focusing on at risk,
homeless, and runaway youths. They operate a youth emergency shelter/transitional
housing in Fairfield One focus of CINOH is on teen mothers transitioning out of foster
care.
Caminar Solano, a local nonprofit, operates two facilities in Fairfield (a transitional housing
project and an emergency shelter). Laurel Creek House, located at 956 East Tabor Avenue,
provides emergency shelter and treatment to persons suffering from mental disabilities. The
capacity of Laurel Creek House is currently 12 beds.
SB2 Requirements
SB2 requires the City to permit as-of-right emergency shelters in at least one zoning district.
The capacity of this zoning district must be sufficient to meet the identified need for
emergency shelter in the community.
Currently, as noted above, emergency shelters are permitted through a Conditional Use
Permit process in the IL Zoning District as well as certain commercial districts. This
Housing Element contains a program, Program HO 6.2A, which directs the City to amend
the Zoning Ordinance by January 2015 to create an Emergency Shelter Overlay District. The
Overlay District will permit as of right the construction of or expansion of emergency
shelters as defined in SB2 without a Conditional Use Permit.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                           A-21

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                 ASSESSMENT
                  The City anticipates applying this Emergency Shelter Overlay District to the 3.48 acre parcel
                  currently housing the Bridge-to-Life Center as well as two larger adjacent parcels. This will
                  provide an opportunity for Mission Solano or a partner agency to modestly expand the
                  Bridge to Life Center on its parcel without a Conditional Use Permit. Staff estimates that
                  existing site could be expanded to a total of capacity of 250 beds at the Bridge-to-Life
                  emergency shelter. The adjacent parcels (7.52 and 6.17 acres) have even more potential
                  capacity to allow the City to meet its , shelter capacity could more than meet the defined
                  need of 300 beds. These sites are also near County social services.
                  The City considered applying the Overlay Zoning to the 7,500 square foot Heather House
                  property on Ohio Street, but the capacity for expansion on this site was limited. Similarly,
                  while the City considered applying the Overlay Zoning to the Laurel Creek House property
                  on East Tabor Avenue (a ¾ acre parcel), this fully developed site had no capacity for
                  significant expansion.
                  With the application of the overlay zoning district as described above, the City of Fairfield
                  will have zoned capacity for well over 300 emergency shelter beds. Note that analysis of the
                  Overlay Zoning District may result in the City identifying additional areas suitable for
                  emergency shelter. The City will ensure that the land designated –ES is adequate to meet the
                  City’s need for emergency shelter housing.
                  To ensure that the selected properties with the Overlay Zoning remain available for the
                  development of or expansion of emergency shelters, the City’s ordinance will include a
                  monitoring element.
                  FARM WORKERS
                  To the extent that farm workers are primarily lower-income residents, their housing needs
                  would be similar to other lower-income households. At one time, much of California’s
                  agricultural production depended primarily on migrant farm workers. A special housing need
                  arises when farm workers must travel from place to place to harvest various crops. Their
                  need is for temporary shelter during harvest time close to their location of employment.
                  They may also require housing at their home base during the remainder of the year.
                  However, given the high rate of urbanization in Fairfield over the past 20 years, along with
                  changes in local agriculture industries, farm worker residents are likely to be permanent,
                  rather than migrant farm workers. The special housing needs among the permanent farm
                  worker population are for the same type of financial assistance that other low-income
                  residents would require.
                  Although farm workers still represent a special housing need in many communities, the
                  advent of mechanization in harvesting crops, new planting techniques, and changes in the
                  types of crops grown have substantially reduced the overall number of farm workers and the
                  proportion of migrant farm workers. Urbanization has further decreased agricultural
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                              CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                              A-22

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
employment in Solano County. There are no working farms within the city limits, except for
limited cattle grazing operations, including City-owned open space properties.
The 2000 Census counted 160 persons (<1 percent) involved in agriculture, forestry, fishing,
and mining occupations in a civilian labor force of 39,186. As there is almost no forestry
mining, or fishing activities in Fairfield, a majority, if not all, of these 160 persons would be
involved in agriculture.
Countywide numbers help quantify the population. According to the California Human
Development Corporation and the California Employment Development Division, studies
indicate that there are 3,000-4,000 migrant workers in Solano County as a whole. In the
vicinity of Fairfield, the orchard crops have been largely replaced with wine grapes in the
Suisun Valley. The Farm Bureau estimates based on a local informal survey, that a typical
125-acre vineyard would employ 10 persons on a semi-permanent basis. If the wine grape
acreage expands in the Fairfield area, additional workers may locate within the city limits.
Others will reside in farm worker housing in or adjacent to unincorporated Solano County,
including camps near Winters (Yolo County) and Dixon.
Most farm workers would have housing needs similar to other lower-income residents. Such
residents can be housed through the City’s existing lower-income housing programs. Migrant
workers may need temporary housing. Through the first-time homebuyer program, farm
workers have been able to purchase homes in Fairfield.
One form of housing that may be suitable for migrant farm workers is the boarding house.
The Fairfield Zoning Ordinance conditionally permits boarding houses in the RH and RVH
zoning districts, as well as in the CD commercial zoning districts. Boarding houses are also
permitted outright in the CM zoning district. Boarding houses can provide an affordable,
temporary housing for migrant farm workers, particularly single individuals.
Another form of housing suitable for migrant farm workers may be Single Room Occupancy
housing. The City amended its zoning ordinance to encourage the operators of older motels
to legalize longer term residence in motels which no longer serve highway travelers. These
older motels could be upgraded and converted to higher quality SRO housing. SRO housing
is also permitted in the CM zoning district near downtown Fairfield.
MILITARY EMPLOYEES                       OF    TRAVIS AIR FORCE BASE
Travis Air Force Base (AFB) is located within the City of Fairfield, in the northeast part of
town. The base has a long and proud history of supporting humanitarian airlift operations at
home and around the world. Today, the base includes approximately 7,260 active military
personnel, 3,770 civilians, and 4,250 reservists.
Travis AFB has long been an important factor in the employment in the City. Known as the
“Gateway to the Pacific,” Travis Air Force Base handles more cargo and passenger traffic
through its airport than any other military air terminal in the United States. Travis AFB has a
major impact on the community as a number of military families and retirees have chosen to
make Fairfield their permanent home. Travis AFB is the largest employer in the City and
Solano County as well, and the massive Travis workforce has a local economic impact of
more than $1 billion annually. The base also contributes a large number of highly skilled
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                 DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                              A-23

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                  people to the local labor pool. David Grant Medical Center annually supports over 308,000
                  outpatient visits, 5,100 admissions, 40,500 dental visits, and 116 research protocols with 124
                  residents and 2,142 staff.
                  Because military personnel, by the nature of their employment, are mobile, and the income
                  level of enlisted personnel is relatively low, they need rental housing that is affordable to
                  low- and moderate-income households and that is available on a monthly basis (in contrast
                  to a long-term lease). Military personnel with dependents need affordable family housing,
                  with recreational amenities for children.
                  Travis Air Force has privatized its on-base housing program. Balfour Beatty Communities
                  (BBC) operates the on-base family housing program and is responsible for maintaining,
                  repairing, constructing and managing the housing on the base. Balfour Beatty currently
                  operates 1,320 housing units at Travis Air Force Base which include a mixture of 2, 3, and 4
                  bedroom units. These housing units are very similar in appearance and amenities to private
                  housing in the local market.
                  The Air Force has ended its relationship with the operators of Georgetown
                  Apartments/Patriot Village, the apartment complex located north of the base proper. The
                  complex is currently vacant.
                  PROJECTED HOUSING NEED
                  The “demand” for housing is based on the total number of households divided into four
                  household income categories. These income categories are based on the median household
                  for Solano County. The Association of Bay Area Governments and HCD classify income as
                  follows:
                          Extremely low-income: 30 percent of median income and below
                          Very low-income: 31 to 50 percent of median income
                          Low-income: 51 to 80 percent of median income
                          Moderate-income: 81 percent to 120 percent of median income
                          Above moderate-income: over 120 percent of median income
                  REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION
                  A Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP) is mandated by the State of California
                  (Government Code, Section 65584), and it requires regions to address expected housing
                  issues and needs, which are based on future growth projections for the area. The RHNP is
                  developed by the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) and allocates to cities and
                  counties their “fair share” of the region’s projected housing needs. A fair share of housing
                  units is calculated for each of four income groups based on a jurisdiction’s current share of
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-24

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                       ASSESSMENT
housing for different income levels and on the jurisdiction’s amount of available vacant land.
Fair share needs are allocated over the planning period for every jurisdiction’s Housing
Element. This cycle, the Planning Period is 2014-2022.
The intent of the RHNP is to ensure that local jurisdictions address not only the needs of
their immediate areas but also help meet the housing needs for the entire region. A major
goal of the RHNP is to ensure that every community provides an opportunity for a mix of
affordable housing to all economic segments of its population. The RHNP jurisdictional
allocations are made to guarantee that adequate sites and zoning are provided to address
existing and anticipated housing demands during the planning period and that market forces
are not inhibited in addressing the housing needs for all populations within a particular
community.
During this cycle, the State permitted local jurisdictions to form “subregions” to allocate
countywide allocations. Fairfield joined Solano County and the cities of the county to review
and allocated the overall housing need calculated by ABAG for the County. The cities and
County agreed on the allocation provided in Table A-16 for the planning period 2014-2022
for each of the household income groups for the City of Fairfield.
                                        TABLE A-16
     2014-2022 FAIRFIELD REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS
                                        ALLOCATION
                 Income Category                               RHNA 2014-2022
  Extremely Low                                                       389
  Very Low                                                            390
  Low                                                                 404
  Moderate                                                            456
  Above Moderate                                                     1,461
  Total                                                              3,100
Source: ABAG Housing Element Data Set
HOUSING            MARKET             CHARACTERISTICS
This section addresses the various housing characteristics and conditions, including the
housing stock growth trends, tenure and vacancy rates, age and condition, housing costs, and
affordability, among others.
Housing Tenure
As shown in Table A-17 below, despite the economic crisis, housing tenure has not changed
in Fairfield significantly being almost evenly divided in Fairfield in 2000 and 2010, with 60
percent of housing units occupied by owners and 40 percent rented.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                           A-25

                             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                            ASSESSMENT
                                                                     TABLE A-17
                                          HOUSEHOLD TENURE (2000-2010)
                                                                    City of Fairfield                       Solano County
                          Tenure                          2000                           2010                     2010
                                             Number Percentage Number Percentage                        Number Percentage
                   Owner-Occupied              18,463              60%          20,835          60%      89,648         63.2%
                   Renter-Occupied             12,509              40%          13,649          40%      52,110         36.8%
                   Total Occupied
                                               30,972             100%          34,784         100%     130,403         100%
                    Housing Units
                  Source: 2010 U.S. Census, ABAG Data Set
                  Housing Type
                  As shown in Table A-18, in 2010 more than two thirds (69 percent) of Fairfield’s housing
                  stock consisted of detached, single-family homes. There were also 2,419 attached, single-
                  family homes. Multi-family housing with five or more units accounted for 17 percent of the
                  housing stock. These percentages are similar to those for Solano County as a whole,
                  although Fairfield does have a slightly higher percentage of multifamily housing.
                                                                     TABLE A-18
                                                  HOUSING UNIT TYPE (2010)
                                                                               City of Fairfield         Solano County
                                     Housing Type
                                                                           Number       Percentage  Number       Percentage
                       Single-Family Detached                              25,665       69%         109,059      71%
                       Single-Family Attached                              2,419        7%          6,592        4%
                       Multi-Family 2-4 Units                              2,015        5%          11,213       7%
                       Multi-Family 5+ Units                               6,086        16%         21,252       14%
                       Mobile Homes/Other                                  999          3%          4,582        3%
                       Total Units                                         37,184       100%        134,513      100%
                     Source: State Department of Finance, as reported in ABAG Data Set
                  Overcrowded Households
                  According to the U.S. Census, overcrowding occurs where there is more than 1.01 persons
                  per room (excluding bathrooms and kitchens) in an occupied housing unit and severe
                  overcrowding occurs when there is more than 1.5 persons per room. Overcrowding usually
                  occurs when there is an inadequate supply of affordable housing. In addition, as discussed
                  above, larger households (with five or more members) typically experience higher levels of
                  overcrowding. As shown in Table A-19, 1,570 out of 33,270 housing units are
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                               CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                       A-26

               APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                           ASSESSMENT
“overcrowded” (4.7%). Of those units, 495 (31.5%) were owner-occupied and 1,075 (68.5%)
were renter-occupied units.
                                             TABLE A-19
                    OVERCROWDED HOUSEHOLDS (2010)
                                  Owner-Occupied           Renter-Occupied            Total
  Persons per room
                               Number       Percentage  Number      Percentage Number       Percent
Overcrowded (1.00 to
                              410           82.8%       900         83.7%      1,310        83.4%
1.50)
Severely Overcrowded
                              85            17.1%       175         16.3%      260          16.6%
(1.00 to 1.50)
Total                         495           100%        1,075       100%       1,570        100%
   Source: 2006-2010 ACS, as reported in ABAG Data Set
Housing Vacancy
Vacancy trends are a way of analyzing housing supply and demand. For example, if the
housing demand is greater than the supply, the vacancy rate is likely to be lower and the
price of housing increasing. The 2010 Census (as reported in the ABAG Data Sets) reported
that 2,700 (7percent) of the 37,184 housing units were vacant, a vacancy rate which is more
than double the 2000 reported rate. This may reflect the housing crisis and the loss of jobs
during the recession. Note the large number of “other” vacant units, which may be homes
repossessed by banks but not placed on the rental or for sale markets. Table A-20
summarizes distribution of vacant housing units in the City and Solano County in 2010.
                                             TABLE A-20
                    VACANCY               STATUS BY TENURE (2010)
                     Vacancy Status                          City of Fairfield    Solano County
  Units for rent                                                   1,048               4,342
  Units for sale only                                               545                2,296
  Rented or sold, not occupied                                      116                 571
  Units for seasonal, recreational, or occasional use               62                  589
  Units for migrant workers                                          0                   39
  Other vacant                                                      929                3,103
  Total Vacant Housing Units                                       2,700              10,940
 Source: 2010 U.S. Census as reported in ABAG Data Sets
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                   DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                 A-27

                          APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                     ASSESSMENT
                  Age of Housing Stock
                  According to the 2008 Claritas Report and City of Fairfield Building Division records,
                  almost half (44 percent) of Fairfield’s housing stock is over 35 years old and 32 percent has
                  been constructed within the past 13 years. Table A-21 shows the total building permits
                  issued per year from 1999 to 2013, broken down by multi-family and single-family permits.
                                                             TABLE A-21
                                        AGE       OF     HOUSING STOCK (2013)
                                             Year Built                       Number                   Percentage
                                Built 1999 to 2013                               7,130                      19%
                                Built 1995 to 1998                               2,556                       7%
                                Built 1990 to 1994                               3,388                      9%
                                Built 1980 to 1989                               7,294                      20%
                                Built 1970 to 1979                               7,321                      20%
                                Built 1960 to 1969                               5,126                      14%
                                Built 1950 to 1959                               3,551                      10%
                                Built 1940 to 1949                               1,017                       3%
                                Built 1939 or earlier                             397                       1%
                                Total                                           37,780                     100%
                                Source: 2000 U.S. Census, 2008 Claritas Report, City of Fairfield Building Records
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                 A-28

                 APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                   ASSESSMENT
                                     TABLE A-22
                  BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (2003-2013)
               Year             Single-Family           Multi-Family            TOTAL
 2003                                601                      466                  786
 2004                                922                      128                 1,050
 2005                                833                        8                  841
 2006                                241                        2                  243
 2007                                180                       26                  206
 2008                                 35                        0                  35
 2009                                185                        0                  185
 2010                                185                        0                  185
 2011                                180                        0                  180
 2012                                277                        0                  277
 2013                                219                        0                  219
 Total
Source: City of Fairfield, 2013
HOUSING CONDITIONS SURVEY
This section assesses the conditions of housing in the City of Fairfield. This analysis may
assist the Community Resources Department in developing strategies for improving or
preserving existing neighborhoods.
PMC staff conducted a “windshield survey” from a car in April 2008 in a broad sample of
Fairfield neighborhoods. Interior conditions were not surveyed. The survey found housing
units in need of moderate or minor repairs in many neighborhoods but only a few units in
need of substantial repairs. The survey used assessor parcel data from the County to
determine the specific number of units that would be surveyed. While some neighborhoods
had lower income families and higher foreclosure rates, the neighborhoods selected were
diverse in age, home price, and condition. The map below (page A-35) indicates the units
surveyed in shaded green. 3,551 units were surveyed.
The City did not conduct a new survey in 2014. Overall conditions have not changed since
significantly since 2008 with the exception of vacant housing units associated with the
foreclosure crisis. The City adopted regulations to require property owners of vacant units to
maintain their property in such a manner as not to degrade neighborhood quality.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                           A-29

                          APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                 ASSESSMENT
                  Definition of Housing Conditions
                         SOUND – A unit that appears new or well maintained and structurally intact. The
                          foundation should appear structurally undamaged and there should be straight roof
                          lines. Siding, windows, and doors should be in good repair with good exterior paint
                          condition. Minor problems such as small areas of peeling paint and/or other
                          maintenance items are allowable under this category.
                         MINOR – A unit that show signs of deferred maintenance or which needs only one
                          major component, such as a roof.
                         MODERATE – A unit in need of replacement of one or more major components
                          and other repairs, such as roof replacement, painting, and window repairs.
                         SUBSTANTIAL – A unit that requires replacement of several major systems and
                          possibly other repairs (e.g., complete foundation work, roof structure replacement
                          and re-roofing, as well as painting and window replacement).
                         DILAPIDATED – A unit suffering from excessive neglect, where the building
                          appears structurally unsound and maintenance is non-existent, not fit for human
                          habitation in its current condition, may be considered for demolition or at
                          minimum, major rehabilitation will be required.
                  Detailed Survey Results
                  Many of the homes surveyed in the City of Fairfield were categorized as sound or minor.
                  Less than one-half of 1 percent of the surveyed units were found to need substantial repair
                  and none of the surveyed units were found to be in dilapidated condition. Table A-23
                  summarizes the overall condition of all of the homes surveyed in the City. Ninety three (93)
                  percent of the homes surveyed in the City of Fairfield were in sound condition or needed
                  minor repairs. Roughly 7 percent of the remaining homes surveyed were in moderate
                  condition, which means they are in need of one or more major repairs, such as a roof
                  replacement and window repair or replacement. Approximately 0.4 percent of the homes
                  surveyed fell into the substantial categories. These homes require many repairs and
                  replacements that often include structural repairs (i.e., roofs or foundations).
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                              A-30

                 APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                           ASSESSMENT
                                              TABLE A-23
                  HOUSING CONDITIONS SURVEY RESULTS
       Condition                Number of Units Surveyed                  Percentage
Sound                                         2,453                           69%
Minor                                          852                            24%
Moderate                                       232                             7%
Substantial                                    14                            <1%
Dilapidated                                     0                               0
Vacant lots                                     0                               0
Total                                         3,551                          100%
Source: PMC Housing Conditions Survey April 2008
As shown in Table A-24, 93 percent of the single-family homes surveyed were in sound
condition or needed minor repairs. Six (6) percent of the homes required moderate repairs.
A total of 14 (less than 1 percent) units were found to be in need of substantial repair.
                                              TABLE A-24
                   SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED/DETACHED
                   Condition                     Number of Units Surveyed       Percentage
Sound                                                    2,426 *                    69%
Minor                                                     839 *                     24%
Moderate                                                  221 *                      6%
Substantial                                                14                      <1%
Dilapidated                                                 0                        0%
Total                                                     3,500                    100%
Source: PMC Housing Conditions Survey April 2008
* Includes 26 foreclosed homes
Table A-25 illustrates that roughly half of the duplexes assessed were found to be in sound
condition, below the number for single-family units. The percentage of units requiring minor
repairs is the same as that for single family homes 25 percent). However, a higher percentage
of the duplexes surveyed are in moderate condition meaning that there is a higher need for
duplexes in Fairfield to have major components replaced.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                             DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                  A-31
                              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                               ASSESSMENT
                                                                   TABLE A-25
                                                                    DUPLEXES
                              Condition                         Number of Units Surveyed   Percentage
                   Sound                                                  19                   49%
                   Minor                                                  10                   25%
                   Moderate                                               10                   25%
                   Substantial                                             0                   0%
                   Dilapidated                                             0                    0%
                   Total                                                  39                  100%
                  Source: PMC Housing Conditions Survey April 2008
                  Table A-26 summarizes survey results for multi-family housing. The majority of multi-
                  family projects (67 percent) appeared to be in sound condition requiring very minor to no
                  repairs. One quarter (25 percent) of the multi-family structures surveyed needed minor
                  repairs or one major repair and only 1 project (8 percent) was found to need moderate
                  repair.
                                                                   TABLE A-26
                                                        MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING
                              Condition                        Number of Projects Surveyed Percentage
                   Sound                                                    8                  67%
                   Minor                                                   3                   25%
                   Moderate                                                 1                   8%
                   Substantial                                             0                    0%
                   Dilapidated                                              0                   0%
                   Total                                                   12                 100%
                  Source: PMC Housing Conditions Survey April 2008
                  Note: this is a count of multi-family building.
                  Table A-27 summarizes survey data on both attached and detached single-family units in
                  foreclosure. The majority of the foreclosed homes surveyed were found to be in either
                  sound or minor condition, meaning very few repairs or replacement of any major
                  components needed. Of the 26 foreclosed homes surveyed, only two were found to be in
                  need of moderate fixes.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                          A-32
             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                           ASSESSMENT
                                              TABLE A-27
                                   FORECLOSURES (2008)
          Condition                    Number of Units Surveyed     Percentage
Sound                                            13                     50%
Minor                                            11                     42%
Moderate                                          2                      8%
Substantial                                       0                     0%
Dilapidated                                       0                      0%
Total                                            26                    100%
Source: PMC Housing Conditions Survey April 2008
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                               A-33
                  APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                           ASSESSMENT
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                         CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                        A-34
                 APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
HOUSING COSTS                  AND    AFFORDABILITY
The cost of housing is directly related to the extent of housing problems in a community. If
housing costs are relatively high in comparison to household income, there will be a higher
prevalence of housing cost burden and overcrowding. This section summarizes the cost and
affordability of the housing stock.
Housing Costs
As confirmed in the data compiled by Data Quick Services, home prices have continued to
recover from their low point in 2008, after the collapse of the housing market. To provide
context, Table A-28 provides the Data Quick numbers for all Solano County communities.
The market recovery includes substantial investment by institutional funding sources and
involves a large number of “cash deals”
                                      TABLE A-28
                       HOME       SALE ACTIVITY (2012)
   Community            # Sales       Average 2012         Average 2011        Change
   Solano County            6,383          $251,000             $193,000         30.05%
   Benicia                   441           $413,000             $307,500         34.31%
   Dixon                     225           $275,000             $210,000         30.95%
   Elmira                     3            $107,000             $187,500         -42.93%
   Fairfield                1,636          $270,500             $220,000         22.95%
   Rio Vista                 377           $235,250             $179,000         31.42%
   Suisun City               371           $225,000             $170,000         32.35%
   Vacaville                1,520          $285,000             $225,000         26.67%
   Vallejo                  1,736          $186,000             $148,250         25.46%
Source: dqonline.com
For this Housing Element, staff also reviewed the projects currently (2014) being marketed
in Fairfield. There has been some recovery in the new home marketplace, and prices have
now risen substantially over the 2008 levels. Projects under development in 2014 included:
          Mackenzie Lane at Goldridge (from the $400,000s)
          Oliver Canyon at Goldridge (from the high $400s)
          Madison Park (from the high $300s))
          Reagans Run II (from the low $300s)
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                            DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                           A-35

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                          Symphony (Cordelia) (from $425s)
                          Turnstone Park at Green Valley ($400s)
                  Given the estimated affordability limits for households discussed below, these projects are
                  going to be affordable only to above-moderate income households, although homes at
                  Reagans’ Run and Madison Park may be affordable to some moderate income households.
                  Foreclosures
                  As discussed previously, Solano County has one of the higher foreclosure rates in the State
                  and the Nation. During the peak of the foreclosure crisis, Trulia Real Estate reported that
                  the City of Fairfield had 1,422 homes in foreclosure in October 2008. City of Fairfield data
                  shows that there were 2,853 properties which received Notices of Default, underwent
                  Trustee Sales, or are registered as Bank Owned Properties during the year between February
                  1, 2013 and February 1, 2014. While this represents a decline in overall new foreclosures,
                  there remain a significant number of foreclosed homes (as shown by the high number of
                  vacant homes not on the market). In addition, many households remain frozen out of the
                  more stringent credit markets, making full recovery in the housing market difficult. This is
                  reflected in continued slower housing development in Fairfield.
                  While housing development has recovered from the market collapse in 2007-2008, the
                  permit numbers in the 180-270 range over the past several years remain well below long
                  term numbers. The high number of foreclosed homes in the Fairfield market remains one of
                  the impediments to full recovery of the local and regional development marketplace.
                  Foreclosure assistance and homeownership preservation will be a top priority through the
                  end of the planning period. The Federal Neighborhood Stabilization program provides
                  funds with the goal of stabilizing areas suffering from high foreclosure and abandonment
                  rates. The funding is provided through the US Department of Housing and Urban
                  Development (HUD) as a part of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act passes by
                  Congress. Even though the City has a high rate of foreclosures, it will not receive any direct
                  funding through the Neighborhood Stabilization program but will apply for funding through
                  the state to help address the problem. NSP funding paid for a series of workshops in 2007
                  and 2008, and the City has expended its initial funding allocation. While the City does not
                  anticipate further funding being made available, the City does administer NSP-13 funds for
                  one neighborhood in unincorporated Solano County and one neighborhood in the City.
                  This neighborhood was particularly impacted by the crisis.
                  Rental Housing Market
                  In the past, the City conducted an annual rental survey to evaluate what the residents are
                  paying for housing. Table A-29 shows average rents between 2000 and 2008. The City also
                  compiled median rents for Suisun City and Vacaville. In 2008, the median rent for a two
                  bedroom unit in Fairfield was $985 compared to Suisun at $1,090 and Vacaville at $925.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                               CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-36

                 APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                ASSESSMENT
                                                   TABLE A-29
                                    2008 APARTMENT RENTS
           Year                    Studio          1 Bedroom  2 Bedrooms     3 Bedrooms    4 Bedrooms
 March 2000                         $523              $638       $700            $810         $1,295
 October 2000                       $575               $713      $763           $1,000         n/a
 October 2001                       $650              $800       $875           $1,098         n/a
 March 2001                         $675              $789       $902           $1,222         n/a
 October 2002                       $575              $725       $769           $1,100         n/a
 March 2003                         $675              $825       $900           $1,199         n/a
 November 2003                      $700              $825       $938           $1,185         n/a
 November 2004                      $700              $800       $923           $1,173         n/a
 November 2005                      $750              $825       $925           $1,195         n/a
 November 2006                      $713              $830       $950           $1,198         n/a
 November 2007                      $705              $815       $930           $1,375         n/a
 November 2008                      $698              $880       $985           $1,348         n/a
 Source: City of Fairfield, Rental Survey, November 2008
The City no longer compiles this survey and information on rents is limited. The ABAG
Data Set, based on the 2006-2011 ACS, found a median gross rent in Fairfield of $1,196.
This is similar to the countywide median gross rent of $1,222. Note that this Census data is
for all rental properties and thus includes rental single family homes as well as apartments.
Mobile Home Park Rents
Fairfield has several mobile home parks. Space rents range anywhere from $335 to $455.
Many households in the very low- and low-income categories would be able to afford these
space rents, assuming park tenants already own their units.
                                                   TABLE A-30
                          MOBILE             HOME PARK SPACE RENTS
                      Park Name                             Number of Spaces           Monthly Rent
            Dover Mobile Home Park                                210                     $430
                County Club Estates*                              207                     $430
                     Pacific Estates                              175                     $335
                 Fairfield M H Park *                              64                     $445
                Casa Nova M H Park                                131                     $450
                    Solano Lodge*                                  30                     $450
                           Total                                  817                       -
Source: City of Fairfield Rental Survey, April 2014
* includes water, garbage and cable
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                     DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                      A-37
                             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                               ASSESSMENT
                  HOUSING AFFORDABILITY                                         AND       HOUSEHOLD INCOME
                  Housing affordability can be inferred by comparing the cost of renting or owning a home in
                  Solano County with the maximum affordable housing costs to households at different
                  income levels. In evaluating affordability, the maximum affordable price refers to the
                  maximum amount that could be afforded by households in the upper range of their
                  respective income category. Households in the lower end of each category can afford less in
                  comparison. The maximum affordable home and rental prices for residents of Solano
                  County are shown in Table A-31 and Table A-32. Taken together, this information can
                  generally show who can afford what size and type of housing. The affordability of the
                  County’s housing stock for each income group is discussed below. HCD has estimated the
                  2014 County Area Median Income (AMI) to be $76,700. Due to the economic slowdown,
                  income levels-and related housing affordability numbers-have not changed substantially
                  since 2008.
                                                                        TABLE A-31
                       AFFORDABLE                         RENTER-OCCUPIED HOUSING COSTS,
                                                                  SOLANO COUNTY
                                                                      Household Rent Levels
                         Income Group                         1-Person           2-Person       3-Person    4-Person
                                                                  Extremely Low (less than 30%)
                          Monthly Rent                           $403               $460           $518        $575
                        Monthly Income                          $1,342            $1,533          $1,725      $1,917
                                                                      Very Low (31% to 50%)
                          Monthly Rent                           $671               $768           $864        $959
                        Monthly Income                          $2,238            $2,558          $2,879      $3,196
                                                                          Low (51% to 80%)
                          Monthly Rent                          $1,074            $1,228          $1,381      $1,534
                        Monthly Income                          $3,579            $4,092          $4,604      $5,113
                                                                      Moderate (81% to 120%)
                          Monthly Rent                          $1,603             $1,833         $2,063      $2,288
                        Monthly Income                          $5,342            $6,108          $6,875      $7,625
                                                               Above Moderate (more than 120%)
                          Monthly Rent                         >$1,603            >$1,833        >$2,063     >$2,288
                        Monthly Income                         >$5,342            >$6,108        >$6,875     >$7,625
                  Source: 2014 Income Limits, Department of Housing and Community Development
                   Note: Utilities are not included due to the varying costs
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                        CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                           A-38

                 APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                                                      TABLE A-32
      AFFORDABLE OWNER-OCCUPIED HOUSING COSTS,
                                                SOLANO COUNTY
                                                    Household Sales Price
         Income Group                           1-Person       2-Person       3-Person  4-Person
 Extremely Low (less than 30%)
 Maximum Sales Price                             $54,016         $61,732        $69,449  $77,165
 Annual Income                                   $16,100         $18,400        $20,700  $23,000
 Very Low (31% to 50%)
 Maximum Sales Price                             $90,850        $102,999       $115,915 $128,664
 Annual Income                                   $26,850         $30,700        $34,550  $38,350
 Low (51% to 80%
 Maximum Sales Price                            $144,097        $164,731      $185,364  $205,829
 Annual Income                                   $42,950         $49,100        $55,250  $61,350
 Moderate (80% to 120%)
 Maximum Sales Price                            $215,056        $245,922       $276,788 $306,983
 Annual Income                                   $64,100         $73,300        $82,500  $91,500
 Above Moderate (more than 120%)
 Maximum Sales Price                           >$215,056       >$245,922      >$276,788 >$306,983
 Annual Income                                  >$64,100       >$73,300       >$82,500  >$91,500
Source: Department of Housing and Community Development, 2014 Income Limits,
 Note: Utilities are not included due to the varying costs
Overpayment
Overpayment is defined as monthly shelter costs in excess of 30 percent of a household’s
income. Severe overpayment is defined as paying over 50% of household income for shelter
costs. Shelter cost is defined as the monthly owner costs (mortgages, deed of trust, contracts
to purchase or similar debts on the property and taxes, insurance on the property, and
utilities) or the gross rent (contract rent plus the estimated monthly cost of utilities).
According to the 2006-2010 CHAS, (based on the Census Bureau American Community
Survey in the ABAG Data Set), 8,509 households in Fairfield pay between 30-50% of their
incomes for housing (25.6%) and an additional 7,204 (21.6%) are severely overpaying. This
means that almost half of Fairfield households are paying above the recommended HUD
standard for housing costs.
In some cases, overpayment may be voluntary as some higher income households choose to
dedicate a higher percentage of their incomes to housing. Of the 15,713 households
overpaying in Fairfield, 4% can be defined as above moderate income and another 11.8%
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                 DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                         A-39

                             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                  moderate income households. Of course, 84% of the households overpaying for housing are
                  low or very low income households, demonstrating an affordability problem for many
                  households in Fairfield. Table A-33 illustrates the extent of overpayment by income group
                  for the City.
                                                        TABLE A-33
                            HOUSEHOLDS OVERPAYING BY INCOME (2010)
                                                                30%-50% Income           Greater than 50%
                            Income Group            Tenure
                                                             Number     Percentage    Number       Percentage
                   Very Low (31% to 50%)            Owners      210                     1,485
                                                    Renters     940                     2,815
                   Low (51% to 80%)                 Owners      760                     1,060
                                                    Renters    1,065                     200
                   Moderate (80% to 120%)           Owners     1,780                    1,025
                                                    Renters     839                       30
                   Above Moderate (more than
                                                    Owners     2,795                     574
                   120%)
                                                    Renters     120                       15
                  Source: 2006-2010 CHAS/ACS, ABAG Data Set
                  AFFORDABLE PROJECTS                       IN  FAIRFIELD
                  State Housing Element law requires that communities identify the status of low-income
                  rental units that are “at risk” of conversion to market rent status within ten years of the
                  statutory mandated update of the Housing Element (from January 2014 to January 2014). As
                  shown in Table A-34 below, the City of Fairfield has significant assisted rental housing,
                  totaling 1,671 units. The inventory includes units assisted under federal, state, and local
                  programs.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                             CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-40

                APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                              ASSESSMENT
                                                  TABLE A-34
                  ASSISTED HOUSING INVENTORY (2013)
   Project Name                 Tenant Type              Assisted Units                    Funding Source
Parkway Plaza                       Elderly                       99                     202 Elderly, Section 8
Monument Arms                        Family                      137                     Tax Credit, Section 8
The Groves                           Family                       61                          Tax Credit
Stoneybrook                          Family                      90                        CDBG, HOME
Woodside Court                       Family                      127                          Tax Credit
Woodsong                             Family                      116                     Tax Credit, Section 8
San Marco                            Family                        5                            HOME
Filmore Street
                                     Family                       12                        HOME,CDBG
Apartments
Sunset Creek                         Family                       76                       Tax Credit, RDA
Fairfield Vista                      Family                      60                           Tax Credit
Quail Terrace                        Family                       26                           CalHFA
Sheffield Greens                     Family                       26                           CalHFA
Parkside Villa                       Family                       64                           Section 8
Rockwell Manor                       Family                       64                           Section 8
Orchard Family
                                     Family                       99                     HOME, RDA, CDBG
Crossing
Gateway Village                      Family                       56             HOME, RDA, CDBG, Tax Credit
                                                                                 HOME, RDA, CDBG, Tax Credit,
Union Square                         Family                       56
                                                                                                 MHP
                                                                                 HOME, RDA, CDBG, Tax Credit,
Laurel Gardens                  Special Needs                     29
                                                                                                 MHP
Dover Woods                          Senior                      198                          Tax Credit
Dover Park                           Family                      178                   RDA, Tax Exempt Bond
Jackson Street
                                     Family                        8                     HOME, RDA, CDBG
Apartments
Senior Manor                         Senior                       84                             RDA
Total                                                           1,671
Source: City of Fairfield, 2008, California Housing Partnership Corporation, August 2008
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                              A-41
                            APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                  At-Risk Projects
                  Several projects have Section 8 project-based subsidies tied to their original construction
                  loans. These properties, which received governmental assistance in order to help fund
                  development, are one of the larger sources of affordable housing in Fairfield. The original
                  federal programs included provisions allowing property owners to convert their projects to
                  market rents.
                  Under State law, units “at risk” are those in projects with Section 8 project-based subsidies
                  eligible to convert to market rate within five years. “Lower risk” indicates the property may
                  convert within a five- to ten-year period, and “low risk” indicates that a property cannot
                  convert for at least ten years.
                  The California Housing Partnership Corporation (CHPC) identified (August 2014) that three
                  properties are at “high” or “very high” risk of conversion: Monument Arms, Parkside Villa,
                  and Rockwell Manor because their project-based Section 8 contracts expire during 2014 and
                  2018. A fourth Section 8 HUD project, Parkway Plaza, is not identified as “at risk:” by
                  CHPC because the Section 8 contract expiration date is 2030.
                  Monument Arms is owned by Jamboree Housing, a non-profit housing provider. While the
                  project-based Section 8 subsidies potentially expire in 2018, Jamboree’s focus is on providing
                  affordable housing and the risk of non-renewal was minimal.
                  In August 2014, the owners of Monument Arms renewed the project-based subsidies for 66
                  units. This new HUD subsidy will preserve the affordability of the units for 25 years.
                  For the remaining 31 units, Jamboree Housing elected to work with the City of Fairfield to
                  replace the project-based subsidies with enhanced tenant-based vouchers. These vouchers
                  will be tied to the property for one year, and tenants can elect to remain at Monument Arms
                  after that period or receive a “regular” voucher and move to new housing. The 31 units will
                  remain affordable, but the enhanced voucher program provides the tenants with more
                  flexibility in finding suitable housing. Because of these new programs, Monument Arms is
                  not considered at risk of conversion to market rent housing.
                  Parkside Villa and Rockwell Manor are owned by private, for profit firms. While the Section
                  8 program provides a steady income stream for property owners, there is no requirement or
                  guarantee that these property owners maintain affordability. The owners of Rockwell Manor
                  are currently working with HCD regarding options for their property.
                  COST ANALYSIS
                  The cost of preserving the assisted units is estimated to be significantly less than that
                  required to replace the units through new construction. Preserving assisted units generally
                  requires subsidizing the difference between market rate and assisted rents. Since land prices
                  and land availability are generally the limiting factors to development of low-income
                  housing, it is estimated that subsidizing rents to preserve assisted housing is more feasible
                  and economical than new construction.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                A-42

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                   ASSESSMENT
Generally, low- and moderate-income households can afford rents for two- and three-
bedroom apartments without experiencing overpayment. However, extremely low- and very
low-income households would find it more difficult to obtain rental housing at an affordable
price without overpaying.
To understand the costs of replacing housing, City staff contacted A. G. Spanos Companies,
the developer of the forthcoming Green Valley Apartments project. Spanos also constructed
Park Crossing Apartments on West Texas Street, a higher end market rate project. While
such a project is not directly comparable to lower cost affordable apartments like the at-risk
units, total development, the Project Manager for A.G. Spanos Companies, estimated that
total development cost in 2003 was $125,000 per unit and could be as high as $185,000 per
unit in 2014. Based on these figures, it would cost approximately $23,680,000to replace the
128 at-risk units with new construction.
A much more affordable option would be for a nonprofit organization to purchase an
existing older market rent multi-family complex, rather than build a new one. The City can
work with nonprofits if renovation is required. According to Realtor.com (September 2014),
one 50 unit apartment complex built in 1966 was on the market and listed at $4,150,000, or
$83,000 per unit. Another, 23-unit project built in 1960 is also on the market for $2,250,000,
or $97,826 per unit. These numbers are less than half of the cost of new construction.
Again, the Spanos project is a higher end complex, and new construction could be somewhat
cheaper if a more basic project were developed.
RESOURCES FOR PRESERVATION
Two primary resources are available for preserving at-risk units: (1) public agencies,
nonprofit housing corporations, and tenant groups, and (2) public financing or subsidy
programs. Section III, Housing Resources, includes a list of public funding sources and
regional nonprofit housing organizations active in or interested in operating in Fairfield.
The City would work with these organizations to preserve the housing units in danger of
conversion.
Regarding Section 8 projects, the property owner can opt to terminate the Section 8 contract
(“opt out”) or renew the contract. The primary incentive for Section 8 property owners to
opt out of their regulatory agreement is monetary. Market rents in some communities have
risen to the point at which many property owners can earn more by prepaying their
government assistance, even if they have to borrow money at market interest rates. This
may not necessarily be the case in central Fairfield, as older apartment buildings do not
command the highest rents in the community.
For the property owner to successfully opt out of the Section 8 contract, the owner must
satisfy certain procedural requirements. A Notice of Intent (NOI) must be filed with HUD
one year before the termination date that indicates the owner’s intent to convert the units to
market rate. Failure to file an NOI within the specified time frame or to follow the other
procedures to opt out of the Section 8 contract results in an automatic contract rollover for
five years.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                           A-43

                          APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                 ASSESSMENT
                  Upon filing of an NOI, HUD may offer several incentives to property owners to remain in
                  their contracts, including refinancing the property mortgage and establishing higher rents
                  charged for the projects.
                  Pursuant to Section 65863.10 of the Government Code, the property owner of a Section 8
                  contract must also provide six months advance notification to each tenant household if the
                  property owner intends to terminate the Section 8 contract. The notice must indicate the
                  anticipated date of conversion and the anticipated rent increase, the possibility of remaining
                  subsidized, the owner’s intentions, and the appropriate contacts for additional information.
                  The property owner must also send a copy of the statement to the city or county where the
                  property is located, to the appropriate local housing authority, and to the Department of
                  Housing and Community Development. The statement must indicate the number, age, and
                  income of affected tenants, the type of assistance, and the owner’s plans for the project.
                  Upon receipt of notice, the city may contact the owner to determine if there are financial or
                  other incentives that could induce the owner to maintain the rent and occupancy restrictions
                  or to sell the property to another owner who will maintain the affordability of the rental
                  units. The city cannot block the owner’s ability to prepay if state and federal requirements
                  for notification are followed and other procedural requirements are met prior to prepayment
                  and the termination of restrictions. The city can monitor the process to ensure that all state
                  and federal requirements are met.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                              A-44

               APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                      ASSESSMENT
II. HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
This section considers City government constraints upon the development of housing for all
income levels. Government constraints may include land use controls; codes and
enforcement; on- or off-site improvements; fees, exactions and processing; and permit
procedures. Government actions affecting the housing market are, in large part, a reflection
of the values of the residents of Fairfield. Elected officials who make decisions affecting
housing development strive to implement policies wisely and act on behalf of the
communities they serve.
Land Use Controls
The City of Fairfield General Plan and Zoning Ordinance provide for a range of residential
land use designations that govern the development of housing. The City reviews the Zoning
Ordinance on an annual basis to correct problems that become apparent and clarify the
language. The Zoning Ordinance has established six categories of residential zoning, all tied
to General Plan density ranges. In addition, the Train Station Specific Plan has specific
density categories associated with the development concept which differ from zoning in the
rest of the City.
The City’s Zoning Ordinance provides options for developers who are working on smaller
infill sites, as well as standard zoning requirements for larger suburban developments. These
standards offer reductions in parking requirements as well as relaxation of certain setback
and open space requirements.
In addition, the City’s adopted Train Station Specific Plan includes a land use vision with
general goals and objectives for the overall community. This vision will be implemented
through a Master PUD Permit process for each planning area. In most areas, the Specific
Plan recognizes that basic land use regulations will remain as outlined in the existing Zoning
Ordinance. However, the Master PUD process will permit some flexibility in design and
project layout.
Zoning Districts with Residential Uses
Following is a detailed description of residential zoning districts, as well as the commercial
districts that permit or conditionally permit residential development:
RVL (Residential, Very Low Density) District – The RVL zoning district is intended for areas of
single-family detached homes on large lots. The RVL district typically serves as a transition
between urban development and agricultural or open space areas. The district may also be
applied to land within hillside areas. Minimum lot sizes range from 15,000 square feet to
40,000 square feet (RVL:15, RVL:20, and RVL:40). The maximum density is 2.5 dwelling
units per gross developable acre.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                             A-45

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                  RL (Residential, Low Density) District – The RL zoning district is intended for areas of single-
                  family detached homes. Minimum lot sizes are typically 8,000 and 10,000 square feet (RL:8,
                  RL:10). The allowable density range is 2.5 to 4.5 dwelling units per gross developable acre.
                  RLM (Residential, Low Medium Density) District – The RLM zoning district is intended for
                  single-family neighborhoods, with limited multi-family housing development allowed with a
                  conditional use permit. The allowable density in this district is 4.5 to 8 dwelling units per
                  gross developable acre.
                  RL-TS (Residential Low Density-Train Station Specific Plan) - This zoning district is intended for
                  lower density single family housing in the Specific Plan Area, typically located some distance
                  from the Train Station and the Town Center District. The allowable density range is 4-10
                  dwelling units per acre. In general, development regulations and permitted land uses in the
                  RL-TZ zone are tied to the City’s RLM regulations.
                  RM (Residential, Medium Density) District – The RM zoning district is intended for areas of low
                  density attached housing, such as duet, duplex, triplex, and four-plex units, townhouses, and
                  condominiums. The RM district also accommodates small-lot single-family dwellings,
                  although single family dwelling units require a Conditional Use Permit in this zone. The
                  Zoning Ordinance imposes no minimum lot size for individual units. The allowable density
                  range is 8 to 15 dwelling units per gross developable acre.
                  RM-TS (Residential Medium-Train Station) - This zoning district is intended for medium density
                  attached housing as well as small lot “courtyard” type single family developments. The
                  permitted density range in the Train Station Specific Plan Area is 10-14 dwelling units per
                  acre as of right. With density transfers, projects can build at densities of up to 20 du/acre.
                  Development standards and permitted land uses will be as established for the RM Zoning
                  District by the Zoning Ordinance
                  RH (Residential, High Density) District – The RH zoning district is intended for multi-family
                  development such as apartments and condominiums, although single family dwelling units
                  are conditionally permitted as a component of a mixed use project incorporating multifamily
                  units as well. RH zoned properties are located along major collector and arterial roads,
                  adjacent to neighborhood-serving land uses such as grocery stores, and near employment
                  centers. Higher density housing is also anticipated in the Train Station Specific Plan Area,
                  particularly near the planned train station. The allowable density range is 15 to 22 dwelling
                  units per gross developable acre.
                  RVH (Residential, Very High Density) District – The RVH zoning district is intended for very
                  high density multi-family development. The primary land uses include apartments,
                  condominiums, and senior housing projects. To achieve the density range, three- and four-
                  story structures would be typical. RVH districts are typically located near transit stations or
                  employment centers. Few properties in the City are zoned RVH, so allowed non-residential
                  uses are restricted to preserve sites for multi-family housing. The allowable density range is
                  22 to 32 dwelling units per gross developable acre.
                  RH-TS (Residential High Density-Train Station) - The High Density area is intended for
                  residential development near the train station in the Town Center and near the Lake Park.
                  Innovative mixed use development suitable for a traditional town center is one of the
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                   CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-46

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
objectives for this density range. This zoning category permits development from 20 to 28
dwellings per acre. Density within ½ mile of the train station must be at least 24 du./acre.
With density transfers, some sites may be suitable for up to 50 dwellings per acre in density.
The City does not anticipate that every developer or landowner will develop their property
to the maximum density permitted by the Zoning in the Train Station Specific Plan. For
example, the owner of a parcel zoned RH (High Density Residential) could as of right
develop his property at 28 dwelling units per acre. If the project is instead approved for 24
dwelling units per acre, a ten acre project would have 240 units instead of the 280 units
potentially permitted under the Zoning and the Specific Plan. As the Specific Plan and the
CEQA document are based on the maximum permitted development under the Zoning, this
means that there are 40 “extra” units that have not been used by this project applicant.
Pursuant to Chapter 14 of the Specific Plan, those units could be transferred to a developer
that proposes to build above the 28 unit/acre permitted as of right by the Specific Plan
zoning. Density Transfers could be approved administratively by the Community
Development Director, and no processing charge would be collected for this action.
Land use and development regulations in the RH-TS Zoning District shall be as established
in the RH and RVH development regulations in the Fairfield Zoning Ordinance. However,
the Specific Plan contains a design vision for the Town Center and Lake Park
neighborhoods that will also be implemented through the Master PUD Process. This vision
includes mixed use development and higher density requirements near the Train Station in
order to create a traditional town center for the Specific Plan Area.
CD (Commercial Downtown) – The CD district is intended to stabilize, maintain, and enhance
the unique commercial character of Downtown Fairfield as an attractive, lively main street
environment, a character based on a mix of specialty retail, cultural, entertainment, office,
service, and restaurant uses. Residential land uses may be appropriate in the CD zoning
district as part of a mixed-use project.
CM (Commercial Mixed) District – The CM zoning district applies to the transitional areas
surrounding Downtown Fairfield and areas identified by the General Plan as Mixed Use. In
the case of the latter, permitted uses are to be consistent with the General Plan description
for each property. For areas surrounding Downtown, uses in the CM zone will provide a
compatible mixture of commercial and residential uses that serves as a transition between
Downtown and adjacent residential areas. According to the Zoning Ordinance, each of the
following residential uses are permitted in the CM district: boarding house, community care
facility, duplex, duet, multi-family dwelling, single-family detached dwelling, and transitional
housing.
CC (Commercial Community) District – The CC zoning district applies to commercial areas of
the City where retail goods and services are available to serve neighborhood and community-
wide needs. Typical land uses include larger shopping centers, specialty shopping centers,
and other retail establishments that serve the community at large. Residential land uses may
be appropriate, particularly as part of a mixed-use development. The CC zoning district is
consistent with the Highway and Regional Commercial, and Community Commercial land
use categories of the General Plan.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                             A-47

                            APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                  CT (Commercial Thoroughfare) District – The CT zoning district applies to portions of West
                  Texas Street, North Texas Street, and Parker Road characterized by a mixture of small,
                  individual multi-tenant commercial buildings, shopping centers, automobile services and
                  sales, and fast-food restaurants. Residential land uses may be appropriate, particularly as part
                  of a mixed-use development. The CT zoning district is consistent with the Community
                  Commercial land use category of the General Plan.
                  CO (Commercial Office) District – The CO zoning district is applied to areas intended for office
                  uses and related services. Land uses include professional offices, medical offices and related
                  services, administrative offices, banks and other financial institutions, and related business
                  support services. Personal services and small-scale commercial and retail establishments may
                  be permitted as supporting land uses. Residential land uses are appropriate as part of a
                  mixed-use project. The CO zoning district is consistent with the Office Commercial land use
                  category of the General Plan.
                  CN (Commercial Neighborhood) District. The CN zoning district provides areas for convenient
                  neighborhood access to daily goods and services. Typical uses include grocery stores, banks,
                  dry cleaners, and restaurants. Residential land uses may be appropriate, particularly as part of
                  a mixed-use development. The CN zoning district is consistent with the Neighborhood
                  Commercial land use category of the General Plan.
                  Single-Family Housing
                  Zoning Districts
                  RVL, RL, and RLM zones are primarily intended for single-family dwellings. Where a
                  minimum lot size is required, a numerical suffix to the zoning district designation is shown
                  on the Zoning District Map, e.g., RVL:20 (20,000 square feet), RL:8 (8,000 square feet), or
                  RLM:4.5 (4,500 square feet). The Residential Medium Density (RM) district is a transitional
                  zone permitting both small-lot single-family dwellings and some lower-density multi-family
                  housing. Single-family detached dwellings require a conditional use permit in both the RM
                  and RH zoning districts. Single-family detached dwellings are not permitted in the RVH
                  district.
                  Single-family dwellings may also be developed in many of the City’s commercial zoning
                  districts with a conditional use permit, including the CD, CN, CO, CT, and CC districts.
                  Except in the CD and CM zones, residential land uses in these commercial districts shall
                  only be allowed in conjunction with a commercial land use on the same property.
                  The Train Station Specific Plan also permits single family housing development in the areas
                  designated RL and RM. While the as of right density ranges differ from standard City
                  zoning (4-7 du/acre and 10-14 du/acre respectively), the basic development standards
                  remain similar to those in conventional development areas.
                  Within commercial zones, single-family attached dwellings (up to two attached dwelling units
                  on any single property) and single-family detached dwellings must comply with the RM
                  Small Lot Development Regulations. Projects with three or more dwelling units on any
                  single property must comply with the development regulations specified in the Alternative
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                 CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-48

               APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                      ASSESSMENT
 Multifamily Development Regulations. Detached dwellings are permitted in the Commercial
 Mixed (CM) zoning district.
 Tables A-35 and A-36 detail the development regulations for the RVL, RL, and RLM
 zoning districts.
                                         TABLE A-35
  RVL        AND      RL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
                  Regulations                           Zoning District
                                                                                       Applicable
   (all figures are minimums measured                                                 Sections and
  from property lines and in linear feet,  RVL:40     RVL:20       RVL:15      RL:10   Footnotes
         unless otherwise indicated)
Density Range (maximum units per gross
                                           up to 1 up to 1.75 up to 2.5 2.5 to 3
developable acre)
Lot Area (square feet)
    Minimum                                 40,000     20,000      15,000      10,000
    Average for new subdivision (15%
                                            40,000     23,000      17,250      11,500    Note 1
    above min. lot area)
Lot Dimensions (feet)                                                                    Note 2
    Width:                                                                               Note 3
       interior lot                          120         100          90          80
       corner lot                            130         110         100          85
    Depth                                    150         130         120         110    Notes 4
Parking                                                                               Section 25.34
    On-site spaces per dwelling, covered                         2                       Note 5
    Off-site spaces per dwelling                                 1                       Note 6
Landscaping
                                             35 feet of street      30 feet of street
    Street trees (one tree for each)                                                     Note 7
                                                 frontage               frontage
    Front yard landscaping installed by
                                                          Not required
    developer
Buildings
Dwelling Unit Size (square feet)                               960
Maximum Floor Area Ratio                     0.5         0.5         0.5         0.5
Setbacks (feet)                                                                          Note 2
    Front:                                                                            Notes 8, 9, 10
    to habitable portion of bldg. or side     30          25          20          20
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                   DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                              A-49
                               APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                                  ASSESSMENT
                                        Regulations                                              Zoning District
                                                                                                                                              Applicable
                      (all figures are minimums measured                                                                                   Sections and
                     from property lines and in linear feet,                      RVL:40        RVL:20         RVL:15           RL:10         Footnotes
                            unless otherwise indicated)
                       entry garage
                       to garage opening directly toward street                       35            30             25             25
                                                                                                                                             Notes 2, 10,
                       Street side yard                                               30            20             20             15
                                                                                                                                                 11
                       Interior side yard:
                       minimum one side                                               15            10             10             10
                       total for both sides                                           40            30             20             20
                       Rear                                                           40            30             25             25          Note 2, 12
                  Building Height Limits (maximum)                                                                                             Note 13
                       Main dwelling                                                                       35
                       Accessory Structures                                                    See Section 25.20.4.1                           Note 12
                   Notes:
                   (1) This regulation shall apply only to subdivisions of 20 or more lots.
                   (2) Lot dimension and setback regulations shall be measured from the outer boundary of any common area or public landscape
                   easement (e.g., rear fence line) on corner lots and lots backing onto a roadway.
                   (3) Minimum lot width is measured 25 feet from front property line or at minimum required front yard setback for garage,
                   whichever is greater (see Section 25.51, Measurements).
                   (4) Lot depth may be reduced by four feet for lots with separated sidewalk at front property line to accommodate wider right-of-way.
                   (5) Tandem parking allowed as required parking in a two-car garage (i.e., single-wide garage door providing access for two spaces).
                   (6) Off-site parking spaces shall be provided within 200 feet of each lot.
                   (7) All street trees shall be located within eight feet of back of sidewalk.
                   (8) Front setbacks may be reduced by two feet for lots with separated sidewalk at front property line provided the distance between
                         the front property line and garage door is 18 feet or greater for homes with garages opening directly toward street.
                   (9) Front setbacks shall be increased by five feet for lots that front on an arterial roadway.
                   (10) Within the Hillside Overlay District, the setbacks of the RLM 4.5 zoning district may be used, as determined necessary by the
                         City, to comply with the Hillside Management Guidelines.
                   (11) For lots with the garage facing the street side yard, the minimum distance between the street-side property line and garage door
                         shall be 18 feet or greater.
                   (12) A garage opening directly to an alley shall either have a minimum 18-foot setback or maximum 3-foot setback.
                   (13) Increased height is allowed with approval of a Conditional Use Permit (see Section 25.40.5).
                   (14) Calculate Floor Area Ratio by dividing total square footage of all floors, including attached garage, by total lot area.
                   (15) Applies only to custom homes.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                                                    CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                             A-50
              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                         ASSESSMENT
                                           TABLE A-36
 RL      AND       RLM DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
                   Regulations                                 Zoning District
                                                                                               Applicable
    (all figures are minimums measured                                                        Sections and
   from property lines and in linear feet,          RL:8     RLM:6       RLM:5 RLM:4.5 Footnotes
          unless otherwise indicated)
 Density Range (maximum units per gross
                                                  2.5 to 4.5 4.5 to 5    4.5 to 6    4.5 to 7
 developable acre)
 Lot Area (square feet)
      Minimum                                       8,000      6,000       5,000      4,500
      Average for new subdivision (approx.
                                                    9,200      6,900       5,800      5,200      Note 1
      15% above min. lot area)
 Lot Dimensions (feet)                                                                           Note 2
      Width:                                                                                     Note 3
      interior lot                                    70         60          50         45
      corner lot                                      75         65          55         50
      Depth                                          100        100         100        100       Note 4
 Parking                                                                                      Section 25.34
      On-site       spaces     per       dwelling
                                                     2/0        2/0         1/1        1/1    Notes 5, 6, 7
      (covered/uncovered)
      Off-site spaces per dwelling                     1          1           1          1       Note 8
 Landscaping
      Street trees (one tree for each ...)                 25 feet of street frontage            Note 9
      Front yard landscaping installed by
                                                  Not required      Required       Required
      developer
 Buildings
 Dwelling Unit Size (square feet)                                      960
 Maximum Floor Area Ratio                            0.5        0.5         0.5        0.5    Notes 17, 18
      Setbacks (feet)                                                                            Note 3
      Front:                                                                                  Notes 10, 11
      to unenclosed porch                             10         10          10         10
      to habitable portion of bldg. or side
                                                      15         15          15         15      Note 12
      entry garage
      to garage opening directly toward street        18         18          18         18      Note 15
      Street side yard                                15         10          10         10     Notes 2, 13
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                           DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                    A-51
                              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                                ASSESSMENT
                                          Regulations                                              Zoning District
                                                                                                                                            Applicable
                       (all figures are minimums measured                                                                                 Sections and
                      from property lines and in linear feet,                         RL:8        RLM:6         RLM:5 RLM:4.5 Footnotes
                              unless otherwise indicated)
                          Interior side yard:
                          minimum one side                                              5             5             5             5           Note 14
                          total for both sides                                         15            15            10            10
                          Rear                                                         20            20            20            15          Note 2, 15
                    Building Height Limits (maximum)                                                                                          Note 16
                          Main dwelling                                                                      35
                          Accessory structures                                                   See Section 25.20.4.1                        Note 15
                  Notes:
                  (1) This regulation shall apply only to subdivisions of 20 or more lots.
                  (2) Lot dimension and setback regulations shall be measured from the outer boundary of any common area or public landscape
                        easement (e.g., rear fence line) on corner lots and lots backing onto a roadway.
                  (3) Minimum lot width is measured 25 feet from front property line or at minimum required front yard setback for garage,
                        whichever is greater (see Section 25.51, Measurements).
                  (4) Lot depth may be reduced by four feet for lots with separated sidewalk at front property line to accommodate wider right-of-way.
                  (5) Tandem parking is allowed as required parking in a two-car garage (i.e., single-wide garage door providing access for two
                        spaces).
                  (6) An additional covered space or off-site parking space may be substituted for required uncovered spaces.
                  (7) In the RLM Districts, three-car garages opening directly to a street shall not occur on lots less than 55 feet in width. Exempt
                        from this regulation are side entry garages or where the third space is tandem (e.g., two-car door).
                  (8) Off-s ite parking spaces for shall be provided within 200 feet of each lot.
                  (9) All street trees shall be located within eight feet of back of sidewalk.
                  (10) Front setbacks may be reduced by two feet for lots with separated sidewalk at front property line provided the distance between
                        the front property line and garage door is 18 feet or greater for homes with garages open directly toward street.
                  (11) Front setbacks shall be increased by five feet for lots that front on an arterial roadway.
                  (12) For lots with the garage facing the street side yard, the minimum distance between the street-side property line and garage door
                        shall be 18 feet or greater.
                  (13) Within the Hillside Overlay District, front and street side yard setbacks of the RLM 4.5 zoning district may be used, as
                        determined necessary by the City, to comply with the Hillside Management Guidelines.
                  (14) The minimum interior side yard setback shall be reduced to zero feet for projects with attached homes.
                  (15) A garage opening directly to an alley shall either have a minimum 18-foot setback or maximum 3-foot setback.
                  (16) Increased height is allowed with approval of a Conditional Use Permit, see Section 25.40.5.
                  (17) Calculate Floor Area Ratio by dividing total square footage of all floors, including attached garage, by total lot area.
                  (18) Applies only to custom homes.
                  Setbacks
                  Single-family housing developed in RVL districts requires front setbacks between 20 and 30
                  feet, side yard setbacks between 10 and 30 feet, and rear yard setbacks of 25 to 40 feet. RL
                  districts require front setbacks between 10 and 20 feet, side yard setbacks between 5 and 15
                  feet, and rear yard setbacks of 20 to 25 feet. RLM districts require front setbacks between 10
                  and 18 feet, side yard setbacks between 5 and 10 feet, and rear yard setbacks of 15 to 20 feet.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                                                    CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                            A-52
             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
While the specified setbacks do minimally constrain the size of dwellings and the density of
developments, they do not present a significant obstacle for developers of single-family
homes, and they are within the range of setbacks required by other communities in the
region. For smaller lots, the City Zoning Ordinance offers an alternate set of guidelines
under the Small Lot Single-Family Development Regulations. These regulations specify
reduced setbacks and other alternate provisions to encourage the efficient use of small lots.
(See Small Lot Single-Family Development Regulations in this section.)
Building Heights
Building heights are limited to 35 feet for all low and medium density developments. While
the City’s building height regulations do limit the vertical dimensions of single-family
developments, they do fit well within the expected norms for single-family homes.
Parking
Parking regulations require two covered spaces and one off-site space for homes in all RVL
and RL zoning districts as well as in RLM:6. One covered space and one uncovered space as
well as one off-site space are required in districts RLM:5 and RLM:4.5. While the City’s
parking requirements do add to the cost of housing development, adequate parking is
necessary to avoid impacts on streets and adjoining neighborhoods. The housing market also
continues to demand such parking accommodations for single-family developments in
neighborhoods and communities that are highly dependent upon automobile transit.
Landscaping
The Zoning Ordinance does not require landscaping by developers in districts with larger
lots (RVL, RL, and RLM:6). In the RLM:5 and RLM:4.5 districts, developers must install
front-yard landscaping. For individual lots, front-yard landscaping generally includes a yard
tree, foundation shrubs, and turf or other ground cover. All zoning districts require street
tree planting at one tree for each 25 to 35 feet of street frontage, depending on the zoning
district. The impact of the City’s landscaping and tree planting requirements for single-family
residential subdivisions is not considered to be a constraint to development.
Multi-Family Housing
Zoning Districts
RH and RVH are primarily intended for higher density multi-family development, including
apartments and condominiums. Multi-family housing is permitted in the RM, RH, and RVH
districts. Densities range from 8 dwelling unit (du)/acre (RM) to 32 du/acre (RVH).
The Zoning for the Train Station Specific Plan Area has similar density ranges: 10-14
du/acre for RM, and 20 to 28 du/acre for RH). The Specific Plan also allows for higher
densities (up to 20 du/acre in the RM zone and up to 50 du/acre in the RH zone, with a
density transfer. While the setbacks and other development requirements reference the
standard Zoning Ordinance, the Specific Plan also encourage innovation in design needed to
meet the overall goal of creating a high quality mixed use town center near the train station
and the Lake Park.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                            A-53

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                 ASSESSMENT
                  Mixed-use Housing
                  The Zoning Ordinance also establishes standards for multi-family housing in a mixed-use
                  project located in commercial zoning districts (Section 25.22.4.4). Multi-family developments
                  are permitted in the CM zoning district and conditionally permitted in the CD (Commercial
                  Downtown), CN (Commercial Neighborhood), CT (Commercial Thoroughfare), and CC
                  (Community Commercial) zoning districts. Standards include density limits (32 du/acre),
                  open space (200 square feet per unit), and parking (one space per unit). Multi-family
                  development projects in commercial zones must comply with the development regulations
                  specified in the Alternative Multifamily Development Regulations. For mixed-use projects
                  with separate commercial and residential buildings on site, the City allows the more flexible
                  standards for multi-family residential contained in the small lot “Alternative” standards
                  shown in Table A-38 below.
                  The Train Station Specific Plan also envisions mixed use development in the Town Center
                  and Lake Park areas, including live-work units, townhouses, and apartments above
                  businesses.
                  Setbacks
                  Multi-family housing developed in RLM, RM, RH, or RVH districts requires minimum front
                  setbacks between 10 and 15 feet, building separations of 10 to 20 feet, and other special
                  setbacks of 5 to 20 feet. Although the setbacks do minimally constrain the size and density
                  of multi-family developments, they are well within the norm for similar communities.
                  Additionally, the City offers an alternate set of regulations for multi-family developments
                  with reduced setbacks to encourage reconstruction of existing multi-family housing and
                  promote infill development.
                  Building Heights
                  Building heights are limited to 35 feet for all low and medium density developments. High
                  density multi-family developments have building height limits of 45 feet. While building
                  heights do limit the size and density of multi-family developments, they are contextual with
                  the building heights of the surrounding community. A Conditional Use Permit can be
                  approved which allows additional height in cases where taller buildings are appropriate.
                  Parking
                  Parking requirements for multi-family developments are assigned by unit size in the
                  following manner: 1 space per unit for studios and efficiency units, 1.5 spaces per unit for
                  one-bedroom units, and 2 spaces per unit for units containing two or more bedrooms.
                  Visitor parking in multi-family units is allocated in different proportions depending on
                  whether the projects contain rental or ownership units. Rental projects require 1 space for
                  each seven units (1:7), while ownership units require 1 space for each four units (1:4).
                  The parking requirements for multi-family housing units do add significant costs to
                  development, but adequate parking is necessary to avoid impacts on streets and adjoining
                  neighborhoods. The City’s density bonus program and alternative multifamily development
                  standards provide mechanisms for reducing parking in exchange for affordable units.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                              A-54

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                       ASSESSMENT
Landscaping
All multi-family housing developments require landscaping. In RLM, RM, RH, and RVH
districts one tree is required for each 25 feet of street frontage. Tree densities are required at
one tree for every 325 square feet of landscaped area. Though these landscaping
requirements do add additional costs, they do not unduly burden developers and are not a
significant constraint on housing.
                                        TABLE A-37
           MULTI-FAMILY                RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
                                       REGULATIONS
                     Regulations                            Zoning District
                                                                                        Applicable
    (all figures are minimums measured from                                            Sections and
       property line and in linear feet, unless     RLM      RM         RH      RVH     Footnotes
                 otherwise indicated)
                                                    up to
  Density range (maximum dwelling units per acre)            8-15      15-22    22-32
                                                      8
      Lot dimensions (minimum for new
      subdivision)
                                                                                      Section 25.10.5
      Area (acres)                                    1         3        3        3
                                                                                            (F)
                                                   150/1 200/2 200/20 200/20
      Width/depth (feet)
                                                     50        00        0        0
  Parking                                                                                 Note 1
      Studio/efficiency                                      1 space per unit
      One bedroom                                          1.5 spaces per unit
      Two or more bedrooms                                  2 spaces per unit
                                                    Rental Projects: 1 space for each
      Visitor
                                                                seven units
                                                     Ownership Units: 1 space for
                                                             each four units
                                                                                          Section
  Landscaping
                                                                                       25.20.4.8 (C)
      Street trees (one tree for each)                  25 feet of street frontage        Note 2
      Tree density, on-site (number per sq. ft. of 1 tree for each 325 square feet of
                                                                                          Note 3
      landscape area)                                         landscape area
      Minimum depth of interior property line
                                                                     5                    Note 4
      landscaping (feet)
                                                                                          Section
  Open space
                                                                                       25.20.4.8 (A)
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                     DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                               A-55
                             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                              ASSESSMENT
                                            Regulations                                            Zoning District
                                                                                                                                          Applicable
                      (all figures are minimums measured from                                                                            Sections and
                         property line and in linear feet, unless                         RLM        RM          RH          RVH          Footnotes
                                      otherwise indicated)
                         Private open space per unit, sq. ft. (ground
                                                                                               120/60                 80/48                   Note 5
                         floor/upper story unit)
                         Common open space (percent of net parcel
                                                                                           50%      45%          40%          35%
                         area)
                    Setbacks
                         From any property line abutting a road
                         to habitable portion of building                                 20 feet average, 15 feet minimum
                         to parking or drive aisle (including carport or
                                                                                          15 feet average, 10 feet minimum
                         garage)
                         From any interior property line
                         to habitable building                                                            15 feet                             Note 6
                         to accessory structure, building or parking                                           5                              Note 7
                    Building Height Limits                                                                                                    Note 8
                         Principal structure and additions                                  35        35          45           45
                         Accessory structures                                                                 16
                  Notes:
                  (1) Minimum of one parking space shall be covered per unit. All parking spaces shall be located within convenient walking distance
                       to each dwelling to which they are assigned.
                  (2) All street trees shall be located within eight feet of back of sidewalk.
                  (3) Minimum seven percent of required trees shall be box species.
                  (4) Interior property line landscaping shall be increased by five feet when abutting single-family residential zone or use.
                  (5) Minimum dimension for required open space/yard area shall be 20’x35’, see Section 25.20.4.8(A).
                  (6) Interior setback shall be increased by 10 feet when abutting single-family residential zone or use.
                  (7) Interior setback shall be increased by 5 feet when abutting single-family residential zone or use.
                  (8) Increased height is allowed with approval of a Conditional Use Permit, see Section 25.40.5.
                  Flexibility in Development Standards
                  The City’s Zoning Ordinance also provides for significant flexibility through (1) Small Lot
                  Single-Family Development Regulations and (2) Alternate Multifamily Development
                  Regulations. Both sets of regulations provide flexible guidelines to help developers use
                  available land efficiently and provide housing at densities that otherwise would not adhere to
                  code.
                  The City also adopted Urban Design Guidelines in 2004 to encourage quality design that
                  contributes to the long-time viability of neighborhoods. The guidelines address Subdivisions,
                  House Design, Multifamily Housing, and Commercial Development (Downtown,
                  Commercial Corridors, Office, and Business Parks). There are also guidelines for Mixed Use
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                                                   CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                          A-56

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                     ASSESSMENT
Development. The guidelines address both site development and building design, including
landscaping, pedestrian connections, access, parking, open space, and streetscapes.
The City’s most significant attempt to provide for flexibility in development standards and to
encourage innovative mixed use and pedestrian oriented development is the Fairfield Train
Station Specific Plan. In the Train Station Specific Plan Area, the objective is to promote
high density, innovative mixed-use communities which can take advantage of the new train
station now under construction. The planning process for each neighborhood will provide
opportunities for flexibility in project design.
The City has also initiated a planning process in its downtown core to study alternatives for
infill development and mixed use in a traditional urban setting.
Small Lot Single-Family Development Regulations
The City’s Zoning Ordinance contains suggested development prototypes for higher density
single family (small-lot) subdivisions. The Planning Commission can approve additional
prototypes. These developments require creativity and architectural excellence in order to
provide an attractive living environment. The prototypes are meant to encourage innovative,
compact, and affordable single-family housing developments. The regulations and
prototypes are flexible, focusing on balancing higher density and usable private open space.
Reducing the visual impact of garages is of key importance. For small-lot developments, the
Zoning Ordinance permits tandem parking within a two-car garage as required parking.
Also, required uncovered parking may be placed in a garage or off-site (e.g., as an additional
on-street space or in a parking bay).
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                            A-57

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                     ASSESSMENT
                                                             TABLE A-38
                                RLM        AND      RM SMALL-LOT DEVELOPMENT
                                                            REGULATIONS
                                      Regulations
                    (all figures are minimums measured from              RLM and RM               Applicable
                       property line and in linear feet, unless         Zoning Districts    Sections and Footnotes
                                 otherwise indicated)
                                                                     4.5 to 8 du/ac in RLM
                  Maximum Density (dwelling units per acre)
                                                                      8 to 15 du/ac in RM
                  Lot Area (square feet)                                                            Note 1
                       Attached homes                                     No minimum
                       Detached homes                                          2,500
                  Lot Dimensions (Detached Housing Units)
                       Width:
                       Interior lot                                              30
                       corner lot                                                35
                       Depth                                              No minimum
                  Parking
                       On-site spaces per dwelling                   1 covered, 1 uncovered        Notes 2, 3
                       Off-site spaces per dwelling                        1 uncovered              Note 4
                  Landscaping
                                                                         25 feet of street
                       Street trees (one tree for each ...)                                         Note 5
                                                                             frontage
                       Front yard landscaping installed by developer         Required
                  Open Space
                       Private open space per unit                       450 square feet            Note 6
                       Common open space (percent of net project       Five percent of net
                                                                                                    Note 7
                       area)                                               project area
                  Buildings
                  Dwelling unit size                                     960 square feet
                                                                      50% in RLM, 60% in
                  Lot Coverage (maximum)
                                                                                RM
                  Setbacks to habitable structures or unenclosed
                  porch
                  (not including garage)
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                   CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                  A-58
                 APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                         Regulations
   (all figures are minimums measured from                                   RLM and RM                         Applicable
     property line and in linear feet, unless                              Zoning Districts           Sections and Footnotes
                   otherwise indicated)
Front or street side-yard:                                                                                    Notes 8 and 9
     if front of house faces a monolithic sidewalk                                  10’
     if front of house faces a separated sidewalk                                    8’
     if front of house faces a private courtyard                                     5’
                                                                        Either 0’, 4’ minimum,
                                                                            or as necessary to
     Interior side yard and rear yard                                                                             Note 10
                                                                         provide private open
                                                                                   space
Setbacks to garages
     if garage faces any street                                                     18’                           Note 11
     if garage faces interior side yard                                             15’
     if garage faces any alley or courtyard                                     5’ exactly
Building Height Limits (maximum)                                                                                  Note 12
     Main dwelling                                                                  35’
     Accessory Structures                                                See Section 25.20.4.1                    Note 13
Notes:
(1) The minimum lot area for any courtyard unit excludes any portion of a common driveway.
(2) Tandem parking within a two-car car garage is allowed as required parking. Also, required uncovered parking may be placed
     in a garage or off-site (e.g., as an additional on-street space or in a parking bay).
(3) Three-car garages facing directly toward a street shall not be permitted on any lot less than 55 feet wide. No more than 30
     percent of units in a subdivision developed under these regulations shall have a three-car garage facing directly toward a street.
(4) Off-site parking spaces shall be provided within 200 feet of each lot.
(5) All street trees shall be located within eight feet of back of sidewalk.
(6) Required private open space shall not be located in the required front yard setback and shall have a minimum depth of 13 feet
     (e.g., 13’ x 35’, 15’ x 30’, etc.), except as identified in Examples of Acceptable Small-Lot Examples "A" and "G."
(7) Projects consisting of 20 or less dwellings shall be exempt from the requirement to provide common open space.
(8) Front setbacks may be reduced by 2 feet for lots with separated sidewalk at front property line.
(9) Front setbacks shall be increased by 10 feet for lots that front on an arterial roadway.
(10) Interior side-yard setback may be reduced to three feet for structures complying with all applicable Uniform Building Code
     regulations.
(11) Garages for homes proposed on lots less than 50 feet in width shall not exceed 60 percent of the front elevation for the home and
     shall be recessed a minimum of 5 feet from the habitable portion of the home, not including any front porch.
(12) Increased height is allowed with approval of a Conditional Use Permit, see Section 25.40.5.
(13) A garage opening directly to an alley or courtyard shall either have a minimum 18-foot setback or 3-foot setback.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                       DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                      A-59

                            APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                       ASSESSMENT
                  Alternative Multifamily Development Regulations
                  The City’s Alternative Multifamily Development Regulations (Table A-39) are intended to
                  encourage the voluntary reconstruction, rebuilding, or rehabilitation of non-conforming
                  multi-family dwellings and to allow construction of new units on infill sites at a density
                  consistent with surrounding development. To create an incentive for private property
                  owners, the regulations in this section are less restrictive than the City’s standard Multifamily
                  Residential Development Regulations. For example, the alternative regulations contain
                  reduced setback and parking requirements. However, these alternative regulations are only
                  intended to apply to lots of one acre or less and where development at the existing density is
                  not permitted as a result of other applicable zoning regulations.
                                                              TABLE A-39
                              ALTERNATIVE                    MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT
                                                             REGULATIONS
                                       Regulations                          Zoning District               Applicable
                   (all figures are minimums and/or linear feet                                          Sections and
                                                                          RM          RH      RVH          Footnotes
                              unless otherwise indicated)
                  Lot Area (maximum)                                                3 acres
                  Lot Dimensions (width/depth) (feet)                              150/150
                  Open Space
                        Private (sq. ft. per ground floor/upper story
                                                                                    80/48              Notes 1
                        unit)
                        Common & private open space (% of net
                                                                                     25%               Section 25.20.4.8 (A)
                        parcel area)
                                                                        Required for projects with 10
                  Recreational Amenities                                                               Section 25.20.4.8 (B)
                                                                                or more units
                                                                       One and one-third spaces per
                  Parking                                                                              Note 2
                                                                                     unit
                  Landscaping                                                                          Section 25.20.4.8 (C)
                        Street trees (one tree for each ...)              25 feet of street frontage   Note 3
                                                                       1 tree for each 325 square feet
                        Tree density, on-site
                                                                              of landscape area
                                                                        Private or common facilities
                  Laundry Facilities
                                                                                   required
                  Storage Space (private, exterior area per unit)               100 cubic feet
                  Trash Enclosures (for garage and recyclable
                                                                                   Required
                  materials)
                                                                    Buildings
                  Lot Coverage (maximum)                                     50%       60% 60%
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                        CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                   A-60

                  APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                          Regulations                                      Zoning District                  Applicable
 (all figures are minimums and/or linear feet                                                              Sections and
                                                                         RM            RH     RVH            Footnotes
              unless otherwise indicated)
Setbacks (feet)
      Front                                                                          15            Note 4
                                                                        5 one side, 15 total for
      Side yard
                                                                                both sides
      Rear                                                                           15
Building Separation and Special Setbacks (feet)                                                    Note 5
      Between any two buildings                                                      10
      Front to front                                                   20 feet between buildings
      Front to rear                                                    20 feet between buildings
Building Height Limit                                                        35            45  45  Note 6
Notes:
(1) Private patios shall be completely enclosed on all sides by a fence which is a minimum of 5 feet in height and shall have a
      minimum depth of 10 feet.
(2) Any fraction of a parking space shall require one additional parking space. Parking located between a main building and a
      street shall be screened by low fencing and/or shrubs.
(3) All street trees shall be located within eight feet of back of sidewalk.
(4) The front setbacks shall be a minimum of 25 feet for lots that front on an arterial roadway.
(5) Distances required between buildings on the same lot and as yards and courts for dwelling groups shall be increased by two feet
      for each story that the height of any building or dwelling group exceeds two stories.
(6) Increased height is allowed with approval of a Conditional Use Permit, see Section 25.40.5.
Multi-family Housing Design Standards
Multi-family design standards address parking, landscaping, open space, and project
amenities. Between 50 percent and 35 percent of the site, depending on the density, must be
open space, and each unit must have a private open space (balcony or patio). Project
amenities can include tot lots, picnic areas, pools, or recreation buildings. For parking, the
ordinance requires up to two spaces per unit, depending on the number of bedrooms.
Projects must also provide one visitor space for each seven units. Finally, the ordinance
requires all multi-family development to be compatible with adjoining neighborhoods. This
requirement addresses issues like bulk and massing of housing, architectural design,
landscaping, and site planning. The Sunset Creek project in eastern Fairfield uses careful site
design that minimizes parking adjacent to the street, street tree plantings, and “traditional”
architectural forms that combine to create a compatible project. Compatible projects are
more likely to receive support or acceptance from adjoining neighborhoods.
While design requirements add to the cost of development, the current standards require
fewer visitor parking spaces, tie the number of trees to the open space area, not the number
of units, and recognize that increasing density will result in some decrease in open space
area. The new standards focus on usable open space areas, listing a menu of options for
builders. As a result, the new design standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance are less of
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                   DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                      A-61

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                  a constraint than the standards required in 1991. The Zoning Ordinance recognizes that it
                  may not be feasible to meet these standards when redeveloping smaller, pre-existing sites.
                  The Alternative Multifamily Development Regulations permit development or
                  redevelopment of sites smaller than 1 acre and non-conforming multi-family structures with
                  less open space and parking.
                  Density Bonus Options
                  The City provides incentives to encourage the production of quality housing for lower-
                  income and senior citizen segments of the community in compliance with the General Plan
                  Housing Element and State Density Bonus Law (California Government Code Section
                  65915). In order to be eligible for a density bonus and other incentives as provided by this
                  section, a proposed residential development project must consist of five or more units and
                  meet one or more of the following criteria:
                          Very Low-Income Rental Housing. Five (5) percent of the units are affordable to
                           households whose total household income is less than 50 percent of the County
                           median income (very low-income households); or
                          Low-Income Rental Housing. Ten (10) percent of the units are affordable to households
                           whose total household income is less than 80 percent of the County median income
                           (low-income households); or
                          Senior Housing. Fifty (50) percent of the units are set aside for persons age 62 and
                           older or persons age 55 and older in a residential development consisting of at least
                           thirty-five (35) dwelling units which is developed for, or substantially rehabilitated or
                           renovated for, senior citizens; or
                          Condominiums and Planned Developments (Moderate Income Households). Ten (10) percent
                           of the dwelling units in a condominium project or planned development as defined
                           in State Civil Code for persons and families with less than 120% of the County
                           median income (moderate-income households).
                  Developers seeking the incentives are required to submit a written proposal and project
                  plans for Conceptual Review to the Community Development Department prior to making
                  a formal development application. Incentives offered include the following:
                          Rental Reserve Units. For projects providing Rental Reserved Units that meet the
                           affordability classifications discussed in above, the City shall grant a density bonus
                           of at least 20%. For projects that provide additional Reserved Units, additional
                           Density Bonus shall be provided as follows:
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                A-62

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
             Low-Income Units: For each 1 percent increase above 10 percent in the
              percentage of units affordable to lower-income households, the density bonus
              shall be increased by 1.5% up to a maximum of 35 percent.
             Very Low-Income Units: For each 1 percent increase above 5 percent in the
              percentage of units affordable to very low-income households, the density
              bonus shall be increased by 2.5% up to a maximum of 35 percent.
        Condominiums or Planned Unit Developments (Ownership Housing). Developers of
         condominium projects or planned unit developments with at least 10% of the units
         affordable to moderate-income households shall be granted a Density Bonus of at
         least 5%. For each 1 percent increase above 10 percent in the percentage of units
         affordable to moderate-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by
         1% up to a maximum of 35 percent.
        Land Dedication for Construction of Very Low-Income Units. When an applicant donates
         land pursuant to Section 65915 (h) to the City, the applicant shall be entitled to a
         15% or greater density bonus, as provided for in Section 65915(g) of California
         Government Code.
A detailed description of all incentives and qualification criteria is contained in Section 25.38,
Density Bonus, of the City’s Zoning Ordinance.
The City is currently amending its Density Bonus Ordinance to reflect current State law.
This update will provide greater density incentives for affordable housing.
Provision for a Variety of Housing Types
The Housing Element must identify adequate sites that are available for the development of
housing types for all economic segments of the population. Housing types include single-
family homes, multi-family attached housing, residential accessory dwelling units, mobile
homes, duplexes and duets, and residential care homes. Table A-40 shows permitted
housing types in residential zoning districts in Fairfield.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                  DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                            A-63

                             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                             ASSESSMENT
                                                                      TABLE A-40
                                        RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT LAND USES
                                                                                       Zoning District                                  Additional
                                     Uses
                                                                   RVL            RL           RLM          RM       RH RVH            Regulations
                  Residential Land Uses
                  Boarding houses                                      -           -             -            -        C          C
                  Assisted Living Facilities                          P            P             P            P         P         P    Note 1
                  Community Care Facilities –
                                                                      P            P             P            P        P          P
                  Residential
                  Duplex                                               -           C             P            P        P          -
                  Duet                                                 -           C             P            P        P          -
                  Dwelling, multi-family
                                                                       -           -             C            P        P          P    §25.20.4.8
                  (townhouses, condos, apartments)
                  Dwellings, single-family detached                   P            P             P            C        C          -    Note 6
                  Transitional Housing                                P            P             P            C        C
                  Supportive Housing                                  P            P             P            C        C
                  Mobile home parks                                   C            C             C            C        C          C    §25.20.4.7
                  Residential Accessory Uses and Improvements
                  Accessory structures and                                                                                             §24.20.4.1,
                                                                      P            P             P            P        P          P
                  improvements                                                                                                         Note 2
                  Animal, fowl and bee keeping
                                                                      P            P             P            P        P          P    Note 3, Ch. 3
                  (non-commercial)
                  Family day care homes:
                       Small (8 or fewer children)                    P            P             P            P        P          P    Note 4
                       Large (9 to 14 children)                       P            P             P            C        C          C    Note 4
                  Garage conversions                            See Section 25.20.4.3
                  Garage and estate sales                             P            P             P            P        P          P    §25.20.4.4
                  Home occupations                                    P            P             P            P        P          P    §25.20.4.5
                  Second dwelling units                               P            P             P            P         -         -    §25.20.4.11
                  Subdivision model homes                             P            P             P            P        P          P    §25.20.4.12
                  Subdivision sales trailers,
                                                                      P            P             P            P        P          P    §25.20.4.12
                  temporary on-site
                   P = Permitted use    C = Conditional Use Permit required                - = Not permitted
                   Notes:
                   (1) No licensed community care facility shall be located within 300 feet of any other community care facility.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                        A-64

                 APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                 ASSESSMENT
(2) Includes any accessory use or improvement that is customarily incidental to a single family residence such as detached garages,
     gazebos, sheds, animal enclosures, cabanas, carports, greenhouses, spas, studios, tennis courts, workshops, and other similar
     structures.
(3) See Chapter 3 of City Code for types and number of permitted animals.
(4) A Conditional Use Permit shall only be required for large day care homes proposed in residential buildings consisting of three or
     more units.
(5) City regulations, standards, and design guidelines shall apply to public and quasi-public utility facilities only to the extent that
     the City is not preempted by federal and state law and the State Public Utilities Commission.
(6) Single Family Detached Housing is permitted in the RH Zoning District only in conjunction with attached housing.
Table A-41 below shows residential uses in commercial districts. The City supports mixed
use development in commercial areas. Emergency shelters are permitted with a Conditional
Use Permit in several commercial districts as well as the IL (Limited Industrial) Zone.
                                                     TABLE A-41
                        COMMERCIAL DISTRICT LAND USES
                                                                  Zoning District
                                                                                                                  Additional
                     Use
                                                                                                                 Regulations
                                                 CD CDC CN CO CS CT CC CR CM
  Public, Quasi-public, and Assembly (see Note 5)
  Homeless Shelter                              -       -       -     -      C C        C    -      C
  Residential
  Boarding house                                C       -       -     -      -     -    -    -      P
  Adult care facility                           C       -       -     -      -     C    C    -      P
  Assisted Living facility                      C       -              C           C    C    -      -
  Duplex                                        -       -       C     C      -     C    C    -      P       Note 5
  Duet                                          -               C                  C    C           P       Note 5
                                                                                                            Section        25.22.4.3,
  Dwelling, multi-family                        C       -       C     -      -     C    C    -      P
                                                                                                            Note 5
  Dwelling, single-family detached              C       -       C     C      -     C    C    -      P       Note 5 §25.46.2(A)
  Family day care, Large and Small -                    -       -     -      -     -    -    -      P
  Single Room Occupancy                         -       -       -     -      -     C    -    -      P       Section 25.22.4.7
  Transitional Housing                          -       -       -     -      -     -    -    -      P
P = Permitted use       C = Conditional Use Permit required             - = Not permitted
(Applicable) Notes:
(5) Except in the CD and CM zones, residential land uses shall only be allowed in conjunction with a commercial land use on the
     same property.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                        DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                   A-65

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                  Second Units
                  In Fairfield a second dwelling unit is permitted on a parcel 5,000 square feet or greater
                  containing a detached single-family dwelling located in zoning districts RVL, RL, RLM, and
                  RM. Any second unit proposed on a lot with a detached garage or any lot with alley access is
                  exempt from this minimum lot size requirement. Second units are not allowed on lots with
                  two or more dwellings.
                  Parking must also be provided for second units separate from the parking already required
                  for the principal unit. One parking space is required for an efficiency or one-bedroom unit,
                  while two spaces are required for a unit having two or more bedrooms. Additional
                  regulations limit the location of the parking. While the parking requirements for second units
                  are a constraint that may limit the number and size of second units constructed in the City,
                  they are fully compliant with the law expressed in AB 1866.
                  Manufactured Housing and Mobile Home Parks
                  Mobile homes, which are identified as “manufactured homes” by the National Manufactured
                  Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, offer an affordable
                  homeownership option to many low- and moderate-income households. In accordance with
                  state law, the City of Fairfield Zoning Ordinance allows certified mobile homes by right in
                  all zoning districts that allow single-family dwellings. The same development regulations that
                  apply to single-family dwellings also apply to mobile homes, including the provision of
                  covered parking. Mobile homes are not allowed within a historic district or on any parcel
                  with a building, structure, object, or place having special historical interest or value, provided
                  the building, structure, object, or place is listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
                  Mobile homes that are not certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and
                  Safety Act of 1974 may only be placed in mobile home parks.
                  Mobile home parks are conditionally permitted in all of the City’s residential zoning districts.
                  The City has implemented regulations to ensure that new, expanded, or reconstructed
                  mobile home parks are located and established in a manner that is compatible with adjacent
                  residential neighborhoods and commercial areas. The minimum site area for a mobile home
                  park is 5 acres. A maximum of eight mobile home spaces per gross developable acre is
                  allowed in the RVL, RL, and RLM zoning districts, with a maximum of 12 mobile home
                  spaces per gross developable acre in the RM, RH, and RVH zoning districts. Setbacks of 10
                  to 20 feet, landscaping, and enclosure by fencing are also specified for mobile home parks in
                  the City’s zoning code. However, because of land values and the relatively low return on
                  investment associated with mobile home parks, the City has seen no proposals for new
                  mobile home parks in over thirty years, and we do not anticipate any new applications during
                  the time frame of this Housing Element.
                  Additionally, any subdivision of an existing mobile home park or conversion of an existing
                  mobile home park to another land use is subject to the provisions of the Government Code
                  related to mobile home park closure, commencing at Section 65863.7.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                   CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                A-66

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                   ASSESSMENT
Government Constraints on Production of Housing for the Disabled
SB 520 (Chapter 671, Statutes of 2001) requires all local jurisdictions to undertake an analysis
of governmental constraints to the development, improvement, and maintenance of housing
for persons with disabilities and to include a program to remove constraints to, or provide
reasonable accommodations for housing designed for occupancy by, or with supportive
services for persons with disabilities. For the purposes of state law, “persons with
disabilities” are defined in the Government Code as those individuals facing a variety of
physical, mental, or health problems that make major life activities difficult or impossible.
The City’s Consolidated Plan is one way in which the City analyzes the ongoing and future
needs of housing for the disabled. According to the City’s Five-Year Consolidated Plan
(2012-2017), the priority objectives for elderly residents and persons with disabilities include:
         Increase the number of rental units with accessibility features
         Provide more housing with supportive services
         Preserve housing stock owned or rented by low- or moderate-income elderly or
          disabled residents
Emergency Shelters
California Health and Safety Code (Section 50801) defines an emergency shelter as “housing
with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six
months or less by a homeless person. No individual or households may be denied
emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.” As indicated in the above tables Uses,
emergency shelters are currently not permitted by right in any zoning district in the City.
Senate Bill 2 (Cedillo, 2007)) requires jurisdictions to allow emergency shelters and
supportive and transitional housing without a conditional use permit. The City must identify
a zone(s) where emergency shelters will be allowed as a permitted use without a conditional
use permit or other discretionary permit.
The City has two existing emergency shelters, along with one shelter which serves mentally
disabled individuals some of whom could face homelessness as they exit acute psychiatric
care facilities: Heather House offers 24 beds, the Mission Solano Bridge to Life Center
which offers up to 208 beds, and Caminar, which offers 13 beds. Together, these facilities
meet a significant proportion of the City’s defined need for emergency shelter.
In addition, several nonprofit organizations offer specialized housing tied to the needs of
youth, single mothers, and those struggling with addictions, including Joshua House and
Children In Need of Hugs (CINOH).
These sites have access to public transportation and are located within close proximity to the
Solano County office of Health and Human Services, for the convenience of their clients to
obtain County social services.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                 DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                            A-67

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                  Supportive and Transitional Housing
                  Supportive housing is defined by Section 50675.14 of the Health and Safety Code as housing
                  with linked on-site or off-site services with no limit on the length of stay and that is occupied
                  by a target population as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 53260. "Target
                  populations means persons with low incomes having one or more disabilities, including
                  mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or
                  individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities
                  Services Act (Welfare and Institutions Code Section 4500 et. seq.) and may include, among
                  other populations, adults, emancipated youth, families, families with children, elderly
                  persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from
                  institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people. Services linked to supportive housing
                  usually focus on retaining housing, living and working in the community, and/or health
                  improvement.
                  Transitional housing is defined in Section 50675.2 of the Health and Safety Code as rental
                  housing for stays of at least six months but where the units are re-circulated to another
                  program recipient after a set period. It may be designated for a homeless individual or family
                  transitioning to permanent housing. This housing can take many structural forms such as
                  group housing and multi-family units and may include supportive services to allow
                  individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of independent living.
                  The City is amending its Zoning Ordinance to clarify that transitional and supportive
                  housing is treated the same as other residential uses. For example, an apartment complex
                  which is used for transitional housing is reviewed and approved under the same standards as
                  a conventional multifamily development. The Ordinance will add a footnote to the zoning
                  land uses table to clarify these regulations.
                  Community Care Facilities-Residential (Group Homes)
                  Group homes, termed “Community Care Facilities-Residential” in the Fairfield Zoning
                  Ordinance, are defined as 24–hour-a-day (residential) non-medical care. All Community Care
                  Facilities-Residential must be licensed by the State of California.
                  Community care facilities are permitted by right in all residential zoning districts as well as in
                  the CM (Commercial Mixed) zoning district. The City does not limit the number of residents
                  in such homes (the City defers to state regulations in such cases), nor does the City’s Zoning
                  Ordinance impose occupancy limits on unrelated individuals. No public hearing or
                  administrative action other than ministerial approval is required for use of existing housing
                  units as a community care facility. Construction of new single-family homes that may be
                  used for a community care facility are treated like all other single-family homes and require a
                  “Minor Discretionary Approval,” which requires public notice but no hearing.
                  Most community care facilities in Fairfield are smaller facilities operating within existing
                  single family homes in residential neighborhoods. Care is provided by residents of the homes
                  in question, and no additional parking is typically required.
                  For newly constructed community care facilities, parking is required per the Zoning
                  Ordinance for residential uses. However, the City’s Density Bonus Ordinance permits the
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                A-68

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                     ASSESSMENT
City to relax such standards for very low- and low-income residents and the elderly. Many
persons with disabilities will be served by housing permitted under this ordinance. In
addition, for projects developed on smaller, infill sites, the City’s Alternative Multifamily
Development Regulations reduce the number of required parking spaces.
In addition to the City’s residential zoning districts, the City conditionally allows community
care facilities-residential in four commercial districts: CD (Commercial Downtown), CO
(Commercial Office), CT (Commercial Thoroughfare), and CC (Community Commercial).
Zoning also permits community care facilities in the CM (Commercial Mixed) Zoning
District. A 300-foot separation is required for community care facilities.
Assisted Living Facilities
The Fairfield Zoning Ordinance defines Assisted Living Facilities as a “residential land use
that provides individual dwelling units supplemented with limited nursing and other services
available on site. Assisted Living Facilities typically have group facilities for dining and
cooking, centralized food service, and can offer social programs and other group amenities.”
Assisted Living Facilities are permitted by right in RM, RH, and RVH zoning districts;
additionally they are permitted with a conditional use permit in the RL, RLM, CD, CN, CO,
CT, CC, CM, and IBP zoning districts. Parking requirements for Assisted Living Facilities
(congregate care facilities) are flexibly determined on a case-by-case basis dictated by the type
of residents, number of employees, and other relevant factors.
Single Room Occupancy/Boarding Houses
Extremely low-income households typically comprise persons with special housing needs
including but not limited to persons experiencing homelessness or at risk of homelessness,
persons with substance abuse problems, and farm workers. Assembly Bill 2634 (Lieber,
2006) requires the quantification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs of
extremely low-income households. This need is summarized in Table A-6. In Fairfield, the
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) land use is permitted outright in the CM (Commercial
Mixed) Zoning District and conditionally permitted in the CT (commercial Thoroughfare)
District. The Zoning Ordinance provides specific policies to encourage the conversion of
existing motels into safe, quality, SRO housing. Some of these motels already serve as de
facto housing for poor and unstable households, and the new policies and requirements
designed to over time encourage upgrades to these units.
The Zoning Ordinance also addresses Boarding Houses as a separate land use. The
definition of “boarding house” is “the renting of three or more individual rooms within a
dwelling to separate households where each household is subject to a separate rental or lease
agreement or other payment arrangement the property owner. A boarding house includes
but is not limited to fraternity or sorority houses, housing for migrant farm workers, and
residential motels and hotels. Meals may or may not be provided but there is one common
kitchen facility.”
Boarding houses are permitted by right in the Commercial Mixed (CM) zoning district.
Additionally, boarding houses are allowed with a conditional use permit in the RH, RVH,
and CD zoning districts.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                 DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                             A-69

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                  Site Improvements, Building Codes & Development Fees
                  Site Improvements
                  Site improvement standards establish infrastructure or require services to support new
                  residential development such as streets, sidewalks, water and sewer, drainage, curbs and
                  gutters, street signs, park dedications, utility easements, and landscaping. While these
                  improvements are necessary to ensure that new housing meets the local jurisdiction’s
                  development goals, the cost of these requirements can represent a significant share of the
                  cost of producing new housing.
                  As stated in HUD’s study of Subdivision Requirements as a Regulatory Barrier, such
                  requirements can reasonably be considered regulatory barriers to affordable housing if the
                  jurisdiction determined requirements are greater (and hence, more costly) than those
                  necessary to achieve health and safety requirements in the community. Subdivision
                  requirements address streets, water, sewer, and drainage facilities; park, school, and other
                  development fees; and tree planting. These standards and fees, while related to legitimate
                  health, safety, and public service needs, nonetheless increase development costs. City fees
                  add another $30,000 in costs, and streets, sewers, sidewalks, water lines, and off-site
                  improvement costs can be substantial for many new subdivisions. Off-site improvements
                  include major arterial roads, subdivision perimeter landscaping improvements, and major
                  water/sewer utility improvements needed to serve the subdivision.
                  Street standards are one significant factor in the design of residential neighborhoods. The
                  City requires 36 feet between curbs for streets internal to a subdivision. Collector streets
                  must be at least 40 feet wide. These standards add to development costs and may, for some
                  projects, diminish the feasibility of developing affordable housing. At the same time, these
                  standards arguably address other public goals, including traffic safety.
                  Changes in City standards may reduce upfront costs but require higher maintenance costs
                  over the long term. Any modifications to City standards would require an analysis of
                  possible impacts on public health and safety, maintenance costs, and function.
                  Building Codes and Enforcement
                  The City of Fairfield implements the 2013 California Building Standards Code (CBSC),
                  which comprises the 2013 CA Building, Residential, Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing, Fire,
                  Energy and Green Building Codes. While building code requirements have, over the years,
                  greatly improved the safety and energy efficiency of homes, it is undeniable that modern
                  codes require the construction of more costly dwelling units than codes used twenty, thirty,
                  or forty years ago. The City of Fairfield has not adopted the 2013 CA Administrative Code,
                  which would permit the City to waive technical requirements that impact housing
                  affordability. Also, the City considers the CBSC a “minimum” standard for building
                  construction. While it may lead to increased costs of construction, reducing building code
                  requirements may lead to long-term health and safety risks, particularly in a seismically active
                  area like Fairfield.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                              A-70

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
The Code Enforcement Unit works closely with all City departments in order to resolve
health, safety, and public nuisance problems that adversely affect the quality of life for
Fairfield residents. The unit enforces the City of Fairfield Municipal Code as it applies to
property maintenance, property nuisances, and other violations in residential and commercial
districts.
Health and Safety Code 17980(b)(2) requires local governments to give consideration to the
needs for housing as expressed in the housing element when deciding whether to require
vacation of a substandard building or to repair as necessary. The enforcement agency is
required to give preference to the repair of the building whenever it is economically feasible
to do so without having to repair more than 75 percent of the dwelling.
Development Fees
The City collects development fees based on the need to supply necessary services and
facilities to new development. Because property tax rates and reassessments are limited by
the state constitution, many municipal facilities that were financed by general obligation
bonds repaid from property tax receipts must now be paid either as “up-front” fees on new
development or through special assessments. Such fees are typically imposed as a condition
of subdivision, but can be included in those fees collected at the time of issuance of building
permits. Improvements frequently considered for financing through development fees
include schools, parks, storm drainage and transportation facilities (traffic signals, street
widening, bicycle paths, etc.)..
Fees for development approvals fall into the following general categories: Planning Fees,
Building Permit Fees, and Impact Fees, which pay for infrastructure and services.
Planning Fees In 2014, a typical 100-unit single family residential development which
required no Zone Changes or General Plan or Specific Plan amendments would pay $8,016
for development review approval and an additional $13,561 for the Tentative Subdivision
Map. Environmental review (CEQA) and map plan checks are additional costs. Planning
fees for a 100 unit multifamily housing project, again assuming no General Plan or Zoning
Amendments are required, would include $9,149 for development review, plus CEQA fees.
On a per lot or per unit basis, Planning review fees are a relatively minor factor in housing
costs .
Building Permit Fees, which include Impact Fees, are a more significant factor in the cost of
new housing. Such fees include standard permit fees and plan check/review fees but also
include impact fees. Such impact fees pay for the public services and infrastructure needed
to support the development and provide services. Not all impact and development fees are
City of Fairfield fees or under the control of the City. Impact fees can include Park and
Recreation (Bedroom Tax), Water and Sewer Connection Fees, County License Tax,
geographically-defined Benefit Districts, School Development Fees, Urban design, Public
Facilities, Traffic Impact Fees, and Park and Recreation (Quimby Act) Fees.
In addition, the City’s major planned growth area, Northeast Fairfield, will require
investment in transportation, parks, greenbelt/habitat mitigation, public works, and other
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                           A-71

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                  on-site and off-site improvements. These Northeast fees can add costs to a typical building
                  permit.
                  The fees summarized below are calculated on the following typical project:
                           Single Family: 1800 square foot 3 bedroom, 2 bath home
                           Multifamily: 100 unit apartment complex distributed among 40 one-bedroom units
                            (700 square feet), 30 two-bedroom units (900 square feet) and 30 three-bedroom
                            units (1000 square feet).
                  Typical building permit and development impact fees are calculated separately for both
                  Central Fairfield (Tables 42A and 43A) and Northeastern Fairfield (Tables 42B and 43B).
                  The Northeastern Fairfield fees are typical for new development in the Train Station Specific
                  Plan Area).
                                                        TABLE A-42A
                      SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSING BUILDING PERMIT FEES
                             (2014) CENTRAL FAIRFIELD/CORDELIA
                          Fee Description           Amount                             Notes
                     AB 1600 Public Facilities    $3,306
                     AB 1600 Parks and Rec*       $6,017
                     AB 1600 Transportation       $4,192
                     AB 1600 Urban Design         $207                           Public urban design enhancements
                     Building Permit              $1,611.13
                     Electrical Permit            $55
                     Electrical Issuance fee      $24
                     Fire Sprinkler               $125
                                                                     At the request of the City, the School district is
                                                               initiating a reduction program for residential impact
                     Fairfield USD School Fee     $8,483                                  fees of approximately 20%
                     Green Building Standards     $8
                     License Tax                  $3,819
                     General Plan Amendment       $87.00
                     Mechanical                   $36.89
                     Mechanical Issuance          $25
                     Park and Recreation**        $2,865
                     Plumbing-Residential         $36.89
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                      CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-72

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                         ASSESSMENT
        Fee Description               Amount                      Notes
   SMIP Residential                  $24.37
   Water Connection                  $6,046
   Water Meter & Box                 $505        for 1” box
   Sewer Connection                  $5,943
   License Tax                       $2,302
   County Public Facilities
   Fee                               $8,962
   Total Residential Fee             $52,678.53
Assumes a 1800 sq/ft, 3-bedroom home
                                           TABLE A-42B
        SINGLE-FAMILY                     (2014)-NORTHEAST FAIRFIELD
          Fee Description                Amount                      Notes
   AB 1600 Public Facilities           $4,308
   AB 1600 Parks and Rec*              $6,017
   AB 1600 Transportation              $4,192
   AB 1600 Urban Design                $393                  Public urban design enhancements
   Building Permit                     $1,611.13
   Electrical Permit                   $55.25
   Electrical Issuance fee             $24
   Fire Sprinkler                      $125
   Travis USD School Fee               $4,308
   Green Building Standards            $8
   License Tax                         $3,819
   General Plan Amendment              $87.00
   Mechanical                          $36.89
   Mechanical Issuance                 $25
   NE-Greebelt                         $282
   NE-Linear Park                      $1,723
   NE-Transportation                   $12,938
   Park and Recreation                 $2,865
   Plumbing-Residential                $36.89
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                             DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                            A-73

                            APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                       ASSESSMENT
                            Fee Description                Amount              Notes
                     Plumbing Issuance Fee               $22.00
                     SMIP Residential                    $18.75
                     Water Connection                    $6,046
                     Water Connection Zone 2             $1,591
                     Water Meter & Box                   $505       for 1” box
                     Sewer Connection                    $5,943
                     License Tax                         $2,302
                     County Public Facilities Fee        $8,962
                     Total Fee                           $65,994.26
                  Assumes a 1700 sq/ft, 3-bedroom home
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                    CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                    A-74

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                 ASSESSMENT
                                  TABLE A-43A
      TYPICAL MULTI-FAMILY BUILDING PERMIT FEES
    (2014) 100 UNIT COMPLEX IN CENTRAL FAIRFIELD
        Fee Description         Amount                            Notes
   AB 1600 Public Facilities $308,236.00
                                                    Reflects 50% City reduction adopted by
   AB 1600 Parks and Rec     $225,600.00                                        Council in 2013
   AB 1600 Transportation    $277,600.00
   AB 1600 Urban Design      $9,658.00                    Public urban design enhancements
   Building Permit           $27,221.66
   CASP-Dedicated Fund       $25.00                             State Mandated Fee for ADA
   CASP-General Fund         $100.00
   County Public Facilities  $672,600.00                             Not a City of Fairfield fee
   Electrical Permit         $2,333.50
   Electrical Issuance fee   $24.00
   Fire Sprinkler            $6,696.00
                                             School district is initiating a reduction program
   Fairfield USD School Fee  $358,282.00   for residential impact fees of approximately 20%
   Green Building Standards  $288.00
   License Tax               $274,700.00
                                           General Plan Cost Recovery Fee collected on all
   General Plan Amendment    $4,400.00     development projects
   Mechanical                $1,558.06
   Mechanical Issuance       $25
   Park and Recreation**     $179,364.00
   Plumbing-Residential      $1,558.06
   Plumbing-Issuance         $22.00
   SMIP Residential          $935.08
   Water Connection          $365,218.00
   Water Meter & Box         $871          for 1.5” box
   Sewer Connection          $358,977.00
   Total Residential Fee     $3,076,292.36
   Per Unit Fee              $30,762.92
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                         A-75

                         APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                 ASSESSMENT
                                                     TABLE A-43B
                  TYPICAL MULTIFAMILY-NORTHEAST FAIRFIELD 2014
                        Fee Description            Amount                        Notes
                   AB 1600 Public Facilities    $308,236.00
                                                                     Reflects 50% City reduction adopted by
                   AB 1600 Parks and Rec        $225,600.00                                  Council in 2013
                   AB 1600 Transportation       $277,600.00
                   AB 1600 Urban Design         $9,658.00                 Public urban design enhancements
                   Building Permit              $27,221.66
                   CASP-Dedicated Fund          $25.00                         State Mandated Fee for ADA
                   CASP-General Fund            $100.00
                   County Public Facilities     $672,600.00                        Not a City of Fairfield fee
                   Electrical Permit            $2,333.50
                   Electrical Issuance fee      $24.00
                   Fire Sprinkler               $6,696.00
                   Travis USD School Fee        $185,689.16
                   Green Building Standards     $288.00
                   License Tax                  $274,700.00
                                                            General Plan Cost Recovery Fee collected on all
                   General Plan Amendment       $4,400.00   development projects
                   Mechanical                   $1,558.06
                   Mechanical Issuance          $25
                   NE _Greenbelt                $8,400.00
                   NE-Linear Park               $129,200.00
                   NE-Transportation            $794,300.00
                   Park and Recreation**        $179,364.00
                   Plumbing-Residential         $1,558.06
                   Plumbing-Issuance            $22.00
                   SMIP Residential             $935.08
                   Water Connection             $365,218.00
                   Water Connection Zone 2      $119,698.00
                   Water Meter & Box            $871        for 1.5” box
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                             CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                             A-76

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
        Fee Description           Amount                            Notes
   Sewer Connection            $358,977.00
   Total Residential Fee       $3,955,297.52
   Per Unit Fee                $39,552.97
City permit and development fees add considerably to the cost of a residential development,
but these fees are necessary to pay for processing development applications and to pay for
the services needed by new residential developments.
Building permit fees vary in Northern California. Fairfield is slightly higher than Vacaville
(10%) but less than other regional suburban communities like Elk Grove, West Sacramento,
and Roseville. Table A-44 summarizes permit fees for several suburban Northern California
jurisdictions.
                                      TABLE A-44
      COMPARABLE              NORTHERN CALIFORNIA BUILDING
                                PERMIT FEES 2014
      City or Jurisdiction      Single Family      Multi Family
   Suisun City                 $41,976             $29,290
   West Sacramento             $59,512             $42,009
   Elk Grove                   $96,060             $55,470
   Rocklin                     $91,660             $42,100
   Lincoln                     $70.050             $46,070
   Roseville                   $74,211             $48,477
   Vacaville                   $48,130*            $30,712*
.*Includes estimated School fees and County Facilities Fees.
Staff consulted with two developers currently building in the City. City impact fees represent
typically 15-25% of total development costs for new single family units. One developer
noted that City fees are similar in value to raw land costs. They confirmed that County fees
and School District fees are a significant factor in the total cost burden, but as noted below
the School District is currently reevaluating these fees. Fairfield’s development fees are not
unusually high, and there are cities with both lower and higher fees in Northern California.
During the most recent recession, most cities in the region did not adjust their fees, which
impacted development feasibility and contributed to the decline in construction in
California. Fairfield saw the biggest impact on multifamily development, which led the City
to reducing multifamily fees in 2013.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                            A-77

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                  Reducing the Impacts of City Development Fees
                  The City has taken several measures to reduce the impact of development fees on affordable
                  housing.
                  In the Train Station Specific Plan Area, the City reduces development fees by 25% for the
                  multifamily units which are built above the 24 dwelling units/acre density range. This is
                  designed to facilitate higher density development, such as near the Train Station.
                  For over two decades, the City has permitted affordable housing projects to defer payment
                  of fees up to the point of building occupancy. This Fee Deferral Program, which is outlined
                  in Chapter 5, Article I of the Fairfield City Code, allows projects providing housing to
                  moderate, low, or very low income households to defer payment of certain building fees
                  until occupancy or permanent financing is obtained.
                  Applicants wishing to receive a fee deferral apply to the Community Development
                  Department. Key requirements include:
                          For multifamily housing, the project must be affordable to moderate income (50%)
                           and low income (25%) residents
                          For single family homes, the project must be affordable to moderate income
                           households
                          For rental housing, a 55 year period of affordability
                          For ownership housing, a 45 year period of affordability.
                  The Community Development Director ultimately approves all deferrals.
                  In addition, the City has established a Fee Credit Program for affordable housing. When a
                  commercial building or residential structure is demolished, credits associated with the
                  demolished building can be donated to the City’s Fee Credit Bank. These Fee Credits are
                  calculated based on square footage, number of bedrooms, water meter use, or other units of
                  measurement to calculate the subject fee. Fee credits are typically available when new
                  buildings built on the site of the demolished building do not use all of the fee credits
                  available for the site. Fee credits are banked by the City for use in future development
                  An applicant developing affordable housing can submit an application to the Community
                  Development Director for fee credits. Fees which can be reduced include water and sewer
                  connection fees but do not include fees associated with other governments like school
                  mitigation fees of Solano County Facilities fees. A project receiving fee credits must provide
                  affordable units for low and moderate income households and a covenant of affordability
                  which can last up to 55 years.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                A-78

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
In addition to these programs, in 2013, the City implemented aggressive measures to
facilitate multifamily residential development by lowering certain fees. These measures
included: .
•         Reduction in multifamily water connection fees by $906/unit
•         50% Reduction in Park and Recreation Fee for multifamily housing.
The City also worked Solano County and the Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District to
identify possible fee reductions to facilitate development during the recovery from the Great
Recession of 2008. Fee reductions already implemented included:
         Solano County Infrastructure Fee reduced from $8,656 for each multifamily unit in
          2013 to $6,726 in 2014.
         Solano County Infrastructure Fee for Single Family reduced from $9,150 in 2013 to
          $8,962 in 2014.
The Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District is also considering reducing its School Impact
Fees by 20% in the near future. The City will work closely with the School District to
implement this fee reduction. In addition to the fee reductions discussed above, the City
took actions to encourage second units.
Second dwelling units are another source of affordable housing, especially for senior citizens
and individuals. The City exempts second dwelling units from water connection fees,
AB 1600 fees, Benefit District fees, and any infrastructure fees established for Northeast
Fairfield. There is a water meter fee of $505 (based on a 1” box), however, if the builder
would like the second unit to be separately metered. Second dwelling units are also subject to
reduced (40 percent) fees for General Plan Cost Recovery Program, Comprehensive
Amendment to the General Plan Cost Recovery Fee, and License Tax. Such units must only
pay the lower cost for an additional per bedroom for the Park and Recreation Fee and
Cordelia Recreation Fee.
Public Facilities
The City has not identified any public facility constraints that would impose an impediment
to the construction of housing between 2014 and 2022. The City has or will have adequate
water treatment and distribution capacity. According to the Public Facilities and Services
Element of the General Plan, the City will have to add water supplies as it grows, even with
good water conservation practices. Projections indicate that 50,500 acre-feet per year
(AF/year) of water will be needed to accommodate buildout of the General Plan, exceeding
currently identified water supplies by 14,600 AF/year. Fairfield is served by two water
treatment facilities. The Waterman Treatment Plant has a present 22.5 million gallon per day
(mgd) treatment capacity, ultimately expandable to 45 mgd. The North Bay Regional Water
Treatment Plant has a 40 mgd capacity (26.7 mgd for Fairfield and 13.3 mgd for Vacaville)
with sufficient land available at the site for expansion to 90 mgd (60 mgd for Fairfield and 30
mgd for Vacaville). Together, the City’s two treatment plants provide treatment capacity far
in excess of that needed to serve the City at buildout.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                             A-79

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                  The current capacity of the Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District (FSSD) is sufficient to meet the
                  needs of both cities over the next five years. According to the Public Facilities and Services
                  Element, the FSSD is in the midst of a planned 20-year program of facilities construction
                  that will increase treatment plant, trunk main, and pump station capacities to correct existing
                  system capacity deficiencies and accommodate future growth within the present General
                  Plan limits of Fairfield and Suisun. The planned expansion program will increase the
                  treatment plant capacity in multiple stages from the present 17.5 mgd Average Dry Weather
                  Flow (ADWF) to ultimate capacity of about 25 mgd. The sewer system is divided into four
                  sewer basins. For two of the basins, Cordelia and Inlet, the existing sewer facilities with
                  extensions and minor updates are adequate to meet the General Plan buildout needs. The
                  other two basins, Suisun and Central, will require pump station expansions and additional
                  trunk sewer capacity to serve development in unincorporated areas east of Peabody Road.
                  The Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District operates three high schools: Armijo High
                  School and Fairfield High School in Central Fairfield and Rodriguez High School in
                  Cordelia, The Travis Unified School District operates Vanden High School, which serves
                  Travis Air Force Base, portions of northeastern Fairfield, and areas in southern Vacaville.
                  Currently, there is adequate capacity in the systems to support planned growth, and planning
                  for additional school capacity is underway.
                  The City is constructing new parks that will help improve recreational facilities in the area.
                  The Train Station Specific Plan envisions the development of a range of new private,
                  neighborhood, and community parks that will serve this new growth center.
                  While basic public services are adequate, traffic congestion has increasingly become an issue
                  in the Cordelia area of Fairfield. Cordelia lies near the intersection of two major regional
                  freeways (Interstates 80 and 680). During peak periods, these highways can back up, causing
                  traffic congestion on nearby streets. Several improvements have been completed since 2009.
                  CALTRANS relocated the eastbound I-80 Truck Scales and improved the connection to
                  east-bound Highway 12, significantly reducing congestion associated with the facility..
                  Completion of Suisun Parkway (the North Connector) between Cordelia and Central
                  Fairfield also provided a new route for local and sub-regional traffic. In addition,
                  CALTRANS is completing a major expansion of westbound Highway 12, which will
                  improve regional traffic flow to the Napa Valley.
                  Planning and design for the next phase of interchange improvements is well underway, with
                  engineering, property acquisition, and design in progress. It will nonetheless be several years
                  before significant capacity improvements are completed can be added to the interstate
                  system. Alternatives to highway reliance are also in design. Train station accessed at the new
                  Fairfield-Vacaville Train Station will be an alternative for longer distance commuters.
                  Local Processing and Permit Procedures
                  City processing of residential developments is governed by federal, state, and local
                  regulations. For residential projects, the City must adhere to the Subdivision Map Act,
                  planning, zoning and development law, and the California Environmental Quality Act
                  (CEQA). The time frames for public review and permit processing outlined in these
                  regulations, as well as the regulations the City has adopted to implement them, impact the
                  cost and time of permit processing and approval.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                 CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-80
             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                   ASSESSMENT
Since 1992, the City of Fairfield has streamlined the process for development review. Almost
all issues are addressed either at staff level through an administrative hearing process or at
the Planning Commission. As discussed previously in this document, the new Zoning
Ordinance adopted in 1999 also streamlines development review. The ordinance has largely
eliminated special purpose planned development districts and relies on standardized zoning
districts with more clearly defined standards and requirements. The ordinance also provides
suggested alternative prototypes for higher density and affordable single-family housing and
authorizes the Planning Commission to approve new prototypes.
The City of Fairfield currently employs a multi-tiered review process for residential
development projects. For projects with fewer than 11 single-family units or 26 multi-family
units, an application will include the filing and processing of an environmental assessment
form, tentative subdivision map application, and Development Review application. The
project would undergo review by Community Development staff, and inter-agency review by
the City’s Development Action Review Team (DART) team. Staff then approves smaller
projects through an Administrative Hearing process. Larger projects (more than 11 homes
or 26 apartments) go through a similar process, with final review and action by the Planning
Commission. Finally, projects that require re-zonings, General Plan Amendments, and/or
Final Subdivision Maps also require City Council review and approval.
The processing of the applications are handled concurrently and typically can take 8-10
weeks from the time the application is determined to be complete until it is presented to the
Planning Commission or City Council for their action. If a zone change or General Plan
Amendment is required, an additional two weeks of processing time may be required.
If an environmental impact report (EIR) is required, it could extend the time frame up to six
months to account for EIR preparation, additional public review, and certification by the
Planning Commission or City Council. In the past, EIRs have not been required by the City
for individual residential subdivisions. Instead, the City has relied upon EIRs prepared for
the Fairfield General Plan or specific planning areas. Similarly, the City has generally not
required EIRs for multi-family projects in the past. For future development, the City will use
recently approved environmental documents adopted for the Train Station Specific Plan
which will address CEQA issues for this development area.
The permit requirements and time frames required by the City of Fairfield to process the
permit applications are similar to other jurisdictions in the Bay Area. The normal process is
not considered a constraint to residential development. However, if significant
neighborhood opposition to a project arises, the development review and CEQA process
can be substantially extended, affecting the feasibility of the project.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                             A-81

                             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                           ASSESSMENT
                                                                   TABLE A-45
                                        TIMELINES               FOR PERMIT PROCEDURES
                                  Type of Approval or Permit                        Typical Processing Time
                   Ministerial Review                                                over the counter/1-day
                   Conditional Use Permit                                                   4-6 weeks
                   Zone Change                                                             6-10 weeks
                   General Plan Amendment                                                  8-12 weeks
                   Site Plan Review                                                        6-10 weeks
                   Architectural/Design Review                                             6-10 weeks
                   Subdivision Maps                                                        6-10 weeks
                   Parcel Maps                                                               6 weeks
                   Initial Environmental Study                                               6 weeks
                   Environmental Impact Report                                            6-12 months
                  Source: City of Fairfield, Community Development Department, 2014
                  Accessibility and ADA Compliance
                  Improvements to residences to bring them into compliance with ADA regulations typically
                  require only a building permit and ministerial review by Planning staff. For the few
                  improvements that require adjustments to zoning standards, the Zoning Ordinance includes
                  an established process that complies with state planning law. Multifamily housing will
                  typically require only administrative level approvals if exterior changes to the building are
                  necessary.
                  Physically, Fairfield City Hall is accessible to the disabled. Wheelchair-accessible work tables
                  are available for use by clients, and staff makes every effort to accommodate those with
                  special needs. Permit application materials and the Zoning Ordinance are available online, at
                  City Hall, and at Westfield Solano Mall, which reduces the number of trips to City Hall. The
                  Fairfield Building Division also publishes a variety of handouts related to the building code
                  and the permit process. These can be helpful in understanding regulations.
                  Building Codes
                  The City of Fairfield implements the CBSC, which incorporates by reference the UBC. The
                  CBSC contains specific but flexible guidance regarding improvements necessary for
                  accessibility to persons with physical disabilities.
                  Building codes have not been an issue in the City of Fairfield as far as limiting the ability to
                  provide accessible access. Fairfield is largely a newer community, and implementation of the
                  CBSC has faced relatively few constraints. Building division staff is familiar with the code
                  and can provide advice to homeowners and contractors interested in meeting accessibility
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                     CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                       A-82
             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                      ASSESSMENT
requirements. For example, while no permit is typically required for a ramp, staff can assist
interested persons in designing their ramp to meet needs.
There are two approaches to housing design for mobility impairment: adaptability and
accessibility. Adaptable housing is a design concept in which a dwelling unit contains design
features that allow for accessibility and use by mobility impaired individuals with only minor
modifications. An accessible unit has the actual special features (e.g. grab bars and special
cabinetry) installed in the house.
To address the need for the adaptability and accessibility of housing by mobility-impaired
individuals, the California Department of Housing and Community Development has
adopted a series of requirements for new rental housing. These regulations implement most
of the requirements of federal law for federally financed housing projects, plus several
additional requirements. California law requires that 5 percent of the dwelling units in a
newly constructed apartment building, hotel, motel, lodge, or other rental project include
design features for adaptable use by mobility-impaired individuals.
The Fairfield Building Division is charged with implementing state requirements for
accessibility, as well as the City’s adopted UBC requirements. The state requirements address
exterior and interior design features, such as walkways leading to a dwelling unit, the gradient
of the access way to the main entrance, changes in level, entry width, threshold height, ramp
and landing design, corridor widths, types of door locks and latches, electrical outlet and
switch heights, bathroom configuration and clear space, ability to install grab bars in
bathrooms, knee space under lavatories and sinks, the height of countertops, the
configuration of a kitchen, and other aspects of housing design.
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Land and Development Costs
A review of land on the market for residential development in Fairfield in August 2008
reveals that the average raw land cost for single-family lots at the RLM:6 zoning density is
approximately $74,000. For medium density projects (smaller lots), lot costs are in the
$34,000 range. For larger lots (6,000 square foot+), lot costs can be around $60,000 per lot.
Improvement costs for single-family lots can add upwards of $20,000 to $30,000 in value per
lot. Construction costs for moderate quality construction range from $55-$100 per square
foot, depending on builder, materials, and amenities (www.building-cost.net).
Development costs (construction, fittings, labor, and materials, along with permits) for a
standard quality 2,000 square foot home is in the range of $360,000 in Northeastern Fairfield
(per City of Fairfield estimates).
According to Fairfield’s Five-Year Consolidated Plan (2012-2017) Fairfield’s median sales
price in 2011 ($220,827) remains below the average reported in the 2008 Consolidated Plan
($300,000). While prices have recovered since the low point of the recession, they remain
well below the average in the central Bay Area, and Fairfield has not experienced the serious
price inflation seen in San Francisco or Silicon Valley. Nonetheless, prices in Fairfield will
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                            A-83

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                  continue to rise due to limited supply of homes on the market and that inner Bay Area price
                  inflation
                  The City has developed programs to address the issue of land and construction costs. For
                  example, the City donated a site to Laurel Creek House. The City helps self-help
                  homebuilders identify sites suitable for their projects. CDBG grants and HOME funds have
                  been used to reduce development costs. The City’s density bonus program for senior and
                  affordable housing, can help developers reduce the per-unit costs of multi-family
                  development. The City also has $3,000,000 in fee credits available for affordable housing
                  projects.
                  Financing
                  The cost of financing can have a substantial effect on the affordability and availability of
                  housing. A few points difference in the interest rate can make a substantial difference in the
                  financial feasibility of a development project. For buyers with a good credit rating, current
                  interest rates for fixed rate home purchase loans in Fairfield range from 4.5-6% depending
                  on the mortgage type. The City of Fairfield also offers “silent second” mortgages to
                  moderate and low income homebuyers in the 0-3% range.
                  In 2012, the Vallejo-Fairfield Reporting Area saw 4,399 loans originated, 1,030 loans denied,
                  696 withdrawn, and 522 approved but not accepted. This represents a significant drop in
                  total loan volume since the peak years of 2004-2006 addressed in the last housing element.
                  25% of the loans were denied or withdrawn during this time period. As a sample, in Census
                  Tract 2525.02, a moderate income census tract, only two loans were originated in 2012, with
                  two denied
                  While the City is not able to provide first mortgages to households, it can affect the
                  availability of financing through its first-time homebuyer and Mortgage Credit Certificate
                  programs as well as by working with builders to use state and federal financing programs,
                  issuing tax-exempt bonds to finance affordable housing projects, and seeking lenders who
                  will increase their community commitments to housing development under the provisions of
                  the Community Reinvestment Act.
                  III. HOUSING RESOURCES
                  AVAILABILITY               OF    LAND
                  State law requires the City to demonstrate that there is adequate vacant land available to
                  meet the allocated housing needs. The City has a total capacity for over 10,000 housing
                  units, on sites within the city limits with zoning, public facilities, and no substantial physical
                  or environmental characteristics that would preclude their development. Potential unit
                  estimates are also based on existing development agreements and tentative maps that govern
                  the number of units likely to be developed.
                  In addition to the land with residential zoning, many of Fairfield’s commercial zoning
                  districts conditionally permit housing, including multi-family housing. Residential
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-84

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
development is also permitted without a use permit in the CM Commercial Mixed zoning
districts near downtown. It is a priority in the City’s General Plan to encourage mixed-use
and infill development.
The residential land use categories are based on land use categories defined in the General
Plan and the Zoning Ordinance, as follows:
               RVL                  Very Low Density                0-2.5 du/acre
                RL                  Low Density                     2.5-4.5 du/acre
                RLM                 Low Medium                      4.5-8 du/acre
                RM                  Medium                          8 to 15 du/acre
                RH                  High Density                    15 to 22 du/acre
                RVH                 Very High Density               22-32 du/acre
The Train Station Specific Plan has specific density ranges that differ somewhat from
zoning elsewhere in the City. These density ranges are considered “as of right” densities and
they have been distributed to planning areas based on the development concept for the
overall Specific Plan. However, the Specific Plan also allows for density transfers within the
Specific Plan area which can result in higher density development in certain key locations.
          Category                           Range (By Right)       With Density Transfer
          Low Density Residential:           4-7                    up to 10 du/acre
          Medium Density Residential         10-14 du/acre          up to 20 du/acre
          High Density Residential           20 to 28 du/acre       up to 50 du/acre
The Specific Plan assume densities will be 6, 12, 1n3 24 du/acre respectively, which
represents the mid-point of these as-of-right density ranges.
The Housing Element assumes that lower density land use (very low (RVL), low (RL), and
low-medium density (RLM) zoning districts) categories will be developed with market rate
housing affordable primarily to above moderate-income households. With subsidies, a
limited number of housing units affordable to moderate-income or even low income
residents households may be built in the R-LM zoning district (or RL zoning district in the
Train Station Specific Plan area), but the City does not assume that development in this
zoning district is necessary to meet its Regional Housing Needs Allocation and does not
include these lower density sites in the Sites Inventory.
The Housing Element assumes that the medium density (RM) category will typically be
developed with moderate- and above moderate-income housing. If subsidies are provided,
some affordable units for low- or even very low-income households may be produced at this
density.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                            A-85

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                  The affordable housing units (very low-, low-, and moderate-income) will primarily be
                  accommodated in the high and very-high-density zoning districts. Density does not
                  guarantee affordability. But the densities permitted in these zoning districts, in combination
                  with the various programs included in the Housing Element that mitigate the cost of
                  development, help ensure that there is adequate vacant land to potentially accommodate the
                  housing needs of all income categories.
                  The sites analysis confirms is enough vacant land to meet the City’s obligations for very low,
                  low, and moderate-income housing. In calculating the capacity for housing development for
                  specific parcels, the City used one of the following assumptions:
                          Vacant parcels have received entitlements with unit counts.
                          For RM (Medium Density Residential) zoning, the tables use the mid-point of the 8
                           to 15 du/acre range (11.5).
                          For RH (High Density Residential), the tables assume 20 units per acre. This is
                           consistent with recent projects completed in Fairfield.
                          For the Train Station Specific Plan, the number of units in each density range were
                           not calculated for each legal parcel but were assigned to Specific Plan’s Planning
                           Areas, which do not follow parcel lines. No final parcel lines have been defined.
                           Each planning area in the Train Station Specific Plan has an identified acreage for
                           each density range and land use type. Planning staff carefully estimated how much
                           density is assigned to each legal parcel.
                          In the table, the total acreages listed reflect parcel acreages, not the acreages
                           assigned solely to a residential use.
                          In calculating the number of units in each planning area, staff’s conservative
                           estimate is that development will occur at the midpoint of each density range. In the
                           RM zone, the densities were assumed to be 12 du/acre; while in the RH zone, the
                           density assumed was 24 du/acre. This density is reflected in the densities assigned
                           portions of individual parcels
                  Table A-46 shows a specific list of high density residential projects and their affordability.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                 CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-86

                 APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                              ASSESSMENT
                                                 TABLE A-46
             HOUSING AFFORDABILITY IN HIGH DENSITY
                                                                                  Affordable Rents
        Project Name                      Density          Unit Size      Rent   (HUD Standards)
                                                                                Very Low       Low
 The Summit (1991)                     18.6 du/acre      1 BR/1 BA     $1315   $768          $1,228
                                       (180 units)       2 BR/1 BA     $1,435  $959          $1,534
                                                         2BR/2 BA      $1,485  $1,035        $1,657
 Fairfield Vista* (1999)               16.43 du/acre     2 BR/1 BA     $725    $959          $1,53
                                                         3 BR/2 BA     $810    $1,112        $1,779
                                                         4 BR/2 BA     $900    $1,266        $2,025
 Sunset Creek* (1997)                  20.2 du/acre      1 BR/1 BA     $750    $768          $1,228
                                                         2 BR/1 BA     $850    $959          $1,583
                                                         3 BR/2 BA     $1150   $1,112        $1,779
 Rolling Oaks (1999)                   20 du/acre        1 BR/ 1BA     $1319   $768          $1228
                                       (292 units)       2 BR/2 BA     $1619   $1,035        $1,657
                                                         3 BR/2 BA     $1904   $1,112        $1,779
 Bridgeport Ranch (1999)               20 du/acre        1 BR/ 1BA     $1391   $768          $1228
                                       (298 units)       2 BR/2 BA     $1827   $1,035        $1,657
 Park Crossing (2002)                  20 du/acre        1 BR/ 1BA     $1298   $768          $1228
                                       (200 units)       2 BR/2 BA     $1790   $1,035        $1,657
                                                         3 BR/2 BA     $2012   $1,112        $1,779
Source: City of Fairfield, August 2014
* Subsidized Project
** Substantial Rehabilitation and Additional Units Added
The City understands the difficulty in developing on smaller parcels of less than 2 acres in
size, but continues to successfully identify nonprofit developers and local niche builders
interested in smaller projects. Recent projects include Park Place, an 11-unit apartment
project developed in 2002. Infill developers like the Olson Company have extended their
successful product lines to smaller parcels. Programs HO 2.1A and HO 2.2A will continue
to encourage lot consolidation and/or the development of infill housing in the City.
Per State Law (AB 2348) the City of Fairfield needs to show vacant residentially zoned sites
at a density of 30 units per acre to meet their RHNA allocation for extremely low-, very low-
and low-income households. In cases where the City does not have enough residential
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                   DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                     A-87
                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                  vacant sites zoned at 30 units per acre to meet their RHNA allocation for these income
                  groups the City needs to analyze the financial feasibility for construction of affordable units
                  on sites zoned for less than 30 units per acre.
                  The City’s Housing Element assumes it can accommodate its extremely low-, very low- and
                  low-income RHNA allocations on available vacant sites in the RH zoning district. Properties
                  in the Train Station Specific Plan Area permit development of up to 50 dwelling units per
                  acre near the train station. In addition, there are several projects completed during the past
                  fifteen years which demonstrate the ability to develop affordable housing at densities below
                  30 dwellings per acre Caminar Solano developed Laurel Gardens in 2006. This 30-unit
                  project was developed on a 1.3 acre infill site at a density of 23 units per acre. It provides
                  housing for a special needs population. (Mentally ill/handicapped) and is affordable to very
                  low-income households.
                  The City also completed a feasibility analysis of development potential along the City’s 80-
                  to-80 Corridor (February 2008). This analysis indicated that density in the 20 to 25 unit per
                  acre range is sufficient to allow for the development of affordable, moderate income and
                  market rate housing. Higher densities often require more expensive construction and
                  structured parking, which impacts affordability and the feasibility of the project. With the
                  elimination of density caps in the City’s Zoning Ordinance, the City is providing developers
                  in this corridor and elsewhere with the necessary flexibility to design and build projects at an
                  appropriate density. However, market conditions must recover enough to permit a mixed
                  use project like those envisioned in the Corridor Study to be feasible. The City is revisiting
                  many of the concepts in the 80-to-80 Corridor Study as part of the Downtown South/West
                  Texas Street Specific Plan now underway.
                  In 2008 and 2014, interviews were conducted with several affordable housing developers
                  (Solano County Affordable Housing Foundation, Affirmed Housing Group, and BRIDGE
                  Housing) to determine what zones are appropriate for the development of affordable
                  housing.
                  The Solano County Affordable Housing Foundation (SAHF) indicated that they have
                  participated in acquisition/rehabilitation projects in the City, and plan on developing
                  affordable housing in the near future in Fairfield. Based on past experience, it is possible to
                  develop affordable housing in Fairfield at the 15-22 units per acre range. SAHF believes the
                  Train Station Specific Plan holds great opportunity for future affordable housing and that
                  the City is very flexible and accommodating to affordable housing developers. SAHF also
                  indicted that fees were comparable to surrounding jurisdictions and that current fees did not
                  hinder the development of affordable housing in Fairfield.
                  Affirmed Housing Group was contacted and indicated that the current range of 15 to 22
                  units per acre is appropriate and that the densities were not cost prohibitive. In 2007,
                  Affirmed Housing Group developed Avian Glen, an 87 unit multifamily project in nearby
                  Vallejo. The project was developed on a 4.22 acre site, resulting in a density of 21 units per
                  acre. Avian Glenn is 100 percent affordable and provided 7 units affordable to extremely
                  low- income households, 19 units affordable to very low-income households, 59 units
                  affordable to low-income households and 2 manager units, which are not rent-restricted.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                 CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-88

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                      ASSESSMENT
BRIDGE Housing was also contacted and indicated that 20 units to the acre is the most
economical way to develop in the City of Fairfield. At densities higher than that wood frame
is no longer an option and a concrete podium would be required, making the project much
more expensive to develop. In 2008 BRIDGE constructed Cottonwood Creek apartments,
which are affordable to very low-income households in Suisun City. This project has 94 units
and was constructed on a 4.55 acre site, equating to a density of 20.7 units per acre.
While actual development of new multifamily, market rate as well as affordable, multifamily
came to a halt during the economic downturn since the last Housing Element was adopted,
the conclusions about affordability remain valid. Land values have not recovered to housing
market peaks in Fairfield, and the addition of substantial new land capacity in the Train
Station Specific Plan Area, the Villages at Fairfield, and potentially in the future in
downtown Fairfield will help maintain the feasibility of affordable housing. Nonetheless,
there will be a need for subsidies and assistance for housing developed for extremely low
and very low income residents, no matter what the density range permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance.
Adequate Sites Inventory
An important component of the Housing Element is the identification of sites for future
housing development and evaluation of the adequacy of these sites. The identification of
these sites will help in fulfilling the City’s share of regional housing needs as determined by
ABAG. Table A-47 summarizes the identified development capacity in the City of Fairfield
while Table A-48 contains the actual inventory of sites zoned for high density and medium
density housing development.
Train Station Specific Plan. The most significant change since the 2009 Housing Element
is annexation of the Train Station Specific Plan Area in northeastern Fairfield. This planning
area will be the focus of much of the City’s new growth over the next twenty years.
The Train Station Specific Plan envisions the development of a classic “traditional town”
centered on a new train station providing access to Capital Corridor rail service.
The plan area encompasses 2,972 acres if land with the largest proportion (60%) committed
to greenbelt and habitat conservation purposes. Key elements in the Specific Plan include:
        Construction of a diverse range of housing types with up to 6,800 dwelling units on
         503 residential acres.
        At least 3,000 of these housing units will be developed at higher densities (a
         minimum of 24 du/acre) within ½ mile of new Train Station.
        Development of new industrial businesses providing employment on 286 acres
        New retail, office, and services on 47 commercial and mixed use acres, including a
         “Town Center” adjacent to the Train Station to create a true transit, pedestrian, and
         bicycling oriented community.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                              A-89

                           APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                          Park land totaling 156 acres
                          Resource conservation and mitigation areas totaling 869 acres of conserved open
                           space.
                  One of the key objectives of the Specific Plan is development of a truly diverse “traditional
                  small town”, centered on a “mixed use” town center with sufficient density and diversity in
                  housing types to provide homes for a wide range of residents. Housing types envisioned
                  include traditional single family homes, but also mid density cluster housing and townhouses,
                  and high density housing near the train station and services. By creating variation in
                  neighborhood form and design, a more authentic town character will result, which will
                  support long term social and economic sustainability as well as expand choice for the
                  region’s diverse population.
                  The Specific Plan defines several “Planning Areas” to which development types, densities,
                  and unit counts were assigned. Note that development potential is not assigned to individual
                  parcels (APNs) but to Planning Areas. In many cases, the Planning areas cross parcel
                  boundaries, and many parcels will see a range of commercial, park, and residential uses. In
                  preparing the list of sites for this Housing Element, City staff carefully calculated total
                  housing units for each density range and assigned them to each planning area. The units
                  were then distributed proportionally to each parcel listed in the Sites Inventory.
                  Permitted density ranges in the Specific Plan differ from the rest of Fairfield. High Density
                  Residential Development has a minimum density of 20 dwelling units per acre instead of 15,
                  with the target density established at 28. However, the Specific Plan permits even higher
                  densities in certain cases, up to 50 dwelling units per acre.
                  Note that the Train Station Specific Plan includes full CEQA approval for development up
                  to the maximum number of units (and densities) anticipated in the Plan. The City does not
                  anticipate additional CEQA review will be required during the review of specific projects for
                  entitlements.
                  Many developers looking to build in the Train Station Specific Plan Area will not want to
                  develop at the highest densities permitted as of right. This lower density development
                  effectively “frees up” units which can used by other developers who wish to build higher
                  density urban development near, for example, the Train Station. The “density transfer” will
                  be a simple administrative process.
                  The calculations discussed above for this Sites Inventory were based on the mid points for
                  each density range (RM=12 du/acre; RH = 24 du/acre
                  Adoption of the Specific Plan and the associated annexations was the first step in
                  implementing the Specific Plan. The residential zoning is in place and defined by Planning
                  Areas rather than parcel boundaries. The City anticipates lot line adjustments, parcel and
                  subdivision maps, and consolidation of property ownership in the Specific Plan area will
                  result in substantially different parcel configurations as planning continues. Presently,
                  Planning Areas are configured into blocks of approximately 10-50 acres assigned to a
                  specific density category. As a part of the evolution of parcel boundaries just described,
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                 CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                               A-90

             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                   ASSESSMENT
when a developer has identified the (smaller) bounds of an appropriate site for an affordable
housing project, the city would process a parcel map to create that parcel.
The City has begun site work for the construction of the Train Station and is next summer
construction of major infrastructure, including expansion of Peabody Road and Vanden
Road. The City has also begun the review of initial Planned Unit Development Permit
applications, and the City anticipates further applications in the near future. These Planned
Unit Development Permits will further refine the specific development densities, product
types, and configurations-all in conformance with the basic goals of the Specific Plan.
Villages at Fairfield.
The development concept for the Villages at Fairfield in northeastern Fairfield has changed
since the 2009 Housing Element. The Villages at Fairfield project contains several sites
designated for high and medium density housing which may be affordable by some
moderate and low income residents. The Sites Inventory reflects the current configuration
anticipated by Lewis Operating Group, the master developer. Lewis is currently marketing
The Villages at Fairfield development sites to single family housing builders.
Infill Development/80-to-80 Specific Plan
The 80-to-80 Specific Plan prepared in 2008 envisioned the transformation of West Texas
Street to a mixed use corridor dominated by housing. This potential for redevelopment was
included in the 2007-2014 Housing Element Sites Inventory,.
Due in part to the severe economic slowdown after 2007, the City did not see any proposals
for major redevelopment or new housing in the corridor or in Downtown Fairfield. The
City also chose not to initiate comprehensive rezonings along West Texas Street due to the
lack of market demand.
In our Sites Inventory, the 2014-2022 Housing Element does not assume that substantial
redevelopment will occur along West Texas Street. However, the current Sites Inventory
does include several key sites on West Texas Street, including vacant parcels, parcels with
residential zoning, and parcels with vacant or substandard commercial development which
appears ready for redevelopment.
The Downtown South/West Texas Street Gateway Specific Plan, scheduled for completion
by June 2016, will focus on redevelopment and infill development in this area. Additional
incentives for redevelopment will be developed, and some existing commercial sites will be
rezoned. .
Summary
With the annexation of the Train Station Specific Plan Area, planning for The Villages at
Fairfield, and planned developments in Cordelia and Central Fairfield, The City of Fairfield
has land zoned and/or with appropriate General Plan designations for at least 10,639
housing units. This includes 4,692 potential units in the RH (High Density Housing)
category and 2,381 units in the RM (Medium Density Housing) category. During the time
period of this Housing Element, the City anticipates additional sites for housing, including
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                             DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                           A-91
                            APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                   ASSESSMENT
                  high and medium density housing, will be identified during the Downtown South-West
                  Texas Street Specific Plan process. However, this inventory does not include the sites
                  anticipated to be permitted with the completion of the Downtown South-West Texas Street
                  Specific Plan or other General Plan Amendments and rezonings which may occur in the
                  future. Realistic capacity was determined by looking at zoning, General Plan designation, and
                  any existing development entitlements.
                  The land inventory of specific sites in Table A-48 focuses on medium and high density sites
                  which may provide affordable units for moderate and low income households. This includes
                  of course the Train Station Specific Plan and its substantial number of high density housing
                  sites as well as the Villages at Fairfield, a master planned development area that will include
                  single family, attached medium density, and high density housing.
                  The inventory does not include lower density sites because these sites are less likely to see
                  housing development affordable to moderate, low, and very low income residents. The
                  Quantified Objective does include a modest number of units on lower density sites, but the
                  City cannot predict or assign to sites the second units, self-help housing units, and other
                  infill projects which would generate such affordable units at these lower densities.
                                                          TABLE A-47
                     SUMMARY           OF CAPACITY FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
                   Planning Area                                            RH                  RM
                   Green Valley                                             908                 0
                   Northeast Fairfield                                      2,899               2,417
                   Central Fairfield                                        661                 313
                  As shown in Summary of Capacity of Housing Development. (Table A-47), the City’s
                  available sites have substantial capacity for new housing development. The City has potential
                  for 908 units in the Green Valley area and 5,316 units in the Northeast Fairfield area and 974
                  units in Central Fairfield. . The City can thus meet its obligation under State housing law.
                  The City is also preparing a Specific Plan for Downtown Fairfield and the West Texas Street
                  corridor. This Specific Plan will include an examination of land uses, and one intent of the
                  Specific Plan is to facilitate redevelopment, neighborhood improvement, and appropriate
                  infill development.
DRAFT AUGUST 2014                                                                                  CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                A-92

                                                              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                                                              TABLE A-48
                                                                                         SITES INVENTORY
                                                     Allowable       GP               Real Unit
                Area                  APN       Zone                         Acres               Existing Use  Infrastructure           Constraints                                    Comments
                                                       Density   Designation          Capacity
  GREEN VALLEY/CORDELIA AREA
  Green Valley Apartments         0027-260-120 RH    15 to 22   RH           20.00   284        Vacant.       Yes        North  None.                         Project is entitled with adopted EIR. Based on discussions
                                                                                                              Connector                                       with the developer and the current market rate, these units will
                                                                                                              (Business                                       be affordable to low- and moderate-income households but
                                                                                                              Center Drive)                                   the City is counting them towards Moderate Income RHNA
                                                                                                              completed,
  Seeno Apartments                0187-070-080 RH    15 to 22   RH           19.57   324        Vacant        yes               None.                         Project is entitled with adopted EIR. Based on discussions
                                                                                                                                                              with the developer and the current market rate, these units will
                                                                                                                                                              be affordable to low- and moderate-income households but
                                                                                                                                                              the City is counting them towards Moderate Income RHNA
   Business Center Drive Site     0148-280-490 CO    15 to 22   CO           15.19   300        Vacant.       yes               Level, drained site with road Redevelopment Successor Agency property being marketed to
                                                                                                                                access. Multifamily housing   multifamily developer (Lewis Operating Group)
                                                                                                                                is a conditionally permitted
                                                                                                                                land use in CO Zone.
  RH                   Subtotal                                              54.76   908
  (Green Valley/Cordelia)
  NORTHEAST FAIRFIELD
  Lewis The Villages at Fairfield 0170-010-410 RM    8 to 15    RM           20.96 241          Vacant        Basic             EIR has been adopted for
                                                                                                              infrastructure in The Villages project.
                                                                                                              place         but
                                                                                                              project      will
                                                                                                              complete
                                                                                                              infrastructure
  Lewis                           0166-110-450 RM    8 to 15    RM           9.07  104          Vacant        Basic             EIR.
                                                                                                              infrastructure in
                                                                                                              place         but
                                                                                                              project      will
                                                                                                              complete
                                                                                                              infrastructure
  Lewis                           0166-110-420 RM    8 to 15    RM           0.3   4            Vacant        Basic              EIR
                                                                                                              infrastructure in
                                                                                                              place         but
                                                                                                              project      will
                                                                                                              complete
                                                                                                              infrastructure
  Lewis                           0167-190-340 RM    8 to 15    RM           10.39 120          Vacant        Basic             See       Villages       EIR.
                                                                                                              infrastructure    Entitlements in place (see
                                                                                                                                discussion above).
  Lewis                           0170-050-250 RM    8 to 15    RM           1.72  20           Vacant        Basic
                                                                                                              infrastructure
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                                                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                                         A-93
                                                                              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                                             Allowable             GP                          Real Unit
                Area                             APN             Zone                                              Acres                  Existing Use  Infrastructure            Constraints                           Comments
                                                                              Density          Designation                     Capacity
Lewis                                      0170-050-260         RM          8 to 15          RM                    2.57     30           Vacant        Basic
                                                                                                                                                       infrastructure
Lewis                                      0170-050-330         RM          8 to 15          RM                    1.48     17           Vacant        Basic
                                                                                                                                                       infrastructure
Lewis                                      0166-110-430         RM          8 to 15          RM                    8.92     103          Vacant        Basic
                                                                                                                                                       infrastructure
Train Station Specific Plan
Area
Acreages in this section are often partial parcels. Residential development occurs only on portions of such parcels.
Planning Area 2                            0166-080-140         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    6.91        36        Vacant        Northeast Fee
Planning Area 2                            0166-080-150         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    10.0        120       Vacant        “”                                       RM unit counts are based on 12 du/acre
Planning Area 3                            0166-090-080         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    2.93        35        Vacant        “”
Planning Area 3                            0166-090-090         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    11.23       67        Vacant        “”
Planning Area 2                            0166-110-120         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    18.93       168       Vacant        “”
Planning Area 3                            0174-010-080         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    20.26       69        Vacant        “”
Planning Area 3                            0174-010-090         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    5.00        60        Vacant        “”
Planning Area 3                            0174-010-100         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    4.00        48        Vacant        “”
Planning Area 3                            0174-010-120         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    5.00        60        Vacant        “”
Planning Area 3                            0174-010-140         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    4.87        58        Vacant        “”
Planning Area 3                            0174-010-150         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    4.08        49        Vacant        “”
Planning Area 3                            0174-010-160         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    4.87        58        Vacant        “”
Planning Area 5                            0166-020-140         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    216.41      240       Vacant        “”
Planning Area 4/5                          0166-060-150         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    173.20      603       Vacant        “”
Planning Area 4                            0166-080-080         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    5.60        67        Vacant        “”
Planning Area 4                            0166-080-090         TSSP        10 to 14         RM                    3.35        40        Vacant        “”
RM Subtotal                                                                                                        552*        2417                                      *Only portions of some
(Northeast Fairfield)                                                                                                                                                    parcels are housing
Lewis The Villages at Fairfield            0166-110-            RH          15 to 22         RH                    10.13       185       Vacant        Basic
RH                                         420/430                                                                                                     infrastructure in
                                                                                                                                                       place         but
                                                                                                                                                       project      will
                                                                                                                                                       complete
                                                                                                                                                       infrastructure
Lewis                                      0170-050-340         RH          15 to 22         RH                    25.05       464       Vacant        In place
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                                                                          A-94

                                                                                         APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                                               Allowable             GP                      Real Unit
                  Area                             APN             Zone                                              Acres               Existing Use   Infrastructure       Constraints                                  Comments
                                                                                Density          Designation                  Capacity
  Train Station Specific Plan Area
  Acreages in this section are often partial parcels. Residential development occurs only on portions of such parcels.
  Planning Area 2                            0166-080-020         RH          20 to 28         RH                    10.00   113       Vacant          Northeast Fee                              RH unit counts are based on 24 du/acre
  Planning Area 2                            0166-080-030         RH          20 to 28         RH                    5.00    97        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-080-050         RH          20 to 28         RH                    9.88    100       Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-080-130         RH          20 to 28         RH                    1.26    15        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-080-140         RH          20 to 28         RH                    6.91    75        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-090-030         RH          20 to 28         RH                    9.50    68        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-090-060         RH          20 to 28         RH                    4.54    76        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-090-070         RH          20 to 28         RH                    4.96    83        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-090-120         RH          20 to 28         RH                    2.38    39        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-090-130         RH          20 to 28         RH                    2.38    39        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-090-170         RH          20 to 28         RH                    7.24    122       Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-090-180         RH          20 to 28         RH                    15.05   176       Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-101-110         RH          20 to 28         RH                    2.65    38        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 3                            0166-102-030         RH          20 to 28         RH                    13.92   264       Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 2                            0166-110-120         RH          20 to 28         RH                    18.93   23        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 1                            0166-110-260         RH          20 to 28         RH                    4.03    48        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 1                            0166-110-270         RH          20 to 28         RH                    3.76    45        Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 1                            0166-110-410         RH          20 to 28         RH                    9.14    220       Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 4/5                          0166-060-150         RH          20 to 28         RH                    173.20  629       Vacant          Northeast Fee
  Planning Area 4                            0166-080-170         RH          20 to 28         RH                    1.61    19        Vacant          Northeast Fee
                                                                                                                     341.5*  2899       *Only portions
                                                                                                                                       of some parcels
  RH Subtotal                                                                                                                            are housing
  (Northeast Fairfield)
  CENTRAL FAIRFIELD
  East Tabor/Walters                         0038-040-040         RM          8 to 15          RM                    4.83   53         Vacant          yes
  East Tabor/Walters                         0038-040-090         RM          8 to 15          RM                    2.32   25         Vacant          yes
  East Tabor/Walters                         0038-040-100         RM          8 to 15          RM                    2.51   27         Vacant          yes
  Jefferson Corridor 2                       0030-312-070         RM          8 to 15          RM                    0.17   1          Vacant          yes             None. Previously developed
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                                                                                 A-95
                                                   APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                 Allowable      GP                 Real Unit
             Area                 APN       Zone                        Acres                  Existing Use      Infrastructure           Constraints                                    Comments
                                                   Density  Designation             Capacity
                                                                                                                                vacant infill site.       Any
                                                                                                                                impacts will be mitigated by
                                                                                                                                project proponents.
East Tabor/Sunset             0037-030-210 RM    8 to 15   RM           3.01      38         Vacant             yes
East Tabor/Sunset             0037-030-200 RM    8 to 15   RH           2.87      36         Vacant             yes             None
Matthew Drive                 0037-120-120 RM    8 to 15   RM           2.86      34         Vacant             yes             Noise                           Use 2.86
Matthew Drive                 0037-120-150 RM    8 to 15   RM           0.47      6          Vacant             yes
West Texas/Indiana            0031-124-100 RM    8 to 15   RM           2.27      24         Vacant             yes             None. Vacant infill site with   Will probably be developed with adjacent Del Richardson site
                                                                                                                                street connections in place.    adjoining West Texas Street.
Downtown              Gateway              CM(R  15 to 22  MU           3.15      32         Mix             of yes             Identified as "opportunity      Assumes rear half of site (vacant) is developed for residential
(Pennsylvania at W. Texas)                 H)                                                commercial and                     site" in West Texas Street      uses
                                                                                             vacant property                    Master Plan
Fairfield Bowl Site           0034-150-    CT(R            CC           4.29      26         Vacant             yes             None                            Being marketed by Redevelopment Successor Agency. Mixed
                              050, -310    H)                                                                                                                   use-half commercial and half resident ial
Pine Tree Center              0031-125-440 RM              RM           0.91      11         Shopping Center    yes             Existing            commercial  RM Zoning,
                                                                                                                                development-poor
                                                                                                                                condition, high vacancy rate
RM Subtotal (Central                                                    29.66     313
Fairfield)
Taylor/Missouri               0030-236-010 RH    15 to 22  RH           0.23      5          Vacant             yes             None.         Infill site    in Successor Agency is marketing property for housing
                                                                                                                                downtown Fairfield              development
Gregory Street                0031-182-380 RH    15 to 22  RH           0.37      7          Vacant             yes             Parcel size
N. Texas/Tabor                0034-122-120 RH    15 to 22  RH           1.07      21         Vacant             yes             Minor noise and wetlands
                                                                                                                                issues associated with an
                                                                                                                                infill site. Will be mitigated
                                                                                                                                off site or in on site open
                                                                                                                                space. No reduction of unit
                                                                                                                                counts anticipated.
N. Texas/Tabor                0034-122-100 RH    15 to 22  RH           1.53      31         Vacant             yes             Minor noise and wetlands
                                                                                                                                issues associated with an
                                                                                                                                infill site. Will be mitigated
                                                                                                                                off site or in on site open
                                                                                                                                space. No reduction of unit
                                                                                                                                counts anticipated.
N. Texas-Tabor                0034-242-020 RH    15 to 22  RH           0.60      12         Vacant             yes             Minor noise and wetlands
                                                                                                                                issues associated with an
                                                                                                                                infill site. Will be mitigated
                                                                                                                                off site or in on site open
                                                                                                                                space.
                                                                                                                                No reduction of unit counts
                                                                                                                                anticipated.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                              A-96
                                                             APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                    Allowable       GP              Real Unit
                Area                APN        Zone                         Acres              Existing Use    Infrastructure           Constraints                                    Comments
                                                     Density    Designation          Capacity
  N. Texas-Tabor                0034-242-120  RH    15 to 22   RH           0.44   9          Vacant          yes             Minor noise and wetlands
                                                                                                                              issues associated with an
                                                                                                                              infill site. Will be mitigated
                                                                                                                              off site or in on site open
                                                                                                                              space.
                                                                                                                              No reduction of unit counts
                                                                                                                              anticipated.
  East Tabor@ San Gabriel       0034-150-240  RH    15 to 22   RH           2.50   50         Vacant          yes             none
  E. Tabor/Dover                0034-201-180  RH    15 to 22   RH           1.06   21         Vacant          yes             Small infill site next to
                                                                                                                              existing office building.
  East     Tabor     Townhouses 0037-010-120, RH    15 to 22   RH           6.46   91         Vacant          yes             None.            Project    was Original entitlements expired in 2007.
  (Formerly Tim Lewis)          010                                                                                           approved in 2004 for this
                                                                                                                              site.
  Blossom Avenue                0037-070-030  RH    15 to 22   RH           4.85   107        Vacant          yes             Wetlands issues must be
                                                                                                                              addressed but can be
                                                                                                                              mitigated. The other major
                                                                                                                              constraint is noise from the
                                                                                                                              railroad, which can be
                                                                                                                              mitigated       by     building
                                                                                                                              standards and sound walls.
  Blossom Avenue                0037-070-080  RH    15 to 22   RH           2.14   41         Vacant          yes             None identified. If the
                                                                                                                              wetlands are impacted a
                                                                                                                              survey will be required
  Blossom Avenue                0037-070-070  RH    15 to 22   RH           2.47   54         Vacant          yes             None identified.         If the
                                                                                                                              wetlands are impacted a
                                                                                                                              survey will be required
  E. Travis at Rayburn          0030-070-080  RH    15 to 22   RH           0.52   10         Vacant          yes             Small infill site
  E. Travis at Rayburn          0030-070-090  RH    15 to 22   RH           0.83   16         Vacant          yes             Small infill site
  E. Travis at Rayburn          0030-070-100  RH    15 to 22   RH           0.54   10         Vacant          yes             Small infill site
  Jefferson Corridor 1          0030-285-050  RH    15 to 22   RH           0.26   5          Vacant          yes             Very small site near
                                                                                                                              “industrial” uses. Highway
                                                                                                                              12 Noise must be addressed
                                                                                                                              by project design.
  Ray Venning Property          0031-201-030     PF 15 to 22   RH           4.82  96          Vacant          yes             Larger Infill Site              Being marketed by Housing            Successor Agency for
                                                                                                                                                              development as Priority 1 site
  Missouri at Taylor            0030-236-010  CM(R  15 - 22    MU           0.23  5           Vacant          yes             Small Infill Site               Being marketed by Housing Successor Agency as Priority 3
                                              H)                                                                                                              site.
  Empire at Jackson             0030-183-080  CM(R  15 - 22    MU           0.172 3           Vacant          yes             Small Infill Site
                                              H)
  Jefferson Corridor Mixed Use  0030-291-090, CM(R  15 - 22    MU           4.00  53          Office/Housing/ yes             Some existing development       Assumes 2/3 residential, 1/3 office
  Sites                         -100,-130,-   H)                                              Vacant                          on parcels. Small parcel
                                140                                                                                           sizes.
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                                                                                                                                                       DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                                                                       A-97

                                                                  APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                                 Allowable      GP                 Real Unit
                Area                              APN       Zone                        Acres                  Existing Use     Infrastructure        Constraints                              Comments
                                                                  Density   Designation            Capacity
Webster Street at Empire                     0030-183-090  CM(R  15 - 22   MU           0.167    3           Vacant            yes             Very small infill site
                                                           H)
Great Jones at Empire                        0030-174-010, CD(R  15 - 22   CC           0.20     4           Vacant                            None. Infill Site      Marketed by Housing Successor Agency as Priority 3
                                              -110         H)
Great Jones at Empire 2                      0030-173-080  CM    15 - 22   CM           0.36     7           Vacant    parking yes             None. Infill Site      Associated with vacant office building next door
                                                           (RH)                                              lot
RH Subtotal (Central                                                                    47.41    661
Fairfield)
A detailed map of each site can be found in Appendix B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                                                                              A-98
              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                         ASSESSMENT
FINANCIAL RESOURCES
Due to the high costs of developing, maintaining, and rehabilitating housing, multiple
funding sources are often required. Table A-49 lists the potential financial resources
available to the City in 2014 for housing development, rehabilitation, and financing.
                                           TABLE A-49
  CITY       OF     FAIRFIELD             HOUSING FINANCIAL RESOURCES
   Program                                                 City Agency &
                                Description                                 Eligible Activities
    Name                                                       Contact
1. Federal Programs
                   Grants awarded to cities on a
                   formula basis for housing and
                                                         Housing Division  Acquisition
                   community development activities
                                                                           Rehabilitation
                   primarily benefiting low- and         Contact:
Community                                                                  Homebuyer
                   moderate-income households. The       Sandie Valentine
Development                                                                 assistance
                   City of Fairfield has been a CDBG     (707) 428-7729
Block Grant                                                                Economic
                   entitlement city since 1975. The City svalentine
(CDBG)                                                                      development
                   of Fairfield allocated approximately  @ci.fairfield.    Homeless assistance
                   $200,000 in CDBG funds toward its     ca.us             Public services
                   rehabilitation program for FY 2013-
                   2014.
                   Grant program awarded to City on a    Housing Division  New construction
                   competitive basis for housing         Contact:          Acquisition
                   activities. The City received         Sandie Valentine  Rehabilitation
HOME
                   $500,000 in 2014-$400,000 for First                     Homebuyer
                   time Homebuyers Programs and                             assistance
                   $100,000 for Housing Rehabilitation                     Rental assistance
                   This program, funded with HOME
                                                         Housing Division
First Time         or CalHOME funds, provides                              First-time
                                                         Contact:
Homebuyer          deferred loans to assist low-income                      homebuyer
                                                         Sandie Valentine
Program            first-time homebuyers purchase                           assistance
                   homes.
                   The Mortgage Credit Certificate
                   (MCC) program assists first-time
                   homebuyers with the purchase of
                   existing or new homes in the cities
                   of Fairfield, Suisun City, Dixon and
Mortgage                                                 Housing Division
                   Rio Vista. The MCC tax credit                           First-time
Credit
                   reduces the federal income tax (not   Sandie Valentine   homebuyer
Certificate
                   state) of borrowers purchasing                           assistance
Program
                   qualified homes. The tax credit is
                   equal to 15% of the annual interest
                   paid on the mortgage loan.
                   Maximum purchase price cannot
                   exceed $477,355.
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                          A-99

                          APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                   Program                                                City Agency &
                                              Description                                   Eligible Activities
                     Name                                                     Contact
                                 Rental assistance payments to
                Section 8                                               David Scumloff
                                 owners of private market rate units
                Housing                                                 Fairfield Housing
                                 on behalf of low-income (50 percent                       Rental assistance
                Choice                                                  Authority
                                 MFI) tenants. Administered by the
                Vouchers                                                (707) 428-7392
                                 Fairfield Housing Authority.
                2. State Programs
                                 Tax credits are available to persons
                Low-income
                                 and corporations that invest in low-
                Housing Tax                                                                New construction
                                 income rental housing. Proceeds        Sandie Valentine
                Credit                                                                     Rehabilitation
                                 from the sale are typically used to
                (LIHTC)
                                 create housing.
                                                                                           New construction
                                 Deferred payment loans to local
                                                                                           Rehabilitation
                                 governments, nonprofit and for-
                Multi-Family                                                               Preservation
                                 profit developers for new
                Housing                                                                    Conversion of
                                 construction, rehabilitation and       Sandie Valentine
                Program                                                                     nonresidential to
                                 preservation of permanent and
                (MHP)                                                                       rental
                                 transitional rental housing for lower-
                                                                                           Social services
                                 income households.
                                                                                            within project
                                 Grants to cities and nonprofit
                                 developers to offer homebuyer                             Predevelopment, site
                                 assistance, including down payment                         development, site
                                 assistance, rehabilitation,                                acquisition
                                 acquisition/rehabilitation, and                           Rehabilitation
                                 homebuyer counseling. Loans to                            Acquisition/rehab
                CalHome                                                 Sandie Valentine
                                 developers for property acquisition,                      Down payment
                                 site development, predevelopment                           assistance
                                 and construction period expenses                          Mortgage financing
                                 for homeownership projects. City                          Homebuyer
                                 received $1,000,000 for                                    counseling
                                 rehabilitation and FTHB.
                Infill Incentive Funding of public infrastructure
                Grant            (water, sewer, traffic, parks, site
                                                                                           Public infrastructure
                Program          cleanup, etc.) to facilitate infill    Sandie Valentine
                                                                                            investment
                                 housing development. One funding
                CDBG             round annually.
                                 Low interest, short-term loans to
                                 local governments for affordable
                CalHFA           infill, owner-occupied housing
                                                                                           Site acquisition
                Residential      developments. Links with CalHFA’s
                                                                        Sandie Valentine   Pre-development
                Development      Down Payment Assistance Program
                                                                                            costs
                Loan Program     to provide subordinate loans to
                                 first-time buyers. Two funding
                                 rounds per year.
                CalHFA           CalHFA makes below market loans                           Homebuyer
                Homebuyer’s      to first-time homebuyers of up to      Sandie Valentine
                                                                                            assistance
                Down             3% of sales price. Program operates
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                              A-100

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                        ASSESSMENT
   Program                                                 City Agency &
                                Description                                Eligible Activities
    Name                                                        Contact
Payment            through participating lenders who
Assistance         originate loans for CalHFA. Funds
Program            available upon request to qualified
                   borrowers.
3. Local Programs
                   The program provides below market
                   rate loans to owners with properties
                   that rent to low- and moderate-
                   income households. The program is
Rental
                   funded with redevelopment funds       Sandra Trujillo
Housing
                   set aside to create and preserve low-                   Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation                                           (707) 428-7095
                   and moderate-income housing,
Program
                   Community Development Block
                   Grant funds and HOME funds. The
                   income limits vary based on funding
                   source.
                   The City requires developers
                   building detached homes in a
                   Residential Medium Density zoning
                   to provide 10% of the homes for
Below-Market                                                               New construction
                   sale to moderate-income households
Rate (BMR)                                               Sandie Valentine   (when available)
                   at an affordable price. Under the
Program                                                                    Resales
                   long-term resale restrictions, these
                   homes must remain affordable to
                   and owner-occupied by moderate-
                   income households for 45 years.
4. Private Resources/Financing Programs
                   Fixed rate mortgages issued by
                   private mortgage insurers.
Federal
                   Mortgages which fund the purchase
National
                   and rehabilitation of a home.                           Homebuyer
Mortgage
                   Low Down-Payment Mortgages for                           assistance
Association
(Fannie Mae)       Single-Family Homes in under-
                   served low-income and minority
                   cities.
Federal Home
                   Direct subsidies to nonprofit and
Loan Bank
                   for-profit developers and public
Affordable                                                                 New construction
                   agencies for affordable low-income
Housing
                   ownership and rental projects.
Program
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                             DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                          A-101

                         APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                 ASSESSMENT
                ADMINISTRATIVE RESOURCES
                Below is a list of public agencies and nonprofit organizations that have contributed to
                housing projects in Fairfield and may continue to administer housing projects in the City in
                the future. These agencies and organizations are critical to meeting the housing needs of the
                City and play an important role in the acquisition, rehabilitation, preservation, and
                development of affordable and assisted housing.
                City Administrative Resources
                Housing and neighborhood preservation are key priorities of the City of Fairfield. The City
                Manager’s Office plays a leading role in several programs, including the Quality of Life Task
                Force, regional homelessness, and Travis Air Force Base.
                The Community Development Department is responsible for preparation of and
                administration of the General Plan, including this Housing Element. The Department also
                administers the Fairfield Zoning Ordinance. The Department implements the City’s
                planning and development review process and through the Building Division enforces the
                Building Code, ADA requirements, and energy regulations. The Housing Division
                implements the City’s affordable housing programs. The Fairfield Housing Authority is the
                City’s lead agency for tenant-based assistance. The Housing Authority administers the
                Housing Choice Voucher program. Although there is no public housing in the City of
                Fairfield, the Housing Authority administers 830 tenant-based Housing Choice Vouchers, 21
                Project-Based Vouchers at Laurel Gardens Apartments, 3 vouchers with the Home
                Ownership Option, and 50 Family Self-Sufficiency Program participants. All of these
                services are funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
                The Housing Division administers Community Development Block Grants, HOME and
                other homebuyer programs, and housing rehabilitation programs.
                In addition to the Community Development Department, the Fairfield Police Department
                Code Enforcement Division enforces quality of life and community preservation ordinances
                which impact the City’s neighborhoods.
                North Bay Human Development Corporation
                North Bay Human Development Corporation is a non-profit corporation whose board was
                established specifically to operate the Parkway Plaza senior apartments in Fairfield and has
                no interest in being involved with other housing projects.
                Solano Affordable Housing Foundation
                The Solano Affordable Housing Foundation (SAHF) is a nonprofit housing developer
                established by local cities to encourage affordable housing in the County. The foundation
                will be working to identify affordable housing, including the preservation of affordable
                housing with Redevelopment Agency assistance. The Foundation also owns the Union
                Square apartment complex and purchased the Senior Manor apartment complex in late 2008
                (the City of Fairfield retained ownership of the underlying property).
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                               CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                             A-102

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
Pacific Community Services Incorporated
Pacific Community Services Corporation (PCSI)/Pittsburg Housing and Economic
Development Corporation have expressed interest in facilitating affordable housing in
Fairfield. The corporation has also considered purchasing property in Fairfield for the
development of affordable housing and also assisting in the preservation of at-risk units
during the foreclosure crisis. The corporation also provides assistance to residents with
housing discrimination and other issues. In the past, PCSI was retained by the City of
Fairfield to provide housing counseling services.
Mid-Peninsula Housing
Mid-Peninsula Housing, based in Redwood City, is a Bay Area Nonprofit Housing
Developer and Manager. Mid-Peninsula developed an affordable housing project, Sunset
Creek Apartments in Fairfield in 1994 and has expressed interest in developing future
projects.
Community Housing Opportunities Corporation
CHOC (Community Housing Opportunities Corporation) is a Davis-based nonprofit
interested in affordable housing. CHOC owns and manages Gateway Village, an apartment
project on Pennsylvania Avenue which it acquired and rehabilitated with City assistance. The
City has continued its relationship and discussions with CHOC, who may be interested in
additional projects.
National Community Renaissance
National Community Renaissance is a nonprofit organization based in Southern California.
In cooperation with ANF Families Partnership II, the group acquired and rehabilitated 93
apartment units in the South PACE neighborhood. The organization remains interested in
future projects.
Resources for Community Development
Resources for Community Development (RCD) is a Berkeley-based nonprofit organization
that partnered with Caminar Solano to develop Laurel Gardens, the first affordable housing
project built in Solano County that provides housing to low-income individuals with mental
disabilities, many of them formerly homeless. RCD is interested in doing more projects.
Habitat for Humanity
Habitat for Humanity is a non-profit organization that brings together volunteers in the
community to build homes for low-income families. The participating families also
contribute hours towards building the home. Habitat for Humanity has built several homes
in Fairfield and is currently working with the City on another potential infill project. Habitat
for Humanity continues to be interested in local homeownership programs.
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                      A-103
                         APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                ASSESSMENT
                HOMELESS RESOURCES
                Homeless persons or those who are about to be homeless may contact the Solano County
                Health and Human Services Department. The County and volunteers operate a telephone
                help-line, First Call for Help, and a shelter bed hotline. The Department has a limited
                number of vouchers, redeemable at local motels, for temporary shelter
                Mission Solano Rescue Mission
                Mission Solano’s vision is to develop long-term residential treatment for homeless addicted
                men, women, and children. They have successfully met the basic necessities of the homeless
                and poverty stricken population since 1998. They provide emergency shelters and manage
                both a Community Outreach Center (COC) and Social Industries distributing food, clothing,
                and ongoing community services. Their emergency shelter provides over 17,000 beds per
                year. Since 1998, the Mission SOLANO Rescue Mission has successfully met the basic
                necessities of the homeless and poverty stricken population residing in Fairfield. Recognizing
                that many people struggling with addiction needed more than “three hots and a cot”,
                Mission SOLANO Rescue Mission focused on developing long-term residential treatment
                for homeless addicted men, women and children. The nationally recognized Nomadic
                Sheltering Program provides emergency shelter nights to those in need, while continuing to
                offer the Community Outreach Center (COC) and Social Industries distributing food,
                clothing and ongoing community services. Their doors are open 24 hours a day, 365 days a
                year. Help is available without charge to any person regardless of race, color, creed or social
                standing. Mission SOLANO operates entirely on voluntary contributions with the majority
                of the support coming from individual donors and the balance from churches, organizations,
                foundations and the corporate community.
                Bridge to Life Center
                In December 2005, the Bridge to Life Center celebrated its long anticipated groundbreaking
                on Beck Avenue. The site has access to public transportation and is near the Solano County
                Office of Health and Human Services, for the convenience of their clients to obtain County
                social services such as enrollment in Welfare and Food Stamps and access to County health
                care programs. This type of housing project is the largest of its kind in Solano County and is
                cost $9 million to complete. It includes an emergency shelter, the women’s and children’s
                center, a main dining hall, a day care center and an education center with classrooms and a
                men’s housing unit. 115 beds are currently available. This project is a partnership between
                Mission Solano, Homeaid of Northern California (the charitable arm of the Home Builders
                Association), the City of Fairfield and Solano County.
                City of Fairfield approvals for Bridge to Life permit expansion to 214 beds.
                Community Resources Services (Rosewood House)
                Community Resource Services (CRS) offers case management for homeless clients, assisting
                them with basic needs, jobs search, school reentry, and housing information. Services are
                also provided for incarcerated clients in the county jails. The services provided prepare jail
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                            A-104

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                     ASSESSMENT
clients for a successful return to the community, where they can rejoin families, find work,
and participate meaningfully in the community.
Rosewood House, located in Vallejo, California, provides clean and sober transitional
housing for women. The goals include assisting participants with obtaining permanent
housing, achieving greater self-determination, and increasing their skills and education.
Women completing their stay at Rosewood House will be better prepared to obtain
permanent housing and participate within the community.
Fairfield-Suisun Community Action Council
Fairfield-Suisun Community Action Council (CAC) provides basic needs such as food,
clothing, and shelter and also provides supportive services such as rental assistance,
homeless assistance and prevention, and case management. In addition, the CAC provides
information about and referrals to other community-based organizations, churches and/or
government agencies that can help clients with additional needs. The CAC serves almost
1,000 clients every year; their clients consist of the working poor, low-income, senior citizen,
disabled, and homeless population living in the Fairfield area.
Heather House
Heather House Homeless Shelter is an initiative of the Interfaith Council of Solano County,
a conglomerate of over a dozen community based organizations which partner with the City
of Fairfield in order to combat homelessness. The Council believes that all people are
created equal regardless of demographic, geophysical or other identifying factors. The
Heather House provides hands on services as well as working with local grass roots
organizations to create and spread awareness, and find means to root out poverty and
homelessness. Heather House provides temporary shelter, food, and case management to
the homeless. The shelter has 24 beds and 4 transitional apartments for families and single
women. Clients receive assistance in job searches and in locating permanent housing, as well
as life skills training which includes budgeting, parenting, and nutrition. The CAC has
partnered with Healthy Start, Child Haven, the Community Action Agency, The Salvation
Army, Solano County Mental Health, Youth and Family Services, the Solano County
Homeless Shelter Collaborative and Child Protective Services to ensure that families are
given the necessary tools to strengthen their families, clean up their credit/eviction issues,
find gainful employment, and move into permanent housing. In 2013 Heather House served
239 (unduplicated) homeless individuals. 100 were family units served: 35 single females (35
percent), 44 single mothers with children (44 percent), 18 couples with/without children (18
percent), and 3 single fathers with children (3 percent). For every one client , Heather House
reports that their waiting list has at least three to four persons who need services.
Heather House has expressed interest in partnering with Fairfield and Solano County to
expand their services and increase bed space in order to meet the needs of the homeless and
continue making long term meaningful changes in order to root out poverty. They report
that their records show in follow up studies that their clients sustain employment and
housing upon graduation from their rigorous intervention programs.
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                         A-105
                         APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                ASSESSMENT
                Caminar Solano
                In addition to the project Caminar Solano developed in partnership with Resources for
                Community Development discussed above (Laurel Gardens), Caminar Solano opened Laurel
                Creek House in 1999, offering residential treatment in 12 beds. Not all of the persons served
                by Laurel Creek House would be homeless, but the facility does provide a service to
                residents who might may have temporary shelter needs and services Caminar Solano has
                expressed interest in developing a transitional housing project (15 apartments) for residents
                with mental disabilities.
                First Place for Youth
                First Place for Youth is an Oakland-based organization which focuses on the needs of youth
                transitioning out of the foster care system. Their programs include emergency shelter and
                assistance with finding and funding housing. In 2013, First Place for Youth assisted 43 youth
                with emergency shelter according to the Solano County Point in Time count for Fairfield.
                Joshua House
                Joshua House is a faith-based organization which provides assistance to clients attempting to
                overcome addictions, focusing on drugs and alcohol. Their services include limited
                residential treatment, and Joshua House provided housing to four individuals during the
                2013 Point in Time count for Fairfield.
                Children in Need of Hugs
                Children In Need of Hugs (CINOH) provides housing and services for youths, focusing
                particularly on teen mothers with children.
                ENERGY CONSERVATION
                Development of California’s Energy Standards
                The State of California pioneered the development of energy conservation legislation, mainly
                as a result of the 1973 energy crisis. In 1974, the legislature adopted the Warren-Alquist State
                Energy Resources and Development Act, which established the Energy Resources
                Conservation and Development Commission (California Energy Commission). The Energy
                Commission was delegated the authority to adopt standards and regulations encouraging
                energy conservation in new buildings and rehabilitation of existing buildings.
                The state building requirements that address energy conservation are included in Title 24 of
                the State Building Code. The State of California presently requires local governments to
                recognize and address energy conservation measures in the preparation of housing elements.
                Title 20 of the California Administrative Code, section 1406 gives local governments the
                authority to adopt more stringent standards and provides for documentation on energy
                savings and cost effectiveness.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                 CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                            A-106

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                   ASSESSMENT
Energy Conservation Programs
Local utility companies, in conjunction with state and federally funded initiatives, offer a
number of programs to promote energy-efficient homes. Listed below are some of the
programs that are currently active.
California Energy Star® New Homes Program – This PG&E administered incentive
program is available to builders of single-family homes that are at least 15 percent more
efficient than required by Title 24. A second tier of participation is available to builders of
single-family homes that exceed Title 24 by 35 percent, demonstrate a 40 percent reduction
in cooling load, and include solar generation as an option for buyers. For homes built in
Climate Zone 12, Fairfield’s designated microclimate, the current incentive amount equals
$500 per unit. Additionally, both tiers require that all appliances provided by the builder
must be Energy Star qualified. PG&E will help prospective buyers locate homes that meet
the Energy Star specifications.
California Multi-Family New Homes (CMFNH) – The CMFNH program sponsored by
PG&E and administered by the Heschong Mahone Group, Inc. (HMG) facilitates and
encourages energy-efficient design in multi-family housing through design assistance, cash
incentives, and Energy Star marketing benefits.
Prescriptive Method – For builders not participating in either of the Energy Star programs,
the Prescriptive Method provides incentives for specific features installed before December
31, 2008. Dated, itemized proof of purchase is required with installation location specified.
Incentives will be paid only for measures that exceed 2005 Title 24.
Energy Efficiency for Multi-Family Properties – PG&E offers rebates to multi-family
property owners and managers of existing residential dwellings that contain two or more
units when they implement specified measures to increase energy efficiency. The program
encourages the installation of qualifying energy-efficient products in individual tenant units
and in the common areas of residential apartment buildings, mobile home parks, and
condominium complexes.
New Solar Homes Partnership – The New Solar Homes Partnership (NSHP) provides
financial incentives and other support for installing eligible solar photovoltaic (PV) systems
on new residential buildings that receive electricity from qualifying utility companies. The
California Energy Commission implements the New Solar Homes Partnership in
coordination with the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) as part of the overall
California Solar Initiative.
New Solar Homes Partnership – The New Solar Homes Partnership (NSHP) provides
financial incentives and other support for installing eligible solar photovoltaic (PV) systems
on new residential buildings that receive electricity from qualifying utility companies. The
California Energy Commission implements the New Solar Homes Partnership in
coordination with the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) as part of the overall
California Solar Initiative.
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                              DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                     A-107

                          APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                                  ASSESSMENT
                The state standards require new residential buildings and alterations and additions to existing
                buildings to meet or exceed a specific set of energy conservation requirements. Because
                energy use depends partly upon weather conditions, which vary considerably throughout the
                state, the Energy Commission has created 16 different “climate zones.” each representing a
                distinct microclimate in the state. The energy conservation requirements are tailored for each
                climate zone. The City of Fairfield is located in Climate Zone 12.
                Compliance Methods
                There are two compliance methods available to builders and designers of residential
                structures. The prescriptive method involves selection of prescribed compliance features from a
                list of alternative component packages. Each climate zone has four packages to choose from
                and each offers a different combination of energy conservation requirements. Parameters of
                the building, such as the insulation R-values of the walls and ceilings, percentage of glazing,
                the solar heat gain coefficient of the glazing, thermal mass area, and heating and cooling
                equipment efficiencies are required to meet specific minimums for each package.
                The computer performance method requires the use of an Energy Commission-approved
                computer program. The computer program actually models the energy performance of the
                structure two ways. The energy budget is calculated for the structure through the use of a
                selected set of standard parameters set forth by the Energy Commission. The structure is
                then modeled with the parameters proposed by the designer. The predicted energy budget of
                the proposed design may not exceed the calculated energy budget of the structure modeled
                with the standard parameters of the Energy Commission. This method involves the most
                effort to demonstrate compliance; however, it does offer the greatest flexibility for design.
                When using the computer performance method, additional compliance credit can be
                obtained for improvements in the quality of design, installation of heating and cooling ducts,
                and construction of less-leaky building envelopes. The compliance credit options require
                installer diagnostic testing and certification, as well as independent diagnostic testing and
                field verification by a certified Home Energy Rater.
                Mandatory Energy Conservation Requirements
                There are also mandatory energy conservation requirements that must be met by all new
                residential structures and by additions and alterations to existing structures. A condensed
                summary of these is listed on the mandatory measures checklist, or MF-1 form, submitted at
                the time of plan review.
                Adoption of Local Conservation Ordinances
                The City of Fairfield is experiencing considerable growth and development which is
                expected to continue for the next several years. The City is currently participation in efforts
                to develop a model Green Building Code ordinance will address energy conservation,
                materials, recycling, and other key topics.
DRAFT JUNE 2014                                                                                 CITY OF FAIRFIELD
                                              A-108

              APPENDIX A - HOUSING NEEDS
                                    ASSESSMENT
Conservation Policies for Subdivisions
It is unlikely that all developers will consistently take the initiative to incorporate
conservation features into their projects during the planning and design phases of
development. The City’s subdivision policies, however, represent a logical place to include
design guidelines for energy conservation.
The types of policies that help to promote energy conservation are:
         Location of retail uses near new residential subdivisions.
         Providing access to schools, recreation facilities, and other public and private
          services that would reduce the need for automobile trips.
         Use of landscaping to help reduce the energy needs of residences (such as the use of
          deciduous shade trees).
         Policies to encourage building orientation that reduces east-west surface areas and,
          therefore, the amount of summer heat gain.
         Use of shaded south glazing to take advantage of winter insulation.
         Encouragement of solar energy by ensuring that new subdivisions allow for solar
          access to individual dwelling units. Solar access for passive and active solar systems
          (such as solar water heaters) must be protected for these systems to operate
          properly. The City can ensure solar access by establishing design guidelines that
          require a zone of unimpeded solar access for each residential building to make use
          of passive and/or active solar systems.
         Examination of the City’s Zoning Ordinance to determine if building height,
          setback, and yard area requirements allow for sufficient solar access.
Revisions to the City’s Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances can evolve over a period of time
sufficient to allow planners, land developers, and builders to acquire sensitivity to solar
potential and other energy conservation techniques.
 CITY OF FAIRFIELD                                                                               DRAFT JUNE 2014
                                                        A-109


                APPENDIX B - VACANT LAND
                    INVENTORY MAPS
CITY OF FAIRFIELD                        DRAFT JUNE 2014
                               B-1

APPENDIX B – VACANT LAND INVENTORY M
Land Use Element
Introduction
The Land Use Element has the broadest scope of the seven mandatory elements. It
plays the central role of correlating all land use issues into a set of coherent and
consistent development policies. Its goals, objectives, policies, and programs relate
directly to all the other elements. For these reasons, it is the most visible and most
often used element. Although all general plan elements carry equal weight, the Land
Use Element is often perceived as being the most representative of "the general
plan".
As required by State Planning Law, the Land Use Element designates the proposed
general distribution, location, and extent of land uses for housing, business, industry,
open space, education, public buildings and grounds, waste disposal facilities, and
other categories of public and private uses of land. The emphasis is on the desired
or intended future development of the City and the planning area.
The Fairfield Land Use Element includes this policy document, a land use diagram,
and a technical document. The policy document sets forth the goals, objectives,
policies, and programs for the various land use districts, including standards for
population density and building intensity.
The Land Use Diagram maps the general proposed distribution of the land uses by
land use categories described in the policy document. It is intended to serve as a
general guide to the future land use distribution rather than as a parcel-specific map
of allowable land uses. Zoning classifications, consistent with the land use
categories, will be established for this purpose in the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning
Map. The Land Use Diagram also maps the proposed transportation system.
Policies regarding transportation are addressed in the Circulation Element.
The Land Use portion of the technical document, contained in Volume II of the
General Plan, includes background information on the historical development of
Fairfield and the Fairfield planning area and a description of the process of
establishing the future land use patterns.
City of Fairfield General Plan            LU - 1                                 October
                                             2016
Goals
The goals of the Land Use Element are:
Preserve and enhance the City’s desired physical character with
well-balanced patterns of growth and development.
Create safe and viable neighborhoods with wide ranges of
choices, services, and amenities.
Objectives, Policies & Programs
Objective LU 1
Achieve a level of population and employment which preserves and enhances
the desired character of the City.
    Policy LU 1.1
    Only allow development that is consistent with the Land Use Diagram and the
    Land Use Category definitions.
    Policy LU 1.2
    Provide a mixture of uses throughout the City that provide adequate housing,
    employment, shopping, and social and leisure activities for their respective
    populations. (See Policy CI 1.2)
    Policy LU 1.3
    Achieve an ultimate citywide jobs-housing balance equal to the jobs-housing
    ratio for the nine-county Bay Area. (See Objective ED 6, Objective HO 4, Policy
    HO 4.1, and Program HO 4.1 A)
Objective LU 2
Achieve a pattern of development that reinforces the City’s desired image. (See
Objective UD 4, Policy UD 4.1)
    Policy LU 2.1
    Encourage the preservation of agricultural land surrounding the City and
    permanently preserve agriculture in the Suisun Valley. (See all policies and
    objectives in the Farmlands and Agriculture Element, Objective OS 1, Policies
    OS 1.1, OS 1.2, OS 1.3, OS 1.4 and OS 1.5, Programs OS 1.2 A, OS 1.2 B, OS
    1.2 C, OS 1.4 A, and Rancho Solano North Master Plan Area Policy 6).
City of Fairfield General Plan           LU - 2                             October
                                           2016

         Program LU 2.1 A
         In order to protect agriculture and the visual character of Suisun Valley, the
         City, in cooperation with the County, shall establish an open space buffer
         along its perimeter. This buffer will serve to separate agriculture from
         development. Agriculture and recreational uses will be allowed within the
         buffer. This buffer shall incorporate existing landforms and features, such as
         the ridges east of Mankas Corner Road and Clayton Road, and groves of
         trees so as to take advantage of these features to visually screen
         development from the Valley. If existing features prove inadequate, the
         development shall use trees, berms, and other methods to minimize visibility
         from the Valley.
         Program LU 2.1 B
         The City, in cooperation with the County, shall establish similar buffers
         between productive permanent agricultural lands and development in other
         areas undergoing development.
         Program LU 2.1 C
         The City shall continue to work with the County to plan for the preservation of
         the hills to the west of Suisun Valley as open space.
    Policy LU 2.2
    Preserve and promote the Central Business District as one of the City’s social
    and cultural centers and as an economically viable retail, professional office, and
    residential district. (See Policy CI 7.3 and Policy ED 3.3)
    Policy LU 2.3
    Review and comment on all development proposals within the unincorporated
    areas of the City’s sphere of influence and in neighboring cities.
         Program LU 2.3 A
         After adoption of the Comprehensive Amendment to the General Plan, the
         City will request Solano County LAFCO to amend the City’s sphere of
         influence to be consistent with the Urban Limit Line around the entire City.
    Policy LU 2.4
    Establish and maintain a greenbelt buffer around the City. (See Objective OS 2,
    Policies OS 2.1, OS 2.2, OS 2.3, OS 2.4, OS 2.5)
City of Fairfield General Plan             LU - 3                                October
                                              2016

Objective LU 3
Establish an urban limit line that allows development to be satisfactorily
planned before it occurs.
    Policy LU 3.1
    What is urban shall be municipal, and what is rural shall be within the County.
    Any urban development requiring basic municipal services shall occur only within
    the incorporated City and within the urban limit line established by the General
    Plan. (See Policy OS 1.6)
    Policy LU 3.2
    Where the urban limit line encompasses a master plan area, it may include land
    which will not ultimately be developed with urban uses. Once areawide plans are
    adopted for master plan areas, the urban limit line may be amended to exclude
    open space areas.
    Policy LU 3.3
    A voter initiative reaffirmed and readopted: (1) the “Travis Reserve” land use
    designation and the boundaries of the Travis Reserve shown on the General Plan
    Land Use Diagram; (2) the Urban Limit Line shown on the General Plan Land
    Use Diagram; (3) the General Plan text describing the uses permitted in the Travis
    Reserve land use designation; and (4) General Plan objective LU 3, Policies LU
    3.1, LU 3.2, HS 9.2, and Program HS 9.2A, in effect as of October 11, 2002.
    These components of the General Plan are collectively referred to as the Travis
    Air Force Base and Fairfield Urban Boundary Policies and, through December
    31, 2020, may be amended only by a vote of the people or as follows:
         1. The City Council may amend the boundaries of the Urban Limit Line to
              exclude open space areas, provided that the amended boundaries are
              within or coextensive with the limits of the Urban Limit Line in effect as of
              October 11. 2002.
         2. The City Council may redesignate to a different land use designation that
              portion of the land currently designated as Travis Reserve that lies west of
              North Gate Road/Burgan Boulevard and north of Air Base Parkway/Travis
              Avenue.
         3. The City Council may amend Program HS 9.2A to refer to a new 60 dB
              CNEL maximum mission contour for Travis Air Force Base (“New
              Contour”) adopted in either an Air Installation Compatibility Use Zone
              (“AICUZ”) or an Airport Land Use Plan for Travis Air Force Base, provided
              that the amendment specifies that in the event that the New Contour is set
              aside or otherwise ceases to be in effect, the 60 dB CNEL maximum
              mission contour established in the 1995 AICUZ for Travis Air Force Base
              shall apply for the purposes of Program HS 9.2A until such time as the
              New Contour is reinstated or the City Council amends Program HS 9.2A
City of Fairfield General Plan               LU - 4                                October
                                               2016

              to refer to a different 60 dB CNEL maximum mission contour for Travis Air
              Force Base adopted in either an AICUZ or an Airport Land Use Plan for
              Travis Air Force Base.
         4. The City Council may amend the Travis Air Force Base and Fairfield Urban
              Boundary Policies if it does so pursuant to a finding, based on substantial
              evidence, that the application of such policies to any specific property for
              which a development application has been submitted constitutes an
              unconstitutional taking of the landowner’s property; however, any such
              amendment shall be made only to the extent necessary to avoid such an
              unconstitutional taking.
         5. The City Council may reorganize, renumber, or reorder the Travis Air
              Force Base and Fairfield Urban Boundary Policies, provided that the
              Travis Air Force Base and Fairfield Urban Boundary Policies remain in the
              General Plan.
Objective LU 4
Achieve a rate of growth that is consistent with the provision of public facilities
and services, that balances jobs and housing, and that does not result in the
degradation of the natural environment. (See Objectives CI 1, PF 1, and ED 3)
    Policy LU 4.1
    Expand the city limits only in conformance with the Comprehensive Annexation
    Plan.
         Program LU 4.1 A
         Update the Comprehensive Annexation Plan every five years or when there
         are significant changes. Continue to incorporate infill development and
         agricultural preservation policies into the Comprehensive Annexation Plan
         update, according to the standards of the Local Agency Formation
         Commission.
    Policy LU 4.2
    Development proposals shall be reviewed for provision of public facilities and
    services and environmental impacts. (See Policies PF 1.1 and PF 1.2)
    Policy LU 4.3
    The content of all areawide plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
    Commission prior to their preparation.
City of Fairfield General Plan               LU - 5                               October
                                               2016

    Policy LU 4.4
    Development east of Claybank Road and north of Airbase Parkway shall occur in
    a logical and orderly pattern, and avoid creating discontiguous islands of
    development which cannot be economically served with a full range of urban
    services and facilities.
Objective LU 5
Participate and cooperate in regional planning activities.
    Policy LU 5.1
    Cooperate with appropriate jurisdictions in the preparation of State-mandated
    regional plans, such as the Congestion Management Program, the Clean Air
    Plan, and the Source Reduction and Recycling Element. (See Policies CI 2.2, CI
    12.1, CI 12.2, and PF 13.2)
    Policy LU 5.2
    Monitor proposals for regional government and review them for positive and
    negative impacts on the City.
    Policy LU 5.3
    Explore the establishment of a regional open space body, such as a new open
    space district, to be responsible for acquiring and managing permanent open
    space. (See Policy OS 11.5, Programs OS 11.5 A, OS 11.5 B, Policy OS 11.6,
    and Program OS 11.6 A)
         Program LU 5.3 A
         Assign the Open Space Commission the task of working with other
         governmental agencies to assist in determining the mechanism(s) for open
         space preservation.
Objective LU 6
Achieve a maximum public value from permanent open space, recognizing and
providing for different types of open space users. (See Objective OS 11 and
Policies OS 11.1, OS 11.2, OS 11.3, and OS 11.4)
Objective LU 7
Achieve a maximum amount of open space land permanently available to
citizens of Fairfield. (See Objective OS 3, Policies OS 3.1, OS 3.2, Program OS
3.2 A, and Objective OS 4)
Objective LU 8
Develop and maintain a pattern of residential land uses which provides for a
variety and balance of densities and opportunities for a mixture of different
dwelling and tenure types. (See Policy HO 1.1)
City of Fairfield General Plan          LU - 6                             October
                                           2016
    Policy LU 8.1
    Residential development shall be consistent with the gross density ranges
    included in the Land Use Diagram. Lower densities may be permitted only when
    the City Council makes all of the following findings:
    A. The development would be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood
         and would not have a detrimental effect on existing or future multi-family
         development.
    B. The development would be equal or superior to the higher density
         development with respect to site planning and to preservation of natural
         topography, mature trees, and other natural resource.
    C. The density reduction will not prevent the City from achieving its goals for low
         and moderate income housing as defined in the Housing Element.
    Higher densities may be permitted that are consistent with State density bonus
    requirements.
Objective LU 9
The City should endeavor, in cooperation with relevant jurisdictions, to
preserve the availability of rural living environments.
    Policy LU 9.1
    Very low density residential development shall be encouraged in transition areas
    within the City’s urban limit line. The intent is to provide a transition between
    agricultural or rural areas and urban development.
         Program LU 9.1 A
         Develop zoning district classifications which provide for large lot subdivisions
         with minimum lot sizes of 1/2 acre or greater.
Objective LU 10
Provide single family residential neighborhoods with a variety of cost ranges
dispersed throughout the City.
    Policy LU 10.1
    Where infill development is proposed, the character, scale and density of existing
    single-family residential neighborhoods should be preserved in the new
    development. (See Policy UD 3.3)
City of Fairfield General Plan             LU - 7                                 October
                                              2016

    Policy LU 10.2
    Large scale single-family residential development shall include a mixture of
    density and dwelling types, consistent with its land use designation and density
    range.
    Policy LU 10.3
    Ancillary uses permitted in single-family residential neighborhoods, such as public
    facilities, day care centers, and churches, shall have minimum negative impact
    on the neighborhood.
         Program LU 10.3 A
         Adopt design and performance guidelines for the location of public facilities in
         residential neighborhoods.
    Policy LU 10.4
    New single-family residences shall be constructed at a size and scale that is
    compatible with the size of the lot.
         Program LU 10.4 A
         Incorporate standards into the Urban Design Plan to ensure that single–family
         development is at a size and scale that is compatible with the size of the lot
         and surrounding area.
Objective LU 11
Provide multi-family ownership and rental units in a variety of cost ranges
dispersed throughout the City.
    Policy LU 11.1
    Encourage the development of a wide variety of higher density multi-family
    residential uses. (See Policy HO 1.3)
         Program LU 11.1 A
         Continue to implement incentives to provide density bonuses or other similar
         measures to encourage the development of high density multi-family
         residential uses. (See Policy HO 2.4 and Program HO 2.4 A)
    Policy LU 11.2
    Multi-family residential land uses shall be developed with a balance of open
    space, landscaping and recreational amenities and shall be accessible to
    commercial and recreational areas, and public transportation facilities.
City of Fairfield General Plan           LU - 8                                 October
                                            2016

    Policy LU 11.3
    Mobile homes shall be considered multi-family residential land uses. High
    standards of development and maintenance with respect to the provision of
    recreation and open space, landscaping and the exterior appearance of the units
    shall apply to their development. (See Program HO 1.3 C)
Objective LU 12
Encourage special residential opportunities to meet the needs of the City’s
residents. (See Objective HO 7)
    Policy LU 12.1
    Special residential land uses, such as senior housing, shall be distributed
    throughout the City to assure their accessibility to activity centers and shopping
    areas and to provide the option of continuing to reside in neighborhoods of mixed
    economic, ethnic and age groups. For projects located on the periphery of the
    City that house senior citizens or the mobility impaired, special transportation,
    such as vans, shall be required to be provided by the project.
Objective LU 13
Minimize conflicts between land uses.
    Policy LU 13.1
    New development shall preserve and enhance, to the extent possible, the existing
    natural vegetation, landscape features, and open space.
    Policy LU 13.2
    Appropriate buffers shall be established between industrial and nonindustrial
    lands. (Policies HS 9.3, HS 9.4, HS 9.5 relate to noise impacts. Policies HS 7.4,
    7.5, and 7.6 relate to hazardous materials. Objective HS 8 and Policies HS 8.2,
    HS 8.3, HS 8.4 and HS 8.5 relate to emergency preparedness. Policy OS 8.1
    relates to air quality. Policies ED 2.5 and CI 1.1 relate to traffic.)
         Program LU 13.2 A
         Adopt standards and criteria for locating nonindustrial development in
         proximity to heavy industrial development that ensures the protection of the
         public health, safety and welfare and the economic viability of the industrial
         development. These standards and criteria shall include noise, hazardous
         materials, emergency response and evacuation, air quality, odors, light and
         glare, traffic, and visual quality. (See Policy ED 2.1)
City of Fairfield General Plan                LU - 9                            October
                                                2016

    Policy LU 13.3
    Proposed land uses shall be consistent with the land use compatibility criteria,
    maps, and policies of the Travis Air Force Base Land Use Compatibility Plan and
    the Land Use Compatibility Plan for the Travis Aero Club incorporated into this
    General Plan. (See Objective HS 5, Policies HS 5.1, HS 5.2, HS 5.3, HS 9.2 and
    ED 1.9)
         Program LU 13.3 A
         If the Air Force decides to relocate the Aero Club landing strip, the City shall
         assist the Air Force and any affected developers in moving the strip to another
         location, away from existing or projected urban development.
         Program LU 13.3 B
         Until such time that the existing Aero Club facility can be relocated, new
         development should comply with the Land Use Compatibility Plan for the
         Travis Aero Club as amended on February 25, 1998.
         Program LU 13.3C
         If the Aero Club facility relocates, then the density range for residential
         development located west of Walters Road in Compatibility Zone C, as
         defined by the Land Use Compatibility Plan for Travis Aero Club, will increase
         to 8-15 units/acre.
    Policy LU 13.4
    Retail uses shall only be permitted in industrial areas as a secondary use to a
    permitted use, such as manufacturing. Retail and service uses which serve the
    employees of the area may also be permitted. (See Policy ED 2.3)
         Program LU 13.4 A
         Develop guidelines for allowing retail in industrial areas. (See Program ED 2.3
         A)
    Policy LU 13.5
    Home occupations may be permitted in residential areas where the use is clearly
    incidental and secondary to the use of the residence for dwelling purposes and
    where the requirements of the Zoning Regulations for home occupations are met.
    (See Policy ED 1.4)
Objective LU 14
Develop sufficient employment generating uses to maintain a positive City
fiscal condition and housing balance. (See Objective ED 1)
City of Fairfield General Plan            LU - 10                                 October
                                             2016
    Policy LU 14.1
    Areas designated for industrial use on the General Plan Diagram should be held
    for such use to assure that there will be sufficient industrial land available to create
    an economic base in support of the costs of providing on-going public services.
    A slow pace of industrial development shall not be construed as justification for
    utilizing lands designated for industrial use for another type of urban use.
    Policy LU 14.2
    A variety of employment areas shall be provided in which industrial and
    commercial activities will contribute to the continued economic welfare of the
    people of the City and to stable economic and tax bases for the City. (See Policy
    ED 1.1)
    Policy LU 14.3
    Commercial areas shall be provided to accommodate the needs of the City’s
    present and anticipated population. (See Objective ED 3)
    Policy LU 14.4
    New strip commercial development shall be discouraged. (See Policy ED 4.2)
    Policy LU 14.5
    The 18-acre mixed use site located at the northeast corner of Airbase Parkway
    and Claybank Road shall include office, specialty services and retail uses. Prior
    to zoning the site, the property owner shall conduct a marketing study to identify
    uses and services for the site. The neighborhood shopping center to the north of
    the site shall be given priority for neighborhood-serving retail and services.
Objective LU 15
Preserve identified prominent topographical features, including ridgelines,
steep slopes and hillsides; and natural features such as tree stands and
riparian areas. (See Objective OS 6, Policies OS 6.1, OS 6.2, OS 6.3, OS 6.4 and
OS 6.5, Programs OS 6.3 A, OS 6.4 A, OS 6.4 B, OS 6.5 A and OS 6.6 A, Objective
UD 5, and Policies UD 5.1 and UD 5.2)
Objective LU 16
Development of identified hillside areas should be sensitive, to preserve
natural features. (See Policies OS 6.2, OS 6.3, Programs OS 6.3 A, OS 6.4 A, OS
6.4 B, and Policy UD 5.3)
City of Fairfield General Plan             LU - 11                                   October
                                              2016

Objective LU 17
Encourage mixed use development that provides for an integrated mixture of
residential and employment-generating uses within the same structure. (See
Policy HO 1.5)
Objective LU 18
Encourage infill development and compact growth.
    Policy LU 18.1
    Utilize land within the existing city limits as efficiently as possible, allowing for a
    wider variety of housing types and densities within the same zone district, and
    economical use of public services and infrastructure.
    Policy LU 18.2
    Provide incentives and support projects that are designed to encourage compact
    growth and higher densities while providing amenities such as bike paths, parks
    and pedestrian parkways as densities increase.
         Program LU 18.2A
         Amend the Zoning Ordinance to facilitate development of projects with higher
         densities and increased number and quality of pedestrian and transit-oriented
         amenities.
    Policy LU 18.3
    Encourage pedestrian and/or transit-oriented projects at unit densities that make
    transit feasible. Evaluate planned land uses around transportation centers to
    assess the feasibility of a high-density residential project oriented to transit.
         Program LU 18.3A
         Revise the City’s zoning ordinance to permit residential and higher-end
         commercial land uses within the same district, provided the uses are
         integrated as a mixed-use development with shared parking and pedestrian-
         oriented amenities.
    Policy LU 18.4
    Establish a program to reduce fees for infill development which meets a
    predetermined set of development criteria consistent with the City’s goals for
    compact growth.
City of Fairfield General Plan             LU - 12                                  October
                                              2016

         Program LU 18.4A
         Encourage nodes of higher housing densities in areas served (or readily
         available) by the existing range of urban services including utilities, transit
         stops, neighborhood shopping and public services. Establish an incentive
         program whereby sites which meet the above criteria are given priority in the
         City’s project approval process and the allocation of affordable housing funds
         from redevelopment set aside and federal HOME funds programs.
         Program LU 18.4B
         Encourage secondary dwelling units on existing owner-occupied single-family
         lots to accommodate the housing needs of the extended and multi-generation
         family and to provide an affordable housing alternative in existing
         neighborhoods. (See Policy HO 2.8)
Objective LU 19
Encourage intensification in downtown and central Fairfield.
    Policy LU 19.1
    Reinforce the economic vitality of the core by maximizing the number of residents
    in close proximity to it, and encouraging development of new ownership housing
    opportunities in downtown.
    Policy LU 19.2
    Encourage the development of live-work spaces in the CD and CM districts in
    downtown Fairfield.
         Program LU 19.2A
         Provide economic incentive (taxes, priority in participation in MCC’s, etc.) for
         development of new mixed-use residential and commercial retail
         development in the CD and CM districts downtown.
         Program LU 19.2B
         Re-designate vacant land within Central Fairfield, in particular the RM district
         south of downtown, for higher density uses and mixed use and provide
         incentives for assembling smaller parcels to create feasible infill projects.
    Policy LU 19.3
    Allow street parking spaces adjacent to properties to be counted toward meeting
    the parking requirements for new residential and mixed-use projects near the
    downtown but outside the P-1 Parking Overlay District.
City of Fairfield General Plan           LU - 13                                   October
                                            2016

Policies for Master Plan Areas
Following are descriptions and specific policies for the three Master Plan Areas. As
described in the section on future land use, Master Plan Areas are special study
areas which have the potential for urban development, but are presently constrained
by a variety of existing factors.
Rancho Solano North
Introduction
 The Rancho Solano North Master Plan Area is identified on the Land Use Diagram
as an approximately 2,000-acre undeveloped area north and east of Rancho Solano,
and land north of Rolling Hills.
All of this land is unincorporated, and is on moderate to steeply sloped hillsides
varying from 200 to 800 feet in elevation. None of this land is now served by urban
sewer or water service.
Areawide Plan Mandate
1.     An areawide plan shall be prepared for the entire master plan area, including
       Tooby Ranch, Hopkins land, Sengo Ranch, and all other land shown in the Land
       Use Diagram.
2.     The areawide plan shall evaluate the open space and development potential of
       all the land without regard to property lines.
3.     Preparation of the areawide plan will include a citizen participation effort,
       involving citizens and property owners representing a wide variety of interests
       and backgrounds.
4.     Development in the area shall be comprehensively planned through the
       areawide plan with unified design concepts.
Suisun Valley Agriculture Protection
5.     New development and traffic improvements shall not conflict with the existing
       agricultural and farming activities in Suisun Valley.
City of Fairfield General Plan             LU - 14                             October
                                               2016
6.     New development shall be physically separated from farmland and agricultural
       uses. In order to protect existing farmland and farming activities from urban
       development, an open space and recreation buffer shall be established along
       the perimeter of the Valley. Only agricultural or passive recreational uses will
       be allowed in this buffer. (See Policy LU 2.1 and Program LU 2.1 A)
7.     No new streets shall be built which intersect Clayton Road. All new roads and
       streets serving new development shall connect into the existing City street
       system.
Scenic Preservation
8.     Golf course, housing, roads, or other forms of urban development visible from
       Mankas Corner Road or Clayton Road; any proposed hillside or ridgeline
       development; and lighting on hillsides shall be minimized and mitigated by
       natural visual barriers, such as mounds, trees, etc.
Natural Resources
9.     Significant wildlife habitats and watersheds shall be preserved and protected.
Urban Limit Line
10. The City’s urban limit line shall ultimately follow the path of final development.
       Until an areawide plan for the master plan area is prepared, the urban limit line
       shall extend to the master plan area’s outer boundaries, but exclude any
       agricultural lands subject to the agreement between the City of Fairfield and
       Solano Irrigation District. Once the areawide plan is adopted, the urban limit
       line shall be configured to follow the outermost fringe of urban development at
       buildout. All land located beyond the ultimate urban limit line, as approved in
       the areawide plan, shall not be included in the City’s sphere of influence and
       shall not be annexed by the City in the future.
Open Space and Recreation
11. Creation of a regional nature park similar to Rockville Hills Park shall be
       incorporated into the areawide plan for the master plan area.
12. An integrated trail system shall be built which serves hikers, runners, bicyclists,
       equestrians, and those with special recreational needs.
City of Fairfield General Plan             LU - 15                              October
                                              2016

Public and Site Improvements
14. All infrastructure improvements, such as sewer and water facilities, roads and
       streets, street lighting, and storm drainage improvements, shall be designed to
       visually blend into the natural setting.
15. All property designated for development in the master plan area shall be subject
       to a Mello-Roos district or other financing mechanisms capable of paying for all
       major public improvements, including open space acquisition, parks, roads,
       sewer and water lines, and storm drainage improvements.
16. Site grading shall be done in a manner to minimize damage to natural land
       features and existing topographical contours. Substantial disturbance of
       existing features and contours shall only be allowed when the visual quality of
       the development is enhanced.
l7.    Site improvements and development in hillside areas shall comply with the
       Hillside Management Guidelines.
Policies for Nelson Hill
Introduction
Nelson Hill is a prominent landform located south of I-80, nearly one mile east of the
I-680/I-80 interchange. Total acreage includes 230 wooded acres on elevations
ranging from 60 to 300 feet. Slopes on the sides of the hill vary from moderate to
very steep, with gentle grades on the west side. Only the north side and the hilltop
are sparsely wooded. A City water reservoir is located at the northeast corner of the
hill.
The top of the hill was quarried for nearly 100 years. Although not presently in
operation, the quarry could be reactivated at any time, since the quarrying rights are
permanent. In October 2000, Solano County and the quarry owners entered into an
agreement that set operating conditions for the quarry. The conditions establish
operating hours for mining activity and truck hauling. In addition, the conditions
establish a maximum annual production of 242,000 tons.
The Land Use Diagram designates this site as a Master Plan Area. It is intended for
a combination of residential and open space uses. Any development of Nelson Hill
will be limited in order to protect prominent ridges, significant tree stands, steep
elevations, and highly visible locations as permanent open space and recreation
resources.
City of Fairfield General Plan             LU - 16                              October
                                              2016
Master Development Plan
(See Policy OS 6.8)
1.     The General Plan designation of the area is low density residential/open space.
2.     After adoption of the General Plan, a master development plan will be prepared
       for the entire Nelson Hill site. This plan shall evaluate the open space,
       recreation, and residential development potential of all land.
3.     Development shall be comprehensively planned and integrated with the
       adjoining residential designated properties to the west; particularly with respect
       to circulation.
Open Space Preservation
4.     Significant ridgelines, steep slopes, and native trees shall be protected from
       urban development and shall be preserved in their natural state. Site
       improvements and development shall not be located within prominent
       viewsheds. Any development on the hilltop shall be situated as not to be visible
       from surrounding areas.
5.     As part of the master development planning process, land shall be dedicated
       for a City park. This land shall include a site to be located at the southern portion
       of the top of Nelson Hill, affording views of the Suisun Marsh and allowing
       access for handicapped, elderly, or very young persons not able to hike from
       the bottom of the hill.
6.     On site open space shall be required as a condition of development approvals.
       Land to be dedicated shall also include the wooded hillsides at approximately
       sixty feet elevation and higher, and other significant open space resources. As
       part of the master development planning process, a publicly accessible trails
       system shall be designated. Trails shall be located at the higher elevations of
       the hillsides, preferably within wooded areas. These trails shall be designed to
       ultimately connect with the Linear Park.
7.     No development shall be allowed at the northeast corner of the site which
       adjoins Suisun Valley agricultural land.
Public and Site Improvements
8.     All infrastructure improvements, such as sewer and water facilities, roads and
       streets, street lighting, and storm drainage improvements, shall be designed
       and located to visually blend into the natural setting.
City of Fairfield General Plan              LU - 17                                  October
                                               2016
9.     The area shall be subject to a Mello-Roos district or other financing mechanisms
       designed to pay for major citywide public improvements, including open space
       acquisition and transportation improvements.
10. Site grading, including pad preparation, road construction, and retaining walls,
       shall be done in a manner to: minimize damage to natural land features,
       conform to existing topographical contours, be visually unobtrusive from
       surrounding viewsheds, and protect native nature trees.
11. Existing old rock walls, including the wall along the property line between the
       Nelson Hill land and adjoining property to the west, should remain undisturbed,
       except for any necessary street or utility improvements. Any street or utility
       easements shall be aligned as not to interfere with the integrity of these walls.
       (See Policy OS 6.10)
Peabody-Walters Master Plan
The Peabody-Walters Master Plan was adopted on September 6, 1994 for the area
east of Claybank Road and north of Air Base Parkway. The Master Plan establishes
specific policies and standards for this area. Future uses for land within the Master
Plan area are identified on the General Plan Land Use Diagram.
Policies for the Cordelia Area
The following policies were included in the Cordelia Area Specific Plan, which was
repealed in 1999. These policies apply to land that was formerly addressed in that
plan.
Open Space/Agriculture
1. The location of open space corridors may vary from those depicted on the
    diagram except when the location is fixed by such features as an earthquake
    fault zone, PG&E power line, natural topographic or vegetative feature, along
    the Urban Limit Line, or divides land uses. The width and location of the open
    space corridor over the earthquake fault zone shall be determined by
    geotechnical studies.
2. The minimum size of a residential lot abutting land designated as Intensive
    Agriculture shall be 1/4 acre.
City of Fairfield General Plan            LU - 18                                October
                                             2016
3. The use of the extensive agricultural land which lies between I-680 and Suisun
    Marsh shall be limited to those agricultural operations which are harmonious
    with the adjoining marsh and wetland area. Examples of acceptable uses
    include grain and hay crop production and irrigated and non-irrigated pasture.
4. There shall be an open space corridor with a minimum width of 50 feet along
    the Urban Limit Line when abutting areas designated Intensive Agricultural by
    the plan.
5. When development occurs adjacent to areas designated as Extensive or
    Intensive Agriculture, fencing shall be installed which is designed to discourage
    trespassing onto such agricultural properties.
6. Ridge lines and riparian areas shall be retained in open space uses.
7. The environmental quality of Suisun Marsh shall be protected and enhanced
    through a combination of land use regulation and construction of public
    facilities. Activities within and adjacent to the marsh shall generally be limited
    to the following: nature-oriented recreation, hunting, fishing, wildlife habitat,
    low-speed boating, and only those specific types of agricultural operations
    which will avoid alteration of topography, vegetation, watercourses and soil-
    water relationships.
Commercial Development
8. In Cordelia, the City shall not approve a disposition and development
    agreement or other discretionary permit for commercial development which is
    greater than 10,000 sq.ft. or which generates more than 150 daily trips if
    calculated Levels of Service at the time of said approval at any major
    intersection, as defined in Section 6.1 of the Green Valley Settlement
    Agreement, is either operating at a level of service lower than LOS D, or would
    operate at a level of service lower than LOS D, as a result of the proposed
    approval in combination with existing traffic levels and projected traffic from the
    projects described in Section 1.29 of the Green Valley Settlement Agreement
    and all other approved residential and commercial projects in Cordelia.
Industrial Development
9. Through its programs and capital expenditures, the City shall encourage
    industrial development which is both capital and labor intensive. Warehouse,
    distribution, and other similar uses shall be given a lower priority by the City.
City of Fairfield General Plan            LU - 19                                October
                                             2016
Old Town Cordelia
10. Prior to the prezoning or rezoning of any land within Old Town Cordelia, a
    development plan for the entire area shall be approved by the City. The
    development plan shall specify the location and type of land uses, public rights-
    of-way, and development regulations and standards.
11. Annexation to the City of Fairfield of any portion of Old Town Cordelia shall not
    occur until the development plan is approved.
12. The architectural design of any new buildings within Old Town Cordelia shall
    reflect its historic character.
Urban Design
13. An Urban Design Plan shall be prepared for Cordelia.
14. Until adoption of the Urban Design Plan, the following interim measures shall
    apply to all areas within the Cordelia Specific Plan Area except for those areas
    north of I-80 and west of Suisun Valley Road which shall comply with the
    Design Standards of the North Cordelia Area:
    •    At the time of initial development, design themes shall be established for
         residential neighborhoods, industrial parks, and commercial centers. The
         theme may focus on building materials, color, architectural style,
         landscaping or lighting.
    •    The selection of the variety of street trees and planting pattern along arterial
         and major collector streets shall be in accordance with a master street tree
         plan.
    •    For commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential projects there shall
         be at least one tree per 20 lineal feet of street frontage, exclusive of any
         required landscaping within parking areas or adjacent to buildings.
    •    Monument and ground signs will be required for all non-freeway oriented
         signs. Sign height and area shall be limited to the minimum necessary to
         identify a business without creating sign clutter or detracting from the natural
         amenity of the area.
    •    All required landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy and attractive
         condition.
City of Fairfield General Plan            LU - 20                                 October
                                             2016

    •    All buildings, structures, and parking areas shall be maintained in a sound
         and attractive condition.
15. A neighborhood corridor shall have a minimum width of 50 feet to a maximum
    of 150 feet. Improvements shall consist of paths, lighting, fencing, and
    landscaping. Continuous fencing on both sides of the corridor shall generally
    be avoided. Construction and maintenance shall be the responsibility of private
    development. The location, width, and design of neighborhood corridors shall
    be subject to approval by the City, which shall take into consideration the street
    and lot pattern, adjacent land uses and topographic conditions.
16. The design of the following street shall have rural elements, such as the
    absence of standard curb, gutter and sidewalk, in order to maintain the
    character of an area, unless a rural design would be detrimental to the public
    health, safety, and welfare.
    •    Green Valley Road, north of future Mangels Boulevard;
17. The width of public right-of-ways and paving may be reduced in hillside areas
    in order to avoid excessive grading.
18. Any required noise barriers shall be designed with a varied height, form and
    location to avoid a monotonous wall-like effect. Landscaped berms or a
    combination berm and wall may be required.
19. Development abutting or highly visible from I-80 and I-680 shall have superior
    design with respect to architecture, building materials, landscaping, and site
    planning. Examples of superior design include, but are not limited to:
    •    Use of front-face quality materials and design of all building elevations
         visible from the freeways.
    •    Screening of parking and other expansive paved areas through use of
         berms, low walls and landscaping.
    •    Prohibition of outdoor storage of materials visible from the freeways.
    •    Creativity in the relationship between buildings and structures.
    •    Use of water, sculptures and other special features.
    •    Distinctive and innovative landscaping plans.
City of Fairfield General Plan            LU - 21                              October
                                             2016

20. Major collector streets shall have sidewalks separated from the curb by a
    parkway strip with a minimum width of six feet.
21. In order to preserve significant resources in Old Cordelia and the rural
    character along the south and east sides of Nelson Hill, the City will study
    alternatives to widening Cordelia Road in its existing alignment
Traffic Analysis
22. For all development north of Interstate 80 the level of Service shall be
    calculated as defined in Section 6.1 of the Green Valley Settlement Agreement
    for as long as it remains in effect. Prior to any approvals within this area and
    annually thereafter, the City shall measure the existing Level of Service and
    calculate future levels. This calculation shall be done as defined in Section 6.1
    and 6.2 of the Settlement Agreement. The results of these calculations shall
    be reported to the Planning Commission and City Council for project review
    and periodic review not more than twelve (12) months apart.
City of Fairfield General Plan          LU - 22                               October
                                            2016
Supporting Text
History and Existing Setting
Fairfield is located along the I-80 corridor in the County of Solano between the rapidly
growing San Francisco Bay and Sacramento areas. (See Exhibit LU-1) The City is
surrounded by undeveloped hills on its western and northern borders. To its east
and northeast are grazing and prairie grasslands. To the south, beyond the
neighboring city of Suisun City, is the largest remaining wetland around San
Francisco Bay, the Suisun Marsh. Suisun Valley, one of the county’s most productive
and intensive agricultural regions, adjoins Fairfield and separates the central city from
the Cordelia planning area.
Over the decades, the city’s character has gradually evolved. Beginning as a small
farming-related community, Fairfield became the Solano County seat in 1858. In the
early l940’s, Fairfield began to take on the identity of a military town, when military
operations began at Travis Air Force Base. In the past few decades, it has also
become a major business and retail center for Solano County and has experienced
rapid growth of new residential neighborhoods.
Presently, Fairfield is characterized by three distinct communities: Cordelia, central
Fairfield, and the Travis Air Force Base/Northeast area. Table LU-1 includes a
summary of existing and projected population, housing and employment.
Central Fairfield is bounded by Suisun Valley on the west, the Vaca Mountains and
Cement Hill on the north, Claybank Road on the east, and the City of Suisun or Union
Pacific railroad tracks on the south. This area contains the City’s oldest residential
neighborhoods as well as new, more upscale housing. It also includes a number of
commercial and industrial areas and serves as the center of County and City
government.
Cordelia is located to the west of Central Fairfield around the I-80/I-680 interchange
and is connected to Central Fairfield by I-80, Cordelia Road, Rockville Road and the
linear park bike trail. Suisun Valley, an intensive agricultural area, separates Cordelia
and Central Fairfield. A Specific Plan for the planning area was adopted in 1974,
calling for a master planned, self-sufficient community. This plan was later amended
in 1986 and repealed in 1999. Relevant policies from the plan were added to the
Land Use Element of the General Plan.
City of Fairfield General Plan             LU - 23                                October
                                              2016

The Travis/Northeast area includes Travis Air Force Base and land generally located
east of Clay Bank Road and north of Air Base Parkway. Used for military operations
since the early l940’s, Travis Air Force Base (AFB) has influenced the character and
economic profile of the city. Originally located five miles east of the city, the base is
becoming connected to central Fairfield by development that has progressively
extended eastward. Much of the remainder of the Northeast area is vacant.
However, there is an area of heavy industrial development along Huntington Drive.
In addition, various manufacturing and service commercial uses are located along
Peabody Road and Cement Hill Road in the unincorporated County.
Future Land Use – The Livable City Concept
Through the Land Use Diagram, Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Programs, the Land
Use Element is a plan for future development of the City to the year 2020. This plan
is a response to the unique issues, opportunities and constraints that face the
community. Some of the key issues which the element addresses are amount and
rate of growth, distribution and location of future land uses, and extent of future City
boundaries. These issues, and others, are resolved in the context of a variety of
opportunities and constraints, such as availability of vacant land, availability of public
services and facilities, the existing pattern of land uses, and the natural environment.
Past strategies for future development have emphasized annexation of undeveloped
land and establishment of unique identities for the western, central and eastern areas
of the city. The experience of other cities, however, has demonstrated that this
type of growth pattern plays an important role in causing urban sprawl. Symptoms
of sprawl include the loss of productive farmland, increased parking and
infrastructure requirements, increased traffic, and a growing inability to access
basic services without the use of an automobile.
With this in mind, the Land Use Element is based on a future scenario known as the
“Livable City" concept. This concept envisions the city developing in a manner that
promotes a more compact and efficient land use pattern, and places less emphasis
on development that necessitates use of the automobile. In particular, the Land
Use Element incorporates the following concepts:
    •    Fairfield will remain an important center in Solano County for government,
         business, and commerce. The downtown area will become a stronger
         center for the entire City.
City of Fairfield General Plan            LU - 24                                 October
                                              2016

    •    There will be a strong commitment toward protection of agricultural areas
         outside the Urban Limit Line and to the separation from other urban areas
         in the County.
    •    Future development will largely occur within the existing City limits. Limited
         development will be proposed outside the City limits, primarily to achieve
         certain related objectives that are difficult to achieve within the existing city
         limits. Examples include the establishment of a large technology-related
         industrial center and the development of a regional open space park north
         of the City.
    •    Incentives will be provided for concentrated development of infill areas
         within the existing City boundaries.            These incentives will include
         modifications to development regulations and city fees.
    •    There will be a greater emphasis than in the past on pedestrian-oriented
         development (POD) and transit-oriented development (TOD).
    •    The existing separation of the western, central and eastern areas of the city
         will become more connected, with emphasis on a common city identity, and
         citywide diversity in development. However, areas that will remain remote
         from central Fairfield and downtown, such as Cordelia, would have high
         quality governmental services, recreation, shopping and employment.
    •    There will be a citywide balance of jobs and housing, with an emphasis on
         diversity in jobs and housing options. The desired citywide ratio should be
         consistent with the desired overall ratio for the nine-county Bay Area,
         established by recent policy decisions of the Association of Bay Area
         Governments.
    •    The City will provide high quality services and infrastructure in accordance
         with adopted standards.
The Land Use Diagram includes an "Urban Limit Line" which represents the ultimate
limit of the City. Policies in the Land Use Element direct that urban development be
confined within this Urban Limit Line. The Urban Limit Line spells out a commitment
on the part of the City of Fairfield to respect the integrity of the surrounding non-urban
areas. This intent is an integral part of the Livable City concept, which envisions
Fairfield being surrounded by a greenbelt buffer of open space, clearly separated
from the other cities of Solano County.
City of Fairfield General Plan             LU - 25                                  October
                                              2016

The Livable City concept, as represented by the Land Use Diagram, contains a range
of land use categories, which are discussed below. The diagram also includes three
Master Development Plan areas. These include Nelson Hill, located in the Cordelia
area, Rancho Solano North, located west of Interstate 80, and Peabody Walters,
located in the eastern part of the City. Master Plan areas are special study areas
surrounding the community which have the potential to become urban areas, but are
presently constrained by a variety of existing factors. Distinct circumstances must
occur in order for master plan area development to be triggered. A General Plan
Amendment and the adoption of an Areawide Plan would be required for these areas
before development would occur. The Land Use Element includes specific policies
for each of the master plan areas.
On September 6, 1994, a Master Plan was adopted for Peabody-Waters. The Master
Plan includes specific policies governing this area. The Master Plan also establishes
land uses designations for this area. The General Plan land use diagram includes
the land use designations established by the Master Plan.
Table LU-1, which summarizes future housing, population and employment for the
City, includes estimates for the Master Plan areas. These estimates have been
developed in order to determine the appropriate level of citywide public facilities.
Once the master, specific or areawide plans are adopted, these numbers may be
revised and should not be considered a maximum or minimum.
City of Fairfield General Plan          LU - 26                               October
                                            2016
Land Use Categories
All lands within the boundaries of a General Plan’s Urban Limit Line must be provided
with a General Plan Land Use designation. In many cases these designations will
have been made without benefit of a detailed analysis of development constraints.
The existence of one or more development constraints could limit the beneficial use
of a property or limit the density or intensity of development to less than that
anticipated by the General Plan designation. Typical examples of such development
constraints include but are not limited to the following: geotechnical conditions,
topography including grading impacts, existence of significant tree stands or groves,
drainage and flood plains, archaeological sites, wetlands and stream courses, faults,
and easements.
Where development constraints such as those described above are found to exist
during the areawide planning process or other more detailed levels of the
development approval process, the General Plan would assume that the density,
intensity and extent of development would be appropriately reduced.
Agriculture
Agriculture is discussed in detail in the Open Space, Conservation and Recreation
Element and the Economic Development Element. Agriculture has value to the City
both as an open space asset and as a contributor to the local economy. The Land
Use Element includes two agricultural categories.
Intensive Agriculture
Intensive agricultural lands are those which have the potential for the highest
productive yield (usually used for row crops and orchards). These lands generally
have soil classes I and II (prime soils). Suisun Valley and portions of lower Green
Valley are characterized by intensive agriculture.
Extensive Agriculture
Extensive agricultural lands have a relatively lower productive yield and are primarily
used for grazing. Extensive agricultural lands in the planning area include hilly slope
areas around the City, portions of Suisun Marsh, and areas to the east and southeast
of Travis Air Force Base.
City of Fairfield General Plan           LU - 27                                October
                                            2016

Open Space
The Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation Element describes several Open
Space Planning Areas that have significant value as open space (See Exhibit OS-1).
Some of these areas will remain permanently as open space. Other areas are
intended for limited development after completion of special studies or areawide
plans that ensure the protection of valuable open space resources. Some of these
areas are identified in the Land Use Diagram as Master Plan Areas.
The Land Use Element and Diagram include two open space categories: Recreation
and Conservation. Open space areas are linked in the diagram by a trail system.
This trail system and other aspects of the open space system are discussed in
greater detail in the Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation Element.
Recreational Open Space
This category is intended for land that has been improved for active recreational uses.
Generally, uses in this category include regional, community and neighborhood parks
and golf courses.
Conservation Open Space
This category includes areas having significant open space value that are not used
for active recreation (such as the Suisun Marsh).
Residential
The Land Use Element and Diagram include six residential categories. These
categories: 1) identify areas throughout the planning area which are acceptable for
housing, 2) clarify the overall type of housing to be developed within each category,
and 3) establish minimum and maximum densities.
Each residential category includes minimum and maximum densities, expressed in
numbers of housing units per gross acre. Densities lower than the minimum
designation may be permitted only when the City Council makes findings according
to the criteria contained in this element. A gross acre includes not only the area
required for the actual residential use (dwelling and yard), but also the area required
for minor and collector streets, utilities, and public or private recreational open space
necessary to serve the housing area. Uses such as major arterial streets,
elementary, middle, and high schools, neighborhood and community parks,
churches, and other uses which serve several neighborhoods or the community at
large are not included in the gross acreage for purposes of calculating the allowable
number of housing units.
The Zoning Ordinance, not the Land Use Diagram, regulates parcel specific lot
standards and allowable land uses. Under state law, zoning shall be consistent with
City of Fairfield General Plan              LU - 28                                October
                                               2016
the general plan. Each residential category in the Land Use Element specifies
housing types that are typical for the density range identified in each category.
However, any type of residence may be built within any residential category, as long
as the density is within the range. For those categories that include single family
detached development, typical lot sizes are included. However, the actual standards
for lot sizes are governed by the Zoning Ordinance.
Very Low Density Residential: less than or equal to 2.5 dwelling
units/gross acre
This category is characterized by large estate lot residential development. Typically,
lot sizes would be 15,000 square feet or greater. However, cluster single family
homes on smaller lots with significant permanent open space may also be found in
this category. This category could be applied to hillside areas and to transition areas
between agriculture and more intense residential development. In the case of hillside
development, a hillside overlay will be established in the Zoning Ordinance.
Development within the hillside overlay will be subject to the requirements of the
hillside grading ordinance and could result in a density below the maximum permitted
by the range.
Low Density Residential: 2.5 - 4.5 dwelling units/gross acre
This category includes single family development on large lots, and standard single
family subdivisions. Lot sizes could range from 7,500 to 15,000 square feet.
Low Medium Density Residential: 4.5 - 8.0 dwelling units/gross acre
This category includes standard single family subdivisions and nontraditional designs
such as zero lot lines, patio homes, and townhomes. Typically, lot sizes would range
from 4,500 to 7,500 square feet. In those areas where lots at the lower end of the
range are proposed, careful attention shall be given to size and massing of homes
and to the provision of adequate open space areas and recreational opportunities.
Medium Density Residential: 8.0 - 15.0 dwelling units/gross acre
This category is intended for a wide range of attached units, such as duets,
townhouses, rowhouses, condominiums, and apartments. In some cases
detached units may be allowed in this category, but only if it is demonstrated that
at least ten percent of the units will provide affordable home ownership
opportunities to low and/or moderate income households. In lieu of providing
home-ownership opportunities within the project, the City may consider proposals
to deed restrict or covenant an equivalent number of home-ownership or rental
units in another residential development within the City, or require an applicant to
pay an in-lieu fee if such is established by the City Council. The requirement that
detached units provide affordable housing opportunities may be waived by the City
in a development agreement where a development is providing a substantial public
City of Fairfield General Plan          LU - 29                                 October
                                           2016
improvement or benefit beyond what may be imposed without a development
agreement. In considering whether to waive the affordable housing requirement in
a development agreement, the City shall consider the impact of the affordability
requirement on the financial feasibility of the development, the impact of the
development and any proposed public improvements on City infrastructure and the
delivery of City services, and any community-wide benefits provided for in the
development agreement. The size and massing of detached homes shall be in
scale with the lot sizes, and there will be provision of adequate open space areas
and recreational opportunities. Typically, single family attached and detached lots
in this category would range from 3,000 to 4,500 square feet for each unit. It is
intended that development in this category be conveniently serviced by
neighborhood commercial and recreational facilities and have access to major
arterial streets.”
High Density Residential: 15.0 - 22.0 dwelling units/gross acre
This category is intended for multi-family apartment and condominium development.
This designation is located in close proximity to major arterial streets, commercial
and recreational facilities, and employment centers.
Very High Density Residential: 22.0 - 32.0 dwelling units/gross acre
This category includes multi-family apartment and condominium development in
high-intensity areas. Development of greater than 32 dwelling units/gross acre may
be permitted for senior congregate care housing projects. When making a
determination regarding the number of dwelling units in a senior congregate care
housing project, a dwelling unit shall be considered a living unit including bathroom
and living areas, but need not include kitchen facilities.
Commercial and Industrial
The descriptions of land uses permitted in each commercial and industrial category
are not exclusive. Other uses are permitted that are consistent with the Zoning
Ordinance. The commercial and industrial categories include both a range of Floor
Area Ratios (FAR) and typical FAR’s for each land use. The FAR’s are intended to
be used as a guide for estimating the future development intensity. The Zoning
Ordinance governs the actual FAR’s required by the City.
Neighborhood Commercial: 0.2 - 0.275 FAR
This designation includes convenience commercial and neighborhood shopping
centers which provide for a range of necessary day-to-day retail goods and services.
Typically, a neighborhood shopping center would include a supermarket as the
principal anchor tenant. Other tenants offer a variety of goods and services such as
drugstores, banks, restaurants, and service stations. A typical FAR for this category
is 0.225.
City of Fairfield General Plan           LU - 30                               October
                                            2016

Community Commercial: 0.2 - 1.5 FAR
This category includes a variety of commercial areas that serve a larger market area
than a neighborhood center but less than a regional center. The designation includes
shopping centers that serve a larger market than the immediate neighborhood.
Typically, there are one or more anchor tenants such as a supermarket, discount or
off-price department store, hardware/home improvement store or combined
drug/variety/garden store. There would also be a variety of tenants offering
consumer goods and personal services. A typical FAR for this type of use is 0.225.
Specialty shopping centers that may be smaller in size than other community
shopping centers but that serve a community-level market are also included in this
category. These centers do not have a supermarket, but provide specialized goods
and services. A typical FAR for this type of use is 0.225.
This category also includes strip commercial shopping areas along North Texas
Street and Texas Street west of Pennsylvania Avenue. These areas are
characterized by retail commercial and office uses, usually developed as
freestanding units. A typical FAR for this type of use is 0.225.
The City’s Central Business District (CBD) is also included in the Community
Commercial category. However, this area has its own unique character as a
pedestrian-oriented, concentrated area of retail, service and office uses. Multi-family
residential may also be permitted in the CBD. The City Center Redevelopment Plan
and the Zoning Ordinance govern the permitted uses in this area. Higher intensity
development should be encouraged in the CBD than in the other types of Community
Commercial development. A typical FAR in the CBD is 0.5. However, FAR’s in the
CBD may be as high as 1.5.
Service Commercial: 0.225 - 0.5 FAR
This designation provides for commercial service activities, such as auto repair,
building material supply, warehousing, wholesale trade, contractors, suppliers,
equipment yards, and other similar uses. Each proposed use must be evaluated on
a case-by-case basis for compatibility with surrounding land uses. The smaller
service commercial centers are intended for lower intensity service operations. The
larger centers are designed to provide sites for uses with large land area
requirements. The typical FAR in this category is 0.225.
City of Fairfield General Plan          LU - 31                                October
                                            2016

Highway and Regional Commercial: 0.15 - 1.0 FAR
This category includes regional shopping centers, highway oriented retail and service
uses, and commercial recreation. Regional shopping centers are large shopping
centers with a variety of large department stores and specialty shops that serve a
market area that exceeds the planning area. Professional offices, governmental
uses, hotel and motels may be permitted in the highway and regional commercial
category if the site size is sufficient and if found to be compatible with adjacent land
uses. Certain neighborhood and community commercial uses may be permitted in
this category. Such uses would consist of retail sales, personal services, and
business services. A typical FAR in this category is 0.225.
Office Commercial: 0.25 - 1.0 FAR
This category is intended for non-retail, business and professional offices. The typical
FAR for this category is 0.30. However FAR’s at the high end of the range will be
expected in more central areas and at the low end of the range in outlying areas.
Business and Industrial Park: 0.25 - 0.60 FAR
This designation is intended for light industrial and office uses. Uses may include
office and administration facilities, research and development, and support business
and commercial facilities. Land within this category has been reserved for industrial
firms and businesses seeking an attractive and pleasant working environment.
These areas are characterized by a high employment density. The development and
design standards for these areas should protect this land from development which is
inappropriate due to either function, appearance or environmental affects. This land
use is appropriate as a buffer between General Industrial areas and non-industrial
areas. The typical FAR for this category is 0.35, but could range between 0.25 and
0.60 depending on the location and the nature of the business park.
Technology Park: 0.25 – 0.5 FAR
This designation is intended for development of large parcels of land with high-
technology uses. Uses may include light industrial, office and administration
facilities, research and development, and support business and commercial
facilities. The area has been reserved for businesses seeking an attractive and
pleasant working environment. Design standards shall be adopted for this area
prior to any development to ensure that especially high standards of development
are maintained. The Technology Park is intended to help the City achieve its
jobs/housing goals by providing a significant amount of high quality jobs for the
community. The City has therefore established an overall job density standard of
10 jobs/acre. Individual projects may be permitted which do not achieve this
density as long as the overall density is maintained.
Limited Industrial: 0.25 - 0.5 FAR
City of Fairfield General Plan            LU - 32                                October
                                               2016

This designation provides for light and medium industrial type activity. Uses typical
of this category may include but are not limited to research & development,
warehouse, wholesale distribution, manufacturing, assembling, fabrication, office
uses, and support uses. Not permitted within this category are uses which require
unscreened open air storage of large quantities of raw, semi-refined, or finished
products. Retail uses are discouraged in this category but may be permitted as a
secondary use to a permitted use. This land use is appropriate as a buffer between
General Industrial areas and non-industrial areas. The typical FAR for this category
is 0.35.
General Industrial: 0.3 - 0.5 FAR
This designation allows for a wide range of industrial activities which includes
manufacturing, assembling, fabrication, and other similar uses. The intent of this
category is to provide a location for heavy industrial uses. Areas developed under
this designation should be located with direct access to major roads, freeways, or rail
lines. The typical FAR for this category is 0.40.
Travis Reserve
This designation applies to certain unincorporated land located north and east of
Travis Air Force Base. Land in the Travis Reserve is set aside for future expansion
of Travis Air Force Base only. If the status of the base changes, the construction
of a non-military airport and support uses may be permitted in the Travis Reserve.
No residential uses will be permitted in the Travis Reserve. Until a military or
airport use is proposed for land with the Travis Reserve designation, the City
supports its continued use for agriculture and grazing.
Public Facilities
This includes a wide range of uses that can be defined as institutional responses to
basic human needs, such as health, education, safety, and recreation. Examples of
typical public facilities include schools, water treatment plants, and fire stations.
Public facilities, including waste management, are described in detail in the Public
Facilities and Services Element. Hazardous waste management is addressed in the
Health and Safety Element. Public facilities may be permitted within other land use
categories.
City of Fairfield General Plan          LU - 33                               October
                                            2016
Mixed Use
This designation has been applied to several areas throughout the City. Each area
has a unique mix of specified permitted uses. The Land Use Policies and Zoning
Ordinance describe the permitted uses at each location in detail. The FAR’s in the
Mixed Use category will vary depending on the mix of uses. The FAR’s for each of
the permitted uses will apply to this category. The following areas have been
designated as mixed use on the Land Use Diagram:
Southeast Corner of Peabody Road and Cement Hill Road (Train Station West):
Neighborhood commercial, residential over neighborhood commercial, and
residential up to 50 units per acre.
Southeast Corner of Walter Road and Airbase Parkway (Parker Ranch):
Residential of various densities and Commercial, with appropriate buffering along
Airbase Parkway to protect the residential zones. Residential development shall
comply with Policy HS 9.2A regarding exposure to aircraft noise at Travis Air Force
Base. A portion of this property is located within Compatibility Zone B for the Land
Use Compatibility Plan for the Travis Aero Club as amended on February 25, 1998
by the Solano County Airport Land Use Commission. Development will comply with
the restrictions included in the Aero Club Plan, including a limitation on retail
development and a prohibition on new residential development on a portion of Zone
B. If the Aero Club closes or relocates, these land use restrictions would no longer
apply. (See Policy LU l3.3 and Program LU l3.3 A)
Northeast Corner of Lopes Road and Gold Hill Road:
Business and professional office, retail and service
Southeast of Solano College:
Business park (offices, research and development and similar uses) and high density
residential (15-22 units per acre). A limited amount of neighborhood commercial
uses may be permitted to serve the college, residents and workers in the immediate
vicinity.
Northeast Corner of Peabody Road and Airbase Parkway:
Commercial and Light Industrial. Land uses shall comply with the Land Use
Compatibility Plan for Travis Aero Club. If the Aero Club closes or relocates, these
land use restrictions would no longer apply. (See Policy HS 5.4)
Area between Empire and Kentucky Streets and south of Missouri Street:
Commercial and residential
Block bounded by Delaware Street, Union Avenue, Broadway Street and
Jefferson Street:
Office, commercial and residential, up to 32 units per acre
City of Fairfield General Plan          LU - 34                               October
                                           2016

Southwest corner of Pennsylvania Avenue and Texas Street:
Office, commercial and residential, up to 32 units per acre
Sunset and Travis:
Neighborhood Commercial and Office
Northeast Corner of Airbase Parkway and Claybank Road:
Office, Specialty Services and Retail (See Policy LU 14.5 for more detail)
North of Highway 12 and West of Pennsylvania Avenue:
Limited Industrial, Service Commercial, and Office
Area South of Travis Blvd. between Clay Street and Wilson Street:
Mixed residential and commercial
Any future areas which receive the mixed use designation shall include an integrated
mixture of residential and employment-generating uses.
City of Fairfield General Plan          LU - 35                               October
                                           2016
TABLE LU-1
Projection of Housing, Population and Jobs
at Buildout of General Plan
                                               Housing          Population               Jobs
Existing (Jan. 1, 2001)
 Cordelia                                          3,140               9,320       not available
 Remainder of City                                29,260              89,480       not available
 Subtotal Existing                                32,400              98,800            43,400
Projected Additions
 Cordelia                                          4,600              12,550            11,370
 Remainder of City                                 9,200              24,810            22,240
 Subtotal Additions                               13,800              37,360            33,610
Projected Buildout Totals
 Cordelia                                          7,740              21,870                 n/a
 Remainder of City                                38,460             114,290                 n/a
Citywide Buildout Totals                         46,200             136,160             77,010
Notes
1. Existing total housing and population figures provided by State Department of Finance.
2. Existing job figures provided by ABAG.
3. Totals have been rounded to the nearest 10.
4. Table LU-1 displays projections of future development, but does not depict maximum
    possible levels of development. Future additions may be higher or lower than projected
    (see the Land Use Chapter of the Technical Document for more information on how
    projections were calculated).
5. Projections of additional development are regularly updated by the Department of Planning
   and Development, and may not be incorporated into Table LU-1.
City of Fairfield General Plan                LU - 36                                    October
                                                  2016
Open Space, Conservation, and
Recreation Element
Introduction
The Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation Element specifies objectives,
policies, and programs to achieve the permanent preservation and management of
public open space lands, natural resources, and the enhancement of community
recreational opportunities. This element incorporates two state-mandated elements
(conservation and open space) with an optional recreation component.
The open space portion of the element addresses open space acquisition and
management, preservation of agricultural lands, focusing on key Open Space
Planning Areas identified during the last comprehensive update of the General Plan.
The Conservation section addresses natural resource conservation topics such as
waterways, natural and riparian habitats, wildlife preservation, and scenic, historic
and cultural resources. Recreation focuses on outdoor recreation and parks,
including neighborhood, community and regional parks and trails in open space
areas surrounding the city.
In addition to this Element, the Tri-City and County Cooperative Plan for Agriculture
and Open Space Preservation, an optional element to the Fairfield General Plan,
contains policies related to this planning area southwest of Fairfield. Preservation of
open space vital to the mission of the airbase can be found in the Travis Protection
Element. Finally, protection of agriculture is also addressed in the Land Use and
Economic Development Elements of the General Plan.
City of Fairfield General Plan            OS - 1                            August 2013
Goal
The goal of the Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation Element is:
Designate, preserve, and protect agricultural, ecological, recreational and
scenic lands in Fairfield and surrounding areas for now and future
generations.
Objectives, Policies, and Programs
Open Space
Objective OS 1
Support preservation of existing agricultural lands. (See Policy LU 2.1 and
Objective ED 8)
    Policy OS 1.1
    Preserve agricultural enterprises by supporting right-to-farm policies, and
    separating and buffering agricultural lands from new development areas. (See
    Policy AG 1.1)
    Policy OS 1.2
    Support the Solano County General Plan and its policies and programs to
    promote and support agricultural uses, including agricultural tourism centers and
    services at appropriate locations. (See Policy AG 1.2)
         Program OS 1.2 A
         Support County efforts to promote farmers and agritourism in Suisun Valley
         and Green Valley. Such support might include technical assistance on grant
         applications, cooperation on water supply issues where appropriate,
         marketing of products, and joint tourism campaigns.
         Program OS 1.2 B
         Support the efforts of Solano County, Solano Land Trust, and the local
         agricultural community to improve bicycle routes and trails in Suisun Valley to
         facilitate tourist access to Suisun and Green Valleys.
         Program OS 1.2 C
         Support the County agricultural preserve program and a strong County right-
         to-farm ordinance. (See Policy AG 1.2 B)
         Program OS 1.2 D
         Encourage development of agriculture processing and handling industries.
         (See Policy AG 1.2 C)
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 2                            August 2013
    Policy OS 1.3
    Maintain current agricultural zoning in the area east of Travis AFB, including
    the Jepson Prairie and Wilcox Ranch. (See Policy AG 1.3)
    Policy OS 1.4
    Permanently preserve productive agricultural lands within the Suisun Valley by
    continuing to direct new urban development away from the Suisun Valley. “Urban
    development” does not include the agricultural services and agritourism
    development envisioned in the Solano County General Plan, which is appropriate
    for development in the County. (See Policy LU 2.1, AG 1.4 and ED 8.3)
         Program OS 1.4A
         Support development, including tourism and support services, at locations
         identified in the Solano County General Plan which strengthens the
         agricultural economy in Suisun Valley
    Policy OS 1.5
    What is urban shall be municipal, and what is rural shall be within the County.
    Any urban development requiring basic municipal services shall occur only within
    the incorporated City and within the urban limit line established by the General
    Plan. (See Objective LU 3, AG 1.6 and Policy LU 3.1) The City will support
    agritourism centers in Suisun Valley and Green Valley that support the
    agricultural economy in the valleys, consistent with Measure L.
Objective OS 2
Create a greenbelt/open space buffer around the perimeter of the city that
provides a clear sense of identity for the City of Fairfield as separate from other
urban areas and incorporates the hills, agricultural valleys, the Jepson Prairie,
and the Suisun Marsh. (See Policy LU 2.4)
    Policy OS 2.1
    Development Master Plans and Specific Plans abutting Open Space Planning
    Areas shall address preservation of important greenbelts and open space buffers.
    Key view corridors, watersheds, and prominent ridges shall be protected. (See
    Objective UD 5)
    Policy OS 2.2
    Establish and maintain open space buffer zones between Vallejo and Fairfield
    along I-80 and between Fairfield and Benicia along I-680, identified as Open
    Space Planning Area 1 on the Open Space Planning Area map.
    Policy OS 2.3
    All land uses and activities in Open Space Planning Area 1, also known as the
    Benicia/Fairfield/Vallejo Buffer as shown in Exhibit OS-1, shall conform to the
    policies contained in the Tri-City and County Cooperative Plan for Agriculture and
    Open Space Preservation.
City of Fairfield General Plan            OS - 3                           August 2013

    Policy OS 2.4
    Support the Solano County General Plan goals and objectives for Green Valley,
    including the Green Valley Specific Plan.
    Policy OS 2.5
    Establish a permanent open space buffer between Fairfield and Vacaville
    consistent with the Fairfield Train Station Specific Plan and the amended
    Greenbelt boundary established by the Solano-Vacaville-Fairfield Joint Powers
    Authority.
         Program OS 2.5 A
         Implement the open space preservation program outlined in the Fairfield Train
         Station Specific Plan.
    Policy OS 2.6
    Limit development on hillsides above 200 feet in elevation.
    Policy OS 2.7
    Promote clustering of housing units to preserve hillsides, ridges, and the
    maximum amount of open space (See Policy LU 13.1 and Policy UD 5.3)
Objective OS 3
Ensure adequate funding for management of public open space.                     (See
Objective LU 7)
    Policy OS 3.1
    When development projects include open space dedications, the Conditions of
    Approval and/or the Development Agreement shall address funding for long term
    maintenance of the open space.
    Policy OS 3.2
    Ownership and management responsibility of public open space shall be
    assigned to the public agency or private organization best suited to meeting this
    responsibility.
         Program OS 3.2 A
         Continue to support the activities of the Solano Land Trust in acquiring
         and managing open space lands in the vicinity of Fairfield.
         Program OS 3.2 B
         Continue to support Solano County’s open space management and
         recreation programs for open space areas near the City of Fairfield.
City of Fairfield General Plan            OS - 4                          August 2013

    Policy OS 3.3
    Residents, property owners, and users shall contribute to maintaining public open
    spaces.
         Program OS 3.3 A
         Establish Lighting and Landscaping Districts, Community Facilities Districts or
         other appropriate mechanisms to fund maintenance and management of
         open space lands.
         Program OS 3.3 B
         Implement revenue generating programs and projects in Fairfield open space
         properties that generate funds for maintenance and capital improvements.
         Program OS 3.3 C
         Evaluate other mechanisms to generate funds for maintenance of open space
         and associated recreational programs. Such programs might include parcel
         taxes, focusing on properties not in an open space assessment district.
    Policy OS 3.4
    Support countywide and regional efforts to establish a permanent mechanism in
    Solano County to fund the acquisition and management of open space lands.
    Policy OS 3.5
    Work with the Solano County Sheriff, CalFire, the California Highway Patrol, and
    appropriate fire districts to ensure that public safety and security is adequately
    addressed in all public open space areas.
Objective OS 4
Generate funds within the community for acquisition of open space lands.
    Policy OS 4.1
    New development shall fund its share of open space acquisition. Include open
    space acquisition funding as an element in all areawide plans, master plans, and
    specific plans.
         Program OS 4.1AImplement the funding mechanisms for the Fairfield-
         Vacaville-Solano Greenbelt outlined in in the Northeast Fee Program.
         Program OS 4.1B
         As part of the planning process, develop and implement dedication programs,
         funding mechanisms, and cooperative agreements with nonprofits and other
         agencies in forthcoming master or areawide plan areas such as Nelson Hill
         and Rancho Solano North.
         Program OS 4.1C
City of Fairfield General Plan            OS - 5                            August 2013
         Establish Community Facilities Districts in proposed development areas to
         fund the acquisition and management of open space lands.
         Program OS 4.1D
         Investigate the use of an appropriate annual bond repayment property tax at
         an appropriate level for public open space purposes on all new Fairfield
         residences.
Conservation
Objective OS 6
Protect and enhance visual resources throughout the City. (See Objectives LU
15, LU 16, and UD 5 and Policies UD 5.1, UD 5.2, and UD 5.3)
    Policy OS 6.1
    Preserve views of hills and other scenic features surrounding Fairfield. (See
    Policy UD 5.2 and Policy HS 4.7)
    Policy OS 6.2
    Continue to administer adopted preservation ordinances for trees and streams.
    (See Policy UD 5.3)
    Policy OS 6.3
    All grading shall be integrated and compatible with adjacent areas so as to create
    a natural topographical appearance and avoid abrupt changes in slope.
         Program OS 6.3 A
         For all development in hillside overlay (-H) areas, implement the Hillside
         Development Guidelines and the Hillside Grading Ordinance. .
          Program OS 6.3A
         During project review, the City shall review development proposals to confirm
         that proposed developments are suitable for hillside areas.
    Policy OS 6.4
    New development within a Scenic Vista Area or its viewshed shall comply with
    the policies and guidelines in the Scenic Vistas and Roadways Plan. (See
    Objective UD 5)
    Policy OS 6.5
    Significant natural features shall be preserved wherever development is allowed
    in a Scenic Vista Area, and views of these significant features shall not be
    obstructed.
    Policy OS 6.6
City of Fairfield General Plan            OS - 6                           August 2013
    New development along a Scenic Roadway shall comply with the policies and
    guidelines in the Scenic Vistas and Roadways Plan.
         Program OS 6.6 A
         Develop where appropriate public trails, bicycle lanes, and viewpoints along
         scenic roadways within the Planning Area.
    Policy OS 6.7
    Preserve the character of Nelson Hill through protection of key open space,
    recreation amenities, viewpoints, and natural resources in conjunction with any
    proposed development. (See LU Nelson Hill Policies 4, 5, 6, and 7)
    Policy OS 6.8
    Maintain the scenic vistas of the rolling hills that are seen from the urban areas of
    Fairfield.
    Policy OS 6.9
    Limit development above the 200 foot contour on Cement Hill because of its
    dominant visual significance to the City. If the City ultimately acquires this open
    space, it shall develop publicly accessible trails and vista points on Cement Hill
    to take advantage of the outstanding views of Fairfield and the Valley.
         Program OS 6.9 A
         Seek development rights, fee title, or conservation easements to lands on
         Cement Hill in exchange for future development approvals on developable
         lands below the 200 foot contour.
Objective OS 7
Identify and protect sensitive biological habitat and resources.
Note that the City of Fairfield is participating in the preparation of a Habitat
Conservation Plan. If this Plan is adopted, the specific standards and requirements
in the Plan will supersede specific standards and mitigation requirements in this
document. Other Policies in this section will continue to apply where appropriate.
    Policy OS 7.1
    Establish policies to protect indigenous wildlife and their habitats. Support the
    Solano County Water Agency Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) preparation
    effort and, if the HCP is approved and adopted, implement its requirements.
         Program OS 7.1 A
         Adopt a conservation plan and mitigation banking program for annual
         grassland wildlife habitat during any areawide planning process. The plan
         should identify sites for habitat preservation and enhancement and establish
         predictable mitigation requirements for developers, mitigation funding
         mechanisms, and interagency agreements on mitigation measures and
City of Fairfield General Plan              OS - 7                            August 2013
         priorities. Preparation of the plan would include tasks described in the 1992
         General Plan EIR.
         Program OS 7.1 B
         For each proposed development site containing riparian, oak woodland, oak
         savanna, annual grassland, agricultural lands, and wetlands that potentially
         support special-status raptor nests or habitat, the City will require qualified
         biologists to conduct a reconnaissance survey of the site and identify potential
         sensitive biological resources, including special-status species (as identified
         in the 2001 EIR for the Comprehensive Amendment to the General Plan) and
         their habitats, jurisdictional waters of the United States, and any other
         protected biological resources. If no sensitive biological resources are found
         during this survey, no further surveys will be necessary.
         If sensitive biological resources are found, the biologist will conduct additional
         surveys, as needed, using methods and protocols developed or acceptable
         by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and
         Wildlife and make recommendations for avoiding sensitive biological
         resources to the extent feasible. The biologist will also flag or fence sensitive
         resources to be avoided. This requirement shall apply prior to City
         consideration of any development proposal for the site.
         Program OS 7.1 C
         If elderberry shrubs are found during implementation of Policy OS 7.1, the
         project proponent will refer to current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
         conservation guidelines for the valley elderberry longhorn beetle). If it is
         determined that impacts cannot be avoided by maintaining distance
         requirements as specified in the guidelines, the project proponent will
         consult with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service under Section 7 of the federal
         Endangered Species Act (or Section 10 if the project does not involve a
         federal action). Under Section 7, the consultation will require the
         preparation of a biological assessment, development of a compensation
         plan according to U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service guidelines, and, on
         approval by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, authorization to take valley
         elderberry longhorn beetle in the form of a Section 7 biological opinion. If
         no federal action is involved, the project proponent will prepare an Habitat
         Conservation Plan under Section 10 of the federal Endangered Species Act.
         Program OS 7.1 D
         For each proposed development site containing aquatic habitats, including
         ponds, canals, creeks, or other drainages or water bodies that potentially
         support California red-legged frog, foothill yellow-legged frog, western or
         northwestern pond turtle, or California Tiger Salamander, the City will
         require qualified biologists to conduct a reconnaissance survey of the site
         and identify potential sensitive biological resources, including special-status
         species (as identified in the 2001 EIR for the Comprehensive Amendment
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 8                              August 2013
         to the General Plan) and their habitats, jurisdictional waters of the United
         States, and any other protected biological resources. If no sensitive
         biological resources are found during this survey, no further surveys will be
         necessary.
         If sensitive biological resources are found, the biologist will conduct additional
         surveys, as needed, using methods and protocols developed or acceptable
         by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and
         Wildlife and make recommendations for avoiding sensitive biological
         resources to the extent feasible. The biologist will also flag or fence sensitive
         resources to be avoided. This requirement shall apply prior to City
         consideration of any development proposal for the site.
         Program OS 7.1 E
         For each proposed development site containing grasslands, brush lands,
         woodlands, and chaparral with sandy or loose soils, and abundant ant
         colonies for foraging that potentially support California horned lizard, the City
         will require qualified biologists to conduct a reconnaissance survey of the site
         and identify potential sensitive biological resources, including special-status
         species (as identified in the 2001 EIR for the Comprehensive Amendment to
         the General Plan) and their habitats, jurisdictional waters of the United States,
         and any other protected biological resources. If no sensitive biological
         resources are found during this survey, no further surveys will be necessary.
         If sensitive biological resources are found, the biologist will conduct additional
         surveys, as needed, using methods and protocols developed or acceptable
         by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and
         Wildlife, and make recommendations for avoiding sensitive biological
         resources to the extent feasible. The biologist will also flag or fence sensitive
         resources to be avoided. This requirement shall apply prior to City
         consideration of any development proposal for the site.
         Program OS 7.1 F
         If upland habitats, including grasslands, brush lands, woodlands, and
         chaparral that potentially support California horned lizard are found in a
         project area during implementation of Program OS 7.1J, the project
         proponent will, to the extent feasible, avoid direct and indirect impacts on
         these habitats. Additional surveys may be conducted to determine
         presence or absence of this species in the planning area. If it is determined
         the species is not present on the planning area or on habitat adjacent and
         contiguous with the planning area, no further mitigation is required. If the
         species is present, the project proponent will consult with the California
         Department of Fish and Wildlife to develop appropriate mitigation to offset
         impacts on this species and its habitat.
         Program OS 7.1 G
City of Fairfield General Plan               OS - 9                            August 2013
         If special-status raptors nests are found on or in the vicinity of a project area
         through implementation of Program 7.1B, the project proponent will consult
         with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife to develop appropriate
         site-specific mitigation strategies to avoid impacts on active nests. Active
         raptor nests are protected under the California Fish and Game Code,
         Section 3503.5. Mitigation measures could include establishing protective
         buffer zones, timing restrictions, or compensation through acquisition of
         replacement nesting habitat.
         Program OS 7.1 H
         If nesting Swainson’s hawks are found on or in the vicinity of a project area
         through implementation of Program OS 7.1B or if known nests are identified
         through other sources (e.g., the California Natural Diversity Database) within
         10 miles of the planning area, the project proponent will mitigate for losses of
         annual grassland and agricultural foraging habitat using the current California
         Department of Fish and Wildlife mitigation guidelines for Swainson’s hawk
         (California Department of Fish and Wildlife 1994).
         Program OS 7.1 I
         For each proposed development site containing grasslands and agricultural
         habitats along field edges and ruderal habitats that potentially support
         western burrowing owl, the City will require qualified biologists to conduct a
         reconnaissance survey of the site and identify potential sensitive biological
         resources, including special-status species (as identified in the 2001 EIR
         for the Comprehensive Amendment to the General Plan) and their habitats,
         jurisdictional waters of the United States, and any other protected biological
         resources. If no sensitive biological resources are found during this survey,
         no further surveys will be necessary.
         If sensitive biological resources are found, the biologist will conduct additional
         surveys, as needed, using methods and protocols developed or acceptable
         by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and
         Wildlife, and make recommendations for avoiding sensitive biological
         resources to the extent feasible. The biologist will also flag or fence sensitive
         resources to be avoided. This requirement shall apply prior to City
         consideration of any development proposal for the site.
         Program OS 7.1 J
         If active burrowing owl nesting or wintering burrows are found on or in the
         vicinity of a project area through implementation of Program OS 7.1N, the
         project proponent will implement the California Department of Fish and
         Wildlife mitigation guidelines for burrowing owls (California Department of
         Fish and Wildlife 1995).
         Program OS 7.1 K
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 10                             August 2013

         For each proposed development site containing riparian areas that
         potentially support great egret, snowy egret, great blue heron, or black-
         crowned night heron rookeries, the City will require qualified biologists to
         conduct a reconnaissance survey of the site and identify potential sensitive
         biological resources, including special-status species (as identified in the
         2001 EIR for the Comprehensive Amendment to the General Plan) and their
         habitats, jurisdictional waters of the United States, and any other protected
         biological resources. If no sensitive biological resources are found during
         this survey, no further surveys will be necessary.
         If sensitive biological resources are found, the biologist will conduct additional
         surveys, as needed, using methods and protocols developed or acceptable
         by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and
         Wildlife, and make recommendations for avoiding sensitive biological
         resources to the extent feasible. The biologist will also flag or fence sensitive
         resources to be avoided. This requirement shall apply prior to City
         consideration of any development proposal for the site.
         Program OS 7.1 L
         If heron or egret rookeries are found on or in the vicinity of a project area
         through implementation of Program OS 7.1P, the City will require the project
         proponent to consult with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife to
         develop appropriate site-specific mitigation strategies to avoid impacts on
         active colonies. These could include establishing no-disturbance buffers,
         timing restrictions, or habitat compensation.
         Program OS 7.1 M
         For each proposed development site containing freshwater or saltwater
         marsh, or upland sites with blackberries, nettles, thistles, and grain fields
         that potentially support tricolored blackbird nesting colonies, the City will
         require qualified biologists to conduct a reconnaissance survey of the site
         and identify potential sensitive biological resources, including special-status
         species (as identified in the 2001 EIR for the Comprehensive Amendment
         to the General Plan) and their habitats, jurisdictional waters of the United
         States, and any other protected biological resources. If no sensitive
         biological resources are found during this survey, no further surveys will be
         necessary.
         If sensitive biological resources are found, the biologist will conduct additional
         surveys, as needed,; using methods and protocols developed or acceptable
         by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and
         Wildlife, and make recommendations for avoiding sensitive biological
         resources to the extent feasible. The biologist will also flag or fence sensitive
         resources to be avoided. This requirement shall apply prior to City
         consideration of any development proposal for the site.
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 11                             August 2013
         Program OS 7.1 N
         If tricolored blackbird nesting colonies are found on or in the vicinity of a
         project area through implementation of Program OS 7.1R, the City shall
         require the project proponent to consult with the California Department of
         Fish and Wildlife to develop appropriate site-specific mitigation strategies to
         avoid impacts on active colonies. These could include establishing no-
         disturbance buffers, timing restrictions, or habitat compensation.
         Program OS 7.1 O
         For each proposed development site containing saltwater marsh, the City
         will require qualified biologists to conduct a reconnaissance survey of the
         site and identify potential sensitive biological resources, including special-
         status species (as identified in the 2001 EIR for the Comprehensive
         Amendment to the General Plan) and their habitats, jurisdictional waters of
         the United States, and any other protected biological resources. If no
         sensitive biological resources are found during this survey, no further
         surveys will be necessary.
         If sensitive biological resources are found, the biologist will conduct additional
         surveys, as needed, using methods and protocols developed or acceptable
         by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and
         Wildlife, and make recommendations for avoiding sensitive biological
         resources to the extent feasible. The biologist will also flag or fence sensitive
         resources to be avoided. This requirement shall apply prior to City
         consideration of any development proposal for the site.
         Program OS 7.1 P
         If habitat for saltwater marsh special-status species is found on or in the
         vicinity of a project area through implementation of Program OS 7.1T, the
         City shall require the project proponent to consult with the California
         Department of Fish and Wildlife and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to
         determine the potential for state or federally threatened or endangered
         species or state fully protected species (e.g., salt marsh harvest mouse,
         California clapper rail, and black rail). If potential for these species exists,
         then the project proponent will consult with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
         Service under Section 10 or 7 of the federal Endangered Species Act and
         with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife to determine the potential
         effects of the proposed project on these species. The project proponent will
         prepare the appropriate state and federal environmental documentation that
         could ultimately result in authorization to take 1 or more threatened or
         endangered species under the federal Endangered Species Act and
         through a California Department of Fish and Wildlife Section 2081 permit
         process. No take authorization is available for fully protected species, and
         consultation with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife would be
         required to develop approved avoidance measures.
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 12                             August 2013
         Program OS 7.1 Q
         If aquatic habitats, including vernal pools and other seasonal wetlands,
         ponds, creeks, and other drainages or water bodies that potentially support
         California tiger salamander are found in a project area during
         implementation of Program OS 7.1G, the project proponent will consult with
         the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service under Section 7 of the federal
         Endangered Species Act (or Section 10 if the project involves a federal
         action). The consultation could result in additional protocol surveys using
         U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service survey guidelines and could require the
         preparation of a biological assessment, development of a compensation
         plan according to U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service guidelines, and, on
         acceptance by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, authorization to take the
         California red-legged frog in the form of a Section 7 biological opinion. If no
         federal action is involved, the project proponent will prepare a habitat
         conservation plan under Section 10 of the federal Endangered Species Act.
    Policy OS 7.2
    Work with the County and the City of Vallejo to preserve Green Valley Falls as a
    nature reserve.
         Program OS 7.2A
         As funding permits, work with the County, the City of Vallejo, and the Solano
         Land Trust to provide opportunities for appropriate public access in the
         environmentally sensitive areas of the Green Valley canyon.
    Policy OS 7.3
    Support County and Solano Land Trust efforts to preserve, enhance, and restore
    the Rockville Trails property.
         Program OS 7.3 A
         Support the efforts of Solano County and the Solano Land Trust to develop a
         Master Plan for Rockville Trails. Coordinate this planning with the City of
         Fairfield’s goals and objectives for Rockville Hills Regional Park. Work with
         the County and the Land Trust to address public access, safety, and parking
         issues
    Policy OS 7.4
    Cooperate with Solano County and local nonprofit organizations like the Solano
    Land Trust to identify critical wildlife habitat areas suitable for acquisition and
    permanent preservation.
    Policy OS 7.5
    Identify and protect vernal pools located in the entire General Plan Area.
         Program OS 7.5 A
         Adopt a conservation plan and mitigation banking program for vernal pools
         and seasonal wetland habitats during the preparation of required areawide
City of Fairfield General Plan            OS - 13                            August 2013

         plans. The components of this program are described in the 1992 General
         Plan EIR.
         Program OS 7.5 B
         For each proposed development site containing vernal pool or seasonal
         wetland biological communities, the City will require qualified biologists to
         conduct a reconnaissance survey of the site and identify potential sensitive
         biological resources, including special-status species (as identified in the
         2001 EIR for the Comprehensive Amendment to the General Plan) and their
         habitats, jurisdictional waters of the United States, and any other protected
         biological resources. If no sensitive biological resources are found during
         this survey, no further surveys will be necessary.
         If sensitive biological resources are found, the biologist will conduct additional
         surveys, as needed, using methods and protocols developed or acceptable
         by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and
         Wildlife, and make recommendations for avoiding sensitive biological
         resources to the extent feasible. The biologist will also flag or fence sensitive
         resources to be avoided. This requirement shall apply prior to City
         consideration of any development proposal for the site.
         Program OS 7.5 C
         If vernal pools or other seasonal wetlands that potentially support federally
         listed invertebrates are found in a project area during implementation of
         Program 7.5B, the project proponent must consult with the U.S. Fish and
         Wildlife Service under Section 7 of the federal ESA (or Section 10 if the
         project does not involve a federal action). The consultation could result in
         additional protocol-level surveys to determine the presence or absence of
         the species and could require the preparation of a biological assessment,
         development of a compensation plan according to U.S. Fish and Wildlife
         Service guidelines, and, on approval by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
         authorization to take federally listed invertebrates in the form of a Section 7
         biological opinion. If no federal action is involved, the project proponent will
         prepare a habitat conservation plan under Section 10 of the federal
         Endangered Species Act.
    Policy OS 7.6
    Avoid the potential for negative impacts of increased human activity on sensitive
    habitat areas when establishing new recreational facilities or programs.
    Policy OS 7.7
    Continue promoting the preservation of existing mature trees and encourage the
    planting of appropriate shade trees in new developments. (See Policy UD 6.1 and
    Program UD 6.1 A)
         Program OS 7.7 A
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 14                             August 2013
         Implement Zoning Ordinance requirements for street trees and parking lot
         shade trees in new residential and commercial developments
         Program OS 7.7 B
         Adopt a conservation plan and mitigation banking program for oak savannah
         and oak woodland habitat during any areawide planning process. The plan
         should identify habitat preservation and enhancement sites and criteria for
         incorporating and protecting oak savannah habitat and individual valley oaks
         as part of development projects, and would establish predictable mitigation
         requirements for developers, mitigation funding mechanisms, and
         interagency agreements on mitigation measures and priorities. Preparation
         of the plan would include tasks described in the 1992 General Plan EIR.
    Policy OS 7.8
    For each proposed development site within oak woodland or oak savannah
    biological communities, the City will require qualified biologists to identify and
    map all sensitive biological resources, including special-status species (as
    defined above) and their habitats; using methods and protocols developed or
    acceptable by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of
    Fish and Wildlife, make recommendations for avoiding sensitive biological
    resources to the extent feasible; and flag or fence sensitive resources to be
    avoided. This requirement shall apply prior to City consideration of any
    development proposal for the site.
         Program 7.8 A
         The loss of healthy oak trees of all age classes should be avoided or
         reduced to the extent feasible for each development site. Prior to
         consideration of any development proposal for the site, the City shall require
         a botanist or certified arborist to identify and map project-site trees, noting
         the diameter at breast height and condition of all oak trees on the project
         site. The botanist or arborist will coordinate placement of protective
         temporary fencing outside of the driplines of oak trees to be preserved.
         Program 7.8 B
         For each project in which unavoidable removal of oak woodland or savanna
         habitat will occur, the City shall require the development of a compensation
         plan. Compensation will consist of tree planting (preferably onsite) or
         purchase and preservation of existing woodland or savanna. The City will
         develop required compensation ratios for removed oak trees, consistent
         with its Tree Conservation Ordinance and require compliance with the
         compensation plan. Where native oak trees are to be removed, the
         conservation plan shall provide for replacement with native oak trees,
         unless native species that are appropriate for the replanting site are not
         readily available from commercial sources. In this case, non-native species
         may be approved.
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 15                           August 2013
    Policy OS 7.9
    Preserve and protect special status plant populations.
         Program OS 7.9 A
         The City shall require project proponents within undeveloped lands to retain a
         qualified botanist to conduct surveys of proposed project sites to identify
         special-status plant species. If survey results identify potential habitat for
         special-status plants, blooming period surveys will be conducted for all
         potentially present special-status plants. All locations of special-status plants
         will be identified on maps.
         Program OS 7.9 B
         Developers shall prepare a plan to avoid impacting special-status plants,
         especially federally listed species, during construction. Prior to beginning
         construction, the plants to be protected and the buffer zone around each
         plant community shall be identified, fenced, and protected during
         construction activities. The buffer zone shall meet the standards contained
         in this General Plan document and shall be approved by appropriate federal
         and State agencies.
         Program OS 7.9 C
         If City staff determines that complete avoidance of a special-status plant is
         not feasible, the City will require the project proponent to retain a qualified
         botanist to develop a mitigation plan. Depending on the legal status of the
         plant species (i.e., listing under the federal ESA or CESA), the California
         Department of Fish and Wildlife or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service will be
         consulted before preparation of the mitigation plan. The mitigation plan
         should include a description and map of mitigation sites, methods to be
         used; management techniques for the sites; and sources of funding to
         purchase, manage, and preserve the sites. Mitigation could include
         purchase of an existing offsite area known to support the special-status
         species to be affected, as well as preserving the site in perpetuity.
         Transplanting and/or reseeding of special-status plants is not a proven
         effective compensation method for most species; therefore, project
         proponents should avoid special-status plants for which transplanting
         techniques have not been proven or compensate for impacts by preserving
         another population.
    Policy OS 7.10
    Prevent the spread of noxious weeds.
         Program OS 7.10 A
         As part of the biological survey of a construction site, identify and map
         noxious weed infestation areas before construction activities. Infestation
         areas will be avoided by construction activities, if feasible.
City of Fairfield General Plan            OS - 16                              August 2013
Objective OS 8
Preserve and protect natural resources.
    Policy OS 8.1
    Work with Regional and State agencies and surrounding communities to develop
    regional solutions to air quality issues. (See Objective LU 5, Policy LU 5.1, and
    Policy CI 12.1)
         Program OS 8.1A
         Participate in the County Climate Action Plan program
    Policy OS 8.2
    Mitigate air pollution from fixed and vehicular sources as required by state and
    regional air quality plans and programs. (See Policy LU 13.2 and Objective CI 12)
         Program OS 8.2A
         Work with other local agencies to develop and implement a plan to address
         State directives to reduce greenhouse gasses and air pollutants, including
         compliance with SB 375 and AB32.
         Program OS 8.2B
         Continue efforts to reduce air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions
         associated with City facilities and activities, such as building energy retrofits,
         alternative energy, high efficiency lighting, flexible fuel fleet vehicles, and
         electric vehicle charging stations.
         Program OS 8.2C
         Continue to require development projects to implement best management
         practices to reduce air pollutant emissions associated with construction and
         operation of the project, including dust control measures.
         Program OS 8.2C
         Continue to implement requirements for buffer zones on new development
         near major potential stationary pollution sources.
    Policy OS 8.3
    Encourage more efficient use of private vehicles and increased use of mass
    transit and alternative transportation modes. (See Objectives CI 6 and CI 7 and
    Policy CI 12.4)
         Program OS 8.3A
         During development review continue to encourage project design that
         reduces the need for multiple short vehicle trips. Address bicycling, walking,
         and transit use in all projects. Implement the “complete streets” policies in the
         Circulation Element and the Train Station Specific Plan to facilitate walking,
         bicycling, and transit.
City of Fairfield General Plan              OS - 17                           August 2013

         Program OS 8.3B
         Continue seeking funding for expansion of the Fairfield Transportation Center.
         Program OS 8.3C
         Work with regional and local transit providers to maintain and expand transit
         service to employment centers.
         Program OS 8.3D
         Complete construction of the planned Vacaville-Fairfield Train Station to
         improve transit connections to Sacramento and the Bay Area.
    Policy OS 8.4
    Encourage the retrofitting of existing buildings to be energy efficient.         (See
    Objective HO 7)
         Program OS 8.4A
         Continue implementation of the Green Building Code.
         Program OS 8.4B
         Facilitate the efforts of Pacific Gas and Electric to educate commercial building
         owners and homeowners about energy efficiency measures.
         Program OS 8.4C
         Implement building energy efficiency programs identified in the Climate Action
         Plan, when adopted.
    Policy OS 8.5
    Require water conservation and energy efficiency techniques to be incorporated
    into the design of all development projects. (See Policy UD 6.2 and Policy PF
    4.8)
    Policy OS 8.6
    Support recycling activities throughout the City. (See Policy PF 13.1 and Program
    PF 13.1 A)
         Program OS 8.6 A
          Continue implementing the City’s household curbside recycling program.
         (See Program PF 13.1 A)
         Program OS 8.6 B
         Continue implementing the City’s Construction Waste Disposal and Recycling
         Program
    Policy OS 8.7
City of Fairfield General Plan              OS - 18                           August 2013

    Encourage the use of raw, reclaimed, and recycled water where feasible.
Objective OS 9
Maintain existing waterways in their natural state if possible.
    Policy OS 9.1
    Promote restoration and establish permanent mechanisms to protect wetlands
    and riparian corridors.
    Policy OS 9.2
    Manage all seasonal creeks and other drainage courses so as to protect and
    enhance the Suisun Marsh. (See Policy PF 8.4 A)
         Program OS 9.2 A
         During development review, require all projects to continue to meet the
         requirements of the Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District. Incorporate appropriate
         best management practices into stormwater runoff plans to reduce impacts
         on local seasonal creeks and drainage courses.
    Policy OS 9.3
    Secure wetlands designation for appropriate lands in the Fairfield/Vacaville
    Greenbelt and for lands in the Travis AFB/Jepson Prairie Planning Area.
         Program OS 9.3 A
         Support the establishment of a regional or State wildlife preserve within the
         Travis AFB/Jepson Prairie Open Space Planning Area that will complement
         the existing Jepson Prairie Reserve. Work with Solano County and the Solano
         Land Trust to permanently preserve and manage Wilcox Ranch.
    Policy OS 9.4
    Allow no development on the east side of I-680 between Parish Road and the
    Cordelia historic area.
    Policy OS 9.5
    Support acquisition of key parcels on the periphery of the Suisun Marsh to ensure
    the integrity of the entire marsh.
    Policy OS 9.6
    Continue to protect the integrity of the Suisun Marsh Secondary Management
    Zone.
    Policy OS 9.7
    Promote only low intensity recreational activities which are compatible with the
    marsh environment adjacent to Suisun Marsh.
    Policy OS 9.8
City of Fairfield General Plan           OS - 19                           August 2013
    Preserve natural water courses through requirements of land dedication and
    open space improvement imposed during the land development process.
    Policy OS 9.9
    The proponents of new development projects along important freshwater marsh,
    riparian or open water habitat areas that are not already covered by the City's
    Creekside Protection Ordinance shall provide an assessment of the habitat.
    Based on the assessment, an enhancement or restoration plan would be required
    to be prepared by a qualified person(s) experienced in the development and
    implementation of riparian restoration and enhancement plans.
         Program OS 9.9 A
         For each proposed development site within freshwater marsh, salt marsh,
         vernal pool, and seasonal wetland biological communities, the City will require
         qualified biologists to conduct a reconnaissance survey of the site and identify
         potential sensitive biological resources, including special-status species (as
         identified in the 2001 EIR for the Comprehensive Amendment to the General
         Plan) and their habitats. If no sensitive biological resources are found during
         this      survey,     no      further      surveys    will      be    necessary.
         If sensitive biological resources are found, the biologist will conduct additional
         surveys, as needed to map the resources and, using methods and protocols
         developed or acceptable by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California
         Department of Fish and Wildlife; make recommendations for avoiding
         sensitive biological resources to the extent feasible. The biologist will also flag
         or fence sensitive resources to be avoided. This requirement shall apply prior
         to City consideration of any development proposal for the site.
         Program OS 9.9 B
         The loss of freshwater marsh, salt marsh, and vernal pool/seasonal wetland
         habitat and of stream channel and open-water habitats will be avoided or
         reduced to the extent feasible for each development site. Within each
         proposed development or agricultural conversion site, the project wetland
         ecologist will delineate and map waters of the United States and isolated
         wetland and open-water habitats and will make recommendations for
         avoidance. The wetland ecologist will coordinate placement of protective
         temporary fencing around wetland, stream channel, and open-water habitat
         to be preserved. Erosion control measures will be implemented at the edges
         of graded areas to minimize potential release of sediments into adjacent
         avoided wetland, stream channel, and open-water habitats.
         Program OS 9.9 C
         The City shall require the project proponent to obtain all necessary permits
         pertaining to affected waters of the United States, including wetland habitat
         and stream channel and pond habitat regulated by the California
         Department of Fish and Wildlife and/or San Francisco Bay Regional Water
City of Fairfield General Plan              OS - 20                            August 2013
         Quality Control Board prior to construction. Grading or other construction
         activities within streambeds or ponds may require a streambed alteration
         agreement from the California Department of Fish and Wildlife. Discharge
         of fill into waters of the United States will require a Clean Water Act Section
         404 permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Clean Water Act
         Section 401 certification from the San Francisco Bay Regional Water
         Quality Control Board. The permitting process will also require
         compensation for construction impacts.
         Program OS 9.9 D
         For each project in which unavoidable removal of wetland habitat or other
         waters of the United States will occur, the City shall require the project
         proponent to develop a compensation plan prior to construction.
         Compensation may include purchase of mitigation credits for the affected
         habitat types at an established mitigation bank, if available; preservation,
         and possibly enhancement, of in-kind habitat types; or creation and
         preservation of in-kind habitat types. Required mitigation ratios will be
         developed on a case-by-case basis in coordination with the U.S. Army
         Corps of Engineers, California Department of Fish and Wildlife, and/or U.S.
         Fish and Wildlife Service (for wetlands that are occupied by federally listed
         species).
         Program OS 9.9 E
         For each proposed development site within a riparian habitat biological
         community, the City will require qualified biologists to conduct a
         reconnaissance survey of the site and identify potential sensitive biological
         resources, including special-status species (as identified in the 2001 EIR
         for the Comprehensive Amendment to the General Plan) and their habitats,
         jurisdictional waters of the United States, and any other protected biological
         resources. If no sensitive biological resources are found during this survey,
         no further surveys will be necessary.
         If sensitive biological resources are found, the biologist will conduct additional
         surveys, as needed, to map the resources and, using methods and protocols
         developed or acceptable by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California
         Department of Fish and Wildlife, make recommendations for avoiding
         sensitive biological resources to the extent feasible. The biologist will also flag
         or fence sensitive resources to be avoided. This requirement shall apply prior
         to City consideration of any development proposal for the site.
         Program OS 9.9 F
         For each proposed development site affecting a stream channel or open
         water biological communities, the City will require qualified biologists to
         conduct a reconnaissance survey of the site and identify potential sensitive
         biological resources, including special-status species (as identified in the
         2001 EIR for the Comprehensive Amendment to the General Plan) and their
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 21                             August 2013
         habitats, jurisdictional waters of the United States, and any other protected
         biological resources. If no sensitive biological resources are found during
         this survey, no further surveys will be necessary.
         If sensitive biological resources are found, the biologist will conduct
         additional surveys, as needed, to map the resources and, using methods
         and protocols developed or acceptable by the USFWS and CDFG, make
         recommendations for avoiding sensitive biological resources to the extent
         feasible. The biologist will also flag or fence sensitive resources to be
         avoided. This requirement shall apply prior to City consideration of any
         development proposal for the site.
    Policy OS 9.10
    Avoid or reduce the loss of riparian habitat to the extent feasible for each
    development site.
         Program OS 9.10 A
         For each proposed development within a riparian habitat biological
         community, and prior to consideration of development proposals, the City
         shall require a botanist to identify and map riparian habitat and make
         recommendations for avoidance. The botanist will coordinate placement of
         protective temporary fencing around riparian habitat to be preserved.
         Program OS 9.10 B
         The City shall require the project proponent to obtain all necessary permits
         pertaining to affected riparian habitat within the planning area prior to
         allowing development. Removal of riparian habitat may require a streambed
         alteration agreement from the California Department of Fish and Wildlife
         and may require a Section 404 permit from the U.S. Army Corps of
         Engineers and federal Clean Water Act, Section 401, certification from the
         San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board. The permitting
         process will also require compensation for riparian impacts.
         Program OS 9.10 C
         For each project in which unavoidable removal of riparian habitat will occur,
         the City shall require the project proponent to develop a riparian habitat
         compensation plan. Compensation will consist of plantings, preferably
         onsite, or purchase and preservation of existing riparian habitat. The City
         will develop required compensation ratios for removed riparian vegetation
         in coordination with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife; the
         Department may require specific compensation for a site through the
         streambed alteration agreement.
Objective OS 10
Preserve and establish cultural and historic resources.
City of Fairfield General Plan            OS - 22                          August 2013
    Policy OS 10.1
    Conserve valuable resources by promoting educational activities and
    encouraging conservation efforts by citizens, property owners, and builders.
    Policy OS 10.2
    Prior to submittal, the applicant should consult with the California Archaeological
    Inventory Northwest Information Center at Sonoma State University to determine
    if the project will have an impact on cultural resources.
    Policy OS 10.3
    Avoid impacts on cultural resources when archeological studies reveal the
    presence of cultural resources at a development site. If avoidance is infeasible,
    require site testing by a qualified archeologist to determine the significance of the
    resources, and implement recommended mitigation measures.
    Policy OS 10.4
    Halt construction at a development site if cultural resources are encountered
    unexpectedly during construction and require consultation with a qualified
    archeologist to determine the significance of the resources.
    Policy OS 10.5
    Promote a regional or County museum or education center to build awareness of
    our area's history and resources.
    Policy OS 10.6
    Require archeological studies by a qualified archeologist (as defined by the
    Secretary of the Interior’s standards) in areas of archeological significance prior
    to approval of development projects.
    Policy OS 10.7
    Prepare and maintain an inventory of historic structures within the General Plan
    Area per the City’s adopted Historic Preservation Ordinance and, where
    appropriate, promote the inclusion of these structures on the California Register
    of Historic Resources and the National Register of Historic Places. Work with
    property owners in seeking registration of historical structures as State Historic
    Landmarks or listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
         Program OS 10.7 A
         The City shall require that a qualified architectural historian inventory and
         evaluate the significance of buildings and structures located in or adjacent to
         parcels within established historic districts or adjacent to registered landmarks
         before approval of development projects.
    Policy OS 10.8
City of Fairfield General Plan            OS - 23                               August 2013

    Promote the preservation and restoration of historical sites and structures within
    the General Plan Area that are significant to the City's or the region's cultural or
    historic background. (See Policy UD 3.4)
Recreation
Objective OS 11
Maximize public value from open space for recreational uses. (See Objective
LU 6)
    Policy OS 11.1
    Secure public access to open space to the maximum extent feasible.
    Policy OS 11.2
    Promote trail systems through the open spaces, and pedestrian/bicycle links
    throughout the City, per the adopted Master Trails Plan and the Circulation
    Element Bicycle Routes Map. (See Objective CI 9, Policies CI 9.1 and CI 9.2,
    and Program CI 9.2 A)
    Policy OS 11.3
    Require all development projects to incorporate recreation and trails elements
    into project design.
    Policy OS 11.4
    Where appropriate, projects should provide access to trail heads located on
    adjacent public or nonprofit-owned open space lands.
    Policy OS 11.5
    Actively participate with other governmental entities (cities, county, state, and
    federal) or agencies in the acquisition, management, and use of
    recreational/open space lands and facilities. (See Policy LU 5.3 and Program LU
    5.3 A)
         Program OS 11.5 A
         Actively promote ridgetop and hillside trails along major north-south ridges
         connecting Benicia and eastern Vallejo, and between Benicia and Green
         Valley to become major links to the Bay Area Ridge Trail System.
         Program OS 11.5 B
         Actively promote trails for hikers, bicyclists, and equestrians in the Green
         Valley Falls/Vallejo Lakes Planning Area that link the reservoirs, Green Valley
         Falls, Lower Green Valley, and the Rockville Hills area.
         Program OS 11.5 C
City of Fairfield General Plan           OS - 24                             August 2013
         Identify and promote potential shared arrangements for owning, improving,
         and managing open space/conservation/recreational areas of mutual interest.
         This may include:
              •   joint powers agreements.
              •   transfer of development rights.
              •   shared ownership of open space areas.
              •   shared management responsibilities.
              •   joint funding programs.
              •   memoranda of understanding.
    Policy OS 11.6
    Work with Solano County and State and federal resource agencies to incorporate
    appropriate water courses within the General Plan Area as components of the
    recreation corridor system. Public access within sensitive habitat areas of
    waterway shall be considered individually to ensure protection of the habitat
    resource.
         Program OS 11.6 A
         Require development projects to provide appropriate pedestrian, bicycle, and
         equestrian trails with frequent access points along the urban stream corridors.
    Policy OS 11.7
    Preserve public access corridors for walkers, bicyclists, and equestrians along
    future floodway improvement projects whenever feasible.
    Policy OS 11.8
    Utility easement corridors shall be designated for recreational open space unless
    an acceptable trail alternative is included in a development plan.
Objective OS 12
Provide parks that meet the diverse needs of current and future residents.
    Policy OS 12.1
    Implement the Parks Capital Projects Plan, which identifies desired programs and
    recreation facility improvements.
         Program OS 12.1 A
         Periodically (every three-to-five years) review the Parks Capital Projects Plan
         in conjunction with the the annual City budget, and the availability of regional,
         State, and federal grant programs to identify projects for funding.
         Program OS 12.1 B
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 25                            August 2013

         City staff shall continuously monitor the availability of regional, State, and
         federal grants for the development of parks and recreational areas.
    Policy OS 12.2
    Promote the establishment of neighborhood parks of up to approximately seven
    acres in size at a ratio of 1.5 acres of usable park land per 1,000 residents
    throughout the City. Neighborhood parks are intended to serve a 1/2 mile radius
    area and to provide space and facilities for active, neighborhood level sports, as
    well to provide space for casual and passive recreation and leisure.
    Policy OS 12.3
    Encourage the establishment of community parks of approximately 40 acres or
    more at a ratio of 2.0 acres usable park lands per 1,000 residents. Community
    parks provide a broad range of fields, facilities, and spaces for sports and other
    recreational activities suitable, in some cases, for community-wide and even
    regional populations.
    Policy OS 12.4
    Work with regional partners to promote development of regional parks and open
    space preserves to meet passive and natural-oriented regional open space and
    recreation needs. Regional parks need not be owned and operated by the City of
    Fairfield but may be owned by Solano County, a park district or other public entity,
    or a private organization such as the Solano Land Trust.
    Policy OS 12.5
    Encourage the development of specialized parks, pocket parks, private parks and
    private recreational facilities in neighborhoods whose developer or residents wish
    to provide unique or additional recreational facilities for their communities. Use
    of private facilities may be limited to residents of the neighborhood, although
    projects that receive city or public funding should be made available to the
    broader public.
         Program OS 12.5 A
         Implement the concepts for specialized recreational and civic facilities, pocket
         parks and private recreational facilities in the Train Station Specific Plan,
         including the Town Square, the Lake Park, and the Great Park.
    Policy OS 12.6
    Develop new recreational venues for softball, soccer, picnicking, and outdoor
    cultural events.
    Policy OS 12.7
    Preserve and develop the entire Linear Park system, from Solano Community
    College eastward through the Fairfield Train Station Specific Plan area , as
    illustrated on the Land Use Diagram, exclusively as a multi-purpose recreational
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 26                            August 2013
    and multimodal transportation corridor in order to provide linkages among
    recreation and parks, schools, shopping, industry, residential, and other
    community activity centers.
Objective OS 13
Ensure that all parks, trails, and recreational open space properties have
adequate funding for management, maintenance and necessary capital
improvements.
    Policy OS 13.1
    No park, trail, or recreational open space will be developed until long term funding
    for maintenance and management is in place, such as through a community
    facilities district, lighting and landscaping maintenance district, or an endowment
    program.
    Policy OS 13.2
    Developers shall establish a neighborhood association or other funding
    mechanism to fund private park and recreational facility maintenance.
City of Fairfield General Plan              OS - 27                            August 2013
Supporting Text
Open Space
The City of Fairfield is committed to preserving the open space areas surrounding
the city that help create the community's sense of identity and distinction from nearby
cities, natural setting, and quality of life. These open space preserves and buffers
shall, when feasible, be acquired or preserved. They will serve to preserve the
community character by protecting natural resources, offering recreational
opportunities, and maintaining substantial amounts of open space land currently in
economically productive uses. Rockville Hills Regional Park has already been
established and shall be maintained as a permanent recreational open space buffer.
The Fairfield General Plan identifies 11 Open Space Planning Areas (OSPA) on
Exhibit OS-1. These areas are defined due to their geographic location, physical
characteristics, development potential, and open space values or attributes. The
rationale for designating land for OSPA purposes is explained below.
Open Space for the Managed Production of Resources
Primary economic uses of open space within the Fairfield Planning Area include
agriculture and grazing and domestic water production. Agriculture especially
intensive row crops, grain production, orchards, and vineyards, is important to the
economic vitality of the City and the region. Additionally, agriculture and its
associated open space are essential to preserving regional heritage and contribute
to the quality of life for residents in the county.
Open Space for the Preservation of Natural Resources
Natural Resources include waterways, natural habitat areas, wetlands, and geologic
formations. These resource areas contribute to the character of the community and
are valuable in their own right. Inundated by both urban development and agriculture
over the past 150 years, remnant habitat areas have become scarcer and therefore
take on a greater significance with the passage of time.
Open Space for Public Health and Safety
Unstable hillsides, flooding potential, earthquake fault zones, and Travis AFB noise
and safety impacts restrict development potential in many areas around Fairfield.
Development in these areas will be strictly regulated or prohibited, with land most
susceptible to hazards preserved as permanent open space.
City of Fairfield General Plan              OS - 28                           August 2013
Open Space for Public Recreation
The public is increasingly demanding passive natural recreational opportunities close
to urban areas. Passive recreation includes activities such as walking and hiking,
riding mountain bikes, bird watching, and picnicking. Often, these activities can be
accommodated with public trails next to open space areas with limited public access.
Open Space to Shape Urban Growth
Fairfield and its neighboring cities face significant growth pressures. To preserve the
city's separation and individual character and to permanently preserve open space,
buffer zones have been designated between Fairfield and its neighbors.
Visual Open Space
Visual open space, particularly hillside areas and ridge tops, contributes greatly to the
character of the city. Much of this land is currently used for livestock grazing or
agriculture. Given the importance of agriculture in preserving visual open space,
agricultural land uses should be maintained. Scenic road and parkways are also one
of the most common ways people enjoy visual open space. Scenic roads should be
designated and maintained to maximize appreciation of rural open space.
Regional Open Space Issues
Fairfield contains or abuts significant regional open space landscapes, including
ridgelines, the Suisun Marsh, and prime agricultural land. The City will work with
regional agencies, other local governments, and non-profit organizations to
preserve regional trail corridors like the Bay Area Ridge Trail.
Open Space Planning Areas
Brief descriptions of the Open Space Planning Areas (OSPA) are presented below.
Exhibit OS-1 graphically depicts these areas. More detailed descriptions of open
space attributes, existing conditions, and current uses are presented in the Open
Space, Conservation and Recreation section of the Technical Document (Volume II
of this General Plan).
OSPA 1 - Benicia, Fairfield, Vallejo Buffer Zone
Generally located between the cities of Benicia, Fairfield, and Vallejo, this OSPA
comprises approximately 10,000 acres of generally steep hills primarily used for
cattle grazing. Portions of this area are within each of the three cities' spheres of
influence. Preservation of these hills as open space is critical to maintaining a
physical separation between the cities of Fairfield, Vallejo, and Benicia. The City
participates in a Joint Powers Agreement, the Tri City and County Cooperative
 City of Fairfield General Plan           OS - 29                            August 2013
Planning Group, with Benicia, Vallejo, and Solano County. The Tri City and County
Cooperative Plan is an adopted element of the General Plan.
 OSPA 2 - Lower Green Valley
 Located north of Highway 12 and I-80, west of Rockville Hills Park, and south of
 Green Valley Falls, this OSPA includes Green Valley and the hills to the west of
 the valley. Solano County has adopted a specific plan for Middle Green Valley
 that addresses permanent preservation of agriculture in exchange for limited
 residential development.
 OSPA 3 - Green Valley Falls/Vallejo Lakes
 This OSPA is located to the northwest of Cordelia along the Solano-Napa county
 line. The area consists of two watersheds, one draining into Napa Valley and one
 draining into Green Valley. The terrain is mostly mountainous, rugged, and steep,
 with Sugarloaf Peak (elevation 1,686 feet) to the west and Twin Sisters (elevation
 2,259 feet) in the eastern portion of the area. The Vallejo Water Agency owns and
 manages the key properties in the area.
 OSPA 4 - Rockville Hills/Stoneridge
 This OSPA is located north of the I-80/I-680 interchange and east of Green Valley. It
 encompasses approximately 2,600 acres of intermittently wooded, rocky, and hilly
 terrain. A central valley occupies approximately one-third of this area. Rockville Hills
 Park is located in the southern portion. Prominent peaks are located in the northern
 portion of the area. Views in all directions, particularly to the east, are spectacular.
 In 2012, Solano Land Trust acquired Rockville Trails, 1,200 acres of rolling oak
 savanna immediately north of Rockville Hills Park. This acquisition will permanently
 preserve a significant tract of undeveloped wildlife habitat which offers impressive
 views and landscapes.
 OSPA 5 AND 6 - Upper and Lower Suisun Valley
 Suisun Valley occupies approximately 20,000 acres of prime farm and crop land,
 separating central Fairfield and Cordelia. Suisun Valley defines the Fairfield
 community and sets it apart from other communities in the Bay Area. It is bounded
 by Rockville Hills to the west, Suisun Marsh to the south, the Fairfield city limit to the
 east, and the Napa county line to the north. Solano County has adopted General
 Plan policies and zoning regulations to encourage preservation of agriculture in the
 valley while permitting a range of agritourism and service uses.
 OSPA 7- Nelson Hill
 This area includes approximately 240 acres lying northeast of Old Cordelia. It is
 contiguous to, but not incorporated in, the City of Fairfield. The highest point is
 City of Fairfield General Plan          OS - 30                              August 2013
slightly over 300 feet elevation, and sides are steeply sloped except for the portion
facing the Cordelia commercial area. Nelson Hill is recognized as a visual buffer
between Cordelia and other areas of the City, affording uniquely spectacular views
of the Suisun Marsh to the south.
OSPA 8 - Rolling Hills
The Rolling Hills OSPA occupies approximately 4,000 acres north of Fairfield. The
area consists of hilly, often wooded country. Much of it is used for grazing livestock.
Portions of this area are developed areas within the city limits, Rancho Solano and
Rolling Hills. Some of the higher elevations above Rolling Hills, Serpas Ranch, and
Castle rock have been permanently preserved as open space with limited public
access. The Rolling Hills OSPA has some of the most attractive vistas from central
Fairfield. The Rancho Solano North Master Plan Area, which is described in the Land
Use Element, is located in a portion of this OSPA. The Rancho Solano Master
Association owns significant open space resources within the subdivision.
OSPA 9 - Fairfield-Vacaville Greenbelt
This area includes the hills surrounding Lagoon Valley and a strip of land between
the cities of Fairfield and Vacaville. Pursued jointly by the cities of Fairfield and
Vacaville, a permanent open space buffer shall be established within the OSPA. The
open space buffer shall be consistent with the Fairfield Train Station Specific Plan,
an Element of this General Plan.
OSPA 10 - Travis AFB/Jepson Prairie
This OSPA encompasses approximately 26 square miles, bounded by Travis Air
Force Base, the proposed Fairfield-Vacaville greenbelt, State Route 113, Jepson
Prairie's eastern and southern borders, and the Suisun Marsh Preservation Area.
Most of the land is devoted to livestock grazing. This is essentially the same area
recommended for establishment of a major ecological park in the 1982 Jepson
Prairie Feasibility Study. The land is primarily flat to rolling grasslands containing
numerous vernal pools and wetlands. It represents some the state's most significant
examples of Central Valley Prairie.
OSPA 11 - Suisun Marsh
Located immediately south of Fairfield and Suisun City, the Suisun Marsh is the
largest continuous estuarine wetland in the United States. Occupying nearly 85,000
acres, the marsh is a vital wintering and breeding area for waterfowl. Strict federal
and state regulations protect the wetlands and prohibit any new development or
improvements which could degrade its quality. The Grizzly Island Wildlife Area and
other State Department of Fish and Game lands are open to the public.
City of Fairfield General Plan          OS - 31                            August 2013
Open Space Acquisition Mechanisms
The Open Space portion of this Element includes policies and programs regarding
open space acquisition. Some methods for acquiring permanent open space are
described below.
Pooled Development Rights Program
In a pooled development rights program, several landowners agree to consolidate
their landholdings and develop the land under a master development plan.
Development is clustered on the least sensitive portions of the site, preserving open
space assets. Profits from the development are shared among all of the landowners,
even those whose properties are largely set aside as open space.
Dedication of Open Space Land
For large scale development projects, the City requires developers to dedicate land
for open space. Recent examples include the Rolling Hills, Rancho Solano, and
Paradise Valley projects. For smaller scale projects, open space dedication is
generally more difficult to accomplish. In those circumstances where dedication is
not feasible, other techniques such as in-lieu fee payment and development rights
pooling could be applied. The City also requires identification of a funding source,
such as a community facilities district or an endowment, to provide for long term
management, maintenance, and capital improvements associated with the property.
In-Lieu Fee Payment
During those occasions when it is not desirable or feasible to obtain dedications of
open space lands, fees are collected from developers for open space acquisition.
Collected revenues are placed into specific open space accounts for purchase of
open space lands.
Conservation or Open Space Easement
A conservation or open space easement is a contract between a landowner and
another party to preserve the land in open space uses. In effect, the easement
removes the right of the landowner or another party to develop the land or otherwise
interfere with the open space character of the land. City policy is to support the efforts
of private organizations such as the Solano Land Trust in taking the lead in
acquisition of easements in the Fairfield area.
Open Space Funding Mechanisms
Following are potential funding programs that the City could utilize to implement the
Open Space policies.
Bedroom Tax
City of Fairfield General Plan          OS - 32                              August 2013
This is a one-time City tax on new residential construction based on the number of
bedrooms. Use of the revenue is restricted by City ordinance to funding construction
and maintenance of park and recreation facilities. A fee increase would require a
two-thirds vote of the electorate, since this is a "special tax" under Proposition 13.
The Bedroom Tax is of limited utility for open space acquisition and maintenance, as
its focus is on recreational facilities.
Mello-Roos District
State law permits the creation of Community Facilities Districts (CFD) which can sell
bonds to finance a variety of community projects including the purchase of open
space land. The bonds are repaid with an annual parcel tax. Mello-Roos CFD's
require a two-thirds vote of the electorate, or a two-thirds vote of affected landowners
in newly-developing portions of the City. Most CFD's are created at early stages of
the development process by votes of the developers holding the land, and the cost
of paying debt service on the bonds is borne by the residents who purchase homes
in the districts.
Parcel Tax
The parcel tax is a citywide tax. A simple majority election is required if either tax
revenues are deposited into the general fund or if the tax is imposed by a joint powers
agreement. If the funds are to be specifically earmarked for open space, a two-thirds
vote of the electorate is required.
Property Tax
The City may seek a two-thirds voter approval of a general obligation bond measure
to fund open space acquisition and management. The bond issue amount is
discretionary. Some advantages of this approach include that the City Council and
the voters determine the level of funding, the tax is based on property value rather
than a flat amount, and the cost of the funding is borne by both present and future
property owners.
Municipal Park Improvement District
The Fairfield Municipal Park Improvement District (MPID) has authority to issue
bonds for park improvements. The City Council requires bonds to be repaid by a
revenue generating source related to the bond expenditure. For example, bonds
authorized for the Rancho Solano golf course are being paid by greens fees. Since
many types of open space do not generate revenue, the MPID is an appropriate
funding source only in selected instances.
State Grants
City of Fairfield General Plan           OS - 33                               August 2013
Limited state funding is available on a case-by-case basis from the Coastal
Conservancy, environmental license plate fund, and state park bond money. In
some cases, local matching funds would be required for these grants. None of these
constitute a stable revenue source.
Local Fund Raising
Local fund raising is limited in potential as a stable or sizable source. This would be
most likely to be effective if a very popular site was to be acquired and a modest local
matching contribution was required. One recent example is the successful acquisition
of Rockville Trails, during which the Solano Land Trust was able to tap into local
private donations to help fund the acquisition project.
Conservation
The conservation portion of the Element addresses visual resources, natural
resources such as wildlife habitats and air quality, and cultural and historic resources.
These resources are discussed in detail in the Technical Document (Volume II of the
General Plan). Following is a general discussion of existing resources in and around
the City.
Wildlife and Vegetation
Fairfield is located within a region which has a wide variety of vegetative and wildlife
habitats. Land use changes, introduction of detrimental agricultural chemicals, and
competition from non-native species have led to the decline of many wildlife species
in the area. The Fairfield Planning Area includes the following types of habitats:
    grassland, oak savanna, woodland, wetland, agricultural, and urban-industrial.
Creeks and Watershed Protection
The principal streams in the Fairfield area include Ledgewood, Pennsylvania
Avenue, Union Avenue, Laurel, McCoy, Green Valley, Dan Wilson, Suisun, Jameson
Canyon and American Canyon Creeks (see Public Facilities and Services Element
Exhibit PF-4). The continued and uninterrupted flow of these streams is vital to
maintaining the Suisun Marsh environment.
Although Suisun Marsh is not located with Fairfield's City limits, its value as an open
space and water resource is of considerable significance to the City and the region.
It is one of the largest contiguous brackish marshes in the United States and
constitutes over 10% of California's remaining wetlands. A major wintering ground
for waterfowl of the Pacific Flyway, the marsh provides feeding and resting areas for
up to 28% of California's waterfowl during the autumn of low rainfall years. The
principal authorities protecting the marsh are the San Francisco Bay Conservation
City of Fairfield General Plan            OS - 34                             August 2013
and Development Commission (BCDC) and the State Department of Fish and Game
(DFG).
Archaeological, Historical, and Cultural Resources
While there has been no comprehensive inventory of archaeological resources within
the planning area, individual surveys conducted during environmental review of
development projects have identified several important archaeological sites
associated with the Patwin era. The Patwins were a small tribe of hunter-gatherers
concentrated in villages along local creeks, particularly in Green Valley. Surveyed
archaeological sites have included middens, burial grounds, and village sites.
In 1976-77, the Central Solano County Cultural Heritage Commission conducted a
survey of historic buildings and features in central Solano County. The study
identified many significant historic sites in the City of Fairfield. Most of these are
single-family homes located in areas that were originally residential neighborhoods.
Other nonresidential structures chosen for their historical significance include the
Solano County Courthouse, the water tower on Texas Street and the old post office.
The historical town of Cement located in the northern part of the planning area,
contains a number of structures related to the Pacific Portland Cement Company
Factory. Old Town Cordelia also contains a collection of historical structures.
The City of Fairfield offers a broad range of cultural activities for all age groups. There
are a variety of facilities available for these activities, including the Fairfield Center
for the Creative Arts, the Fairfield Community Center, the Fairfield Senior Center,
various school facilities, and the Fairfield/Suisun Library.
Resource Conservation
Resource conservation issues addressed by the General Plan include waste
management, energy, water, and air quality.
The City will address solid waste diversion and disposal through the Source
Reduction and Recycling Element (not an element of the General Plan, but a
separate document) mandated by the California Integrated Waste Management Act
of 1989. This bill requires each city divert 50% of its waste from going to the landfill.
The Green Building Code of 2010 requires 50% of all construction and demolition
debris to be diverted from landfill, with all C&D debris from new construction diverted.
The City provides information to contractors on certified waste diversion options. The
City has a curbside recycling program which includes composting for all green waste
and food waste. In addition, State law now requires all multifamily apartment
complexes with five or more dwelling units to provide for collection of recyclables.
Waste management is also discussed in the Public Facilities and Services Element.
The City has developed a water system that will provide non-potable irrigation water
for areas such as parks, median strips, schools and streetscapes. This system will
save the City energy, as water which previously went through the treatment and
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 35                               August 2013
purification process can now be delivered to areas which do not actually require
potable water.
The City has conducted energy studies of all city buildings and facilities. Some of
the conservation programs being implemented by the City include:
•    New LED lights in City buildings
•    New energy-efficient LED traffic signals and streetlights.
•    Solar panels at the Fairfield Sports Center
•    Energy-efficient LED lighting in public parks and reduced water and energy use
     in park irrigation systems.
•    Solar panels and other technologies installed at water treatment plants to reduce
     energy consumption.
The City also continues to offer residential water audits to homeowners targeted to
reduce water use.
Please refer to the Public Facilities and Services Element for further discussion of
the City's water system.
Energy can be either renewable or nonrenewable. Renewable resources are that
whose supply is unlimited or can be replenished. This includes solar, wind,
hydroelectric and geothermal energy resources. Nonrenewable resources are those
which are limited in supply and which may eventually be depleted. These include
water, oil, gas and nuclear power.
The City is located within the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (AQMD) and
must comply with state-mandated plans adopted by the district. In general, Fairfield
air quality meets national and state standards, except for occasional violations of
ozone and carbon monoxide standards. The land use and growth decisions of the
City have a profound effect on the ability to combat air pollution. The land use,
economic development, and circulation policies included in the General Plan all
influence air quality.
Mineral Resources
The Planning Area includes two currently inactive quarries, Nelson Hill and Cement
Hill, which were used for construction aggregate. There are abandoned limestone
quarries on the western and southern slopes of Cement Hill. Scattered petroleum
and natural gas wells have been drilled in the vicinity of Fairfield. (See Exhibit OS-2.)
Agricultural Soils Resources
City of Fairfield General Plan            OS - 36                            August 2013

In the Fairfield Planning Area, the well-drained soils of Suisun Valley and parts of
Green Valley are considered to be prime farmland. Most of the hillside country west
and north of Fairfield is grazing land. Grazing land also exists in the flat lands north
of Travis Air Force Base. The Land Use Element includes two Agricultural Land Use
Categories, intensive and extensive agriculture. Intensive agricultural lands are
those which have the potential for the highest productive yield and are used for row
crops and orchards. Extensive agricultural lands have a relatively lower productive
yield and are primarily used for grazing.
Recreation
The City of Fairfield currently has the following park facilities;
    •    Twenty public (accessible to the general community) Community,
         Neighborhood or Pocket Parks totaling 295.6 acres, These parks include
         15 neighborhood parks which are typically 5-7 acre parks serving a one-half
         mile radius and three larger community parks which include a variety of
         passive and active recreational facilities and are intended to serve a two-
         mile radius. The Fairmont neighborhood west of Pennsylvania Avenue has
         two pocket parks.
    •    In addition to neighborhood and community parks, the city operates Rockville
         Hills Regional Park, a 633 acre regional park. This park is primarily used for
         outdoor recreation, such as hiking and mountain biking, as well as wildlife
         viewing and public environmental education. Citizens also have access to
         three additional open space areas totaling nearly 1,300 acres.
    •    Fairfield has a system of linear parks and trails for walking, hiking, and
         bicycling. These trails often follow existing features like creeks, canals, bluffs,
         ridges, and utility right-of-ways. The core of the system is the Fairfield Linear
         Park, which the City has completed between Solano Community College and
         Dover Avenue. This ten-foot wide pathway and linear park serves as a central
         intermodal transit spine on which a citywide system of trails will be built.
    •    The City of Fairfield also has several private neighborhood parks and
         recreation centers which are generally not open to the general public.
City of Fairfield General Plan              OS - 37                            August 2013

Public Special Use Facilities
Special use facilities are generally single purpose in nature, having a unique or
important recreational purpose. Examples include the Fairfield Community Center,
Fairfield Senior Center, and the new Fairfield Community Swim Center (Allan Witt
Park). Other examples could include an environmental center, golf course, zoo,
various types of sport centers and outdoor theaters.
Private Facilities
Private facilities in the General Plan area include tennis clubs, fitness centers, golf
courses, private schools and colleges and recreation facilities in new housing
developments.
Golf Courses
The City operates two golf courses: Rancho Solano (204 acres) and Paradise
Valley (190 acres). Both courses are used by local residents as well as visitors
from throughout the region. Rancho Solano is Fairfield's first public golf course. The
golf course contains 92 sand bunkers, five lakes, over 7,000 yards of championship
play, large greens and a driving range. The course is complemented by a clubhouse
consisting of a golf shop, bar and grill, fine dining, banquet facility and a private health
and tennis resort. The Paradise Valley Golf Course contains 18 regulation golf
holes, driving range, practice putting green, pro shop, maintenance yard,
equipment building and restroom, a restaurant/bar and banquet facility.
Projected Park Needs
The General Plan has established for neighborhood parks a one-half mile radius
standard and a population ratio of 1.5 acres of neighborhood park/1000 people.
The General Plan Policy Document established a 2-acre/1000-population standard
for community parks. In order to achieve the established population ratio, the Parks
Capital Projects Plan estimated that under the projected 2031 population 165 acres
of new park land is needed. Approximately 48 acres of this will be provided in
Cordelia Community Park, with the first two phases completed. Per the 2002 Parks
Capital Projects Plan, the new park land required to support the projected
population increase through 2031 will be provided in several neighborhood parks,
completion of the final phases of Cordelia Community Park, and an approximately
50 acre park, “The Great Park”, planned for the Train Station Specific Plan Area.
Two neighborhood parks will be built in The Villages at Fairfield by Lewis Operating
Group as a condition of their development agreement. The Train Station Specific
Plan also identifies a broad range of neighborhood parks, pocket parks, and private
recreational facilities designed to meet the needs of that community.
City of Fairfield General Plan              OS - 38                              August 2013

The City has identified a variety of other projects and types of projects designed to
meet specific needs of the population. Many of these facilities do not have a
completed design or scheduled date of construction.
Softball Fields
Teen Center Facility
Sports Center Facility
Soccer Facility
Community Center
Youth Center
A new Parks Capital Plan will be prepared in 2014 once the City has finalized its
ordinances related to parks financing (Quimby Act).
Opportunities for Shared Facilities
Because regional parks and natural areas attract visitors from throughout the
Northern California region, cooperation among local governments, private
organizations, and regional and state bodies is a preferred approach for managing
such areas. The City has worked with several partners in open space issues, such
as the California Coastal Conservancy, the Solano County Parks Department and
neighboring cities. The City participates with the cities of Vallejo and Benicia and the
County of Solano in the Tri City and County Cooperative Planning Group for
Agricultural and Open Space Preservation. The Cooperative Planning Group is
charged with preserving the land located roughly between the three cities and largely
within the unincorporated County. The City also joined with Vacaville and the County
to plan for the preservation of a buffer zone between Fairfield and Vacaville. In 1994,
the two cities and the County entered into a joint powers agreement to form the
Vacaville-Fairfield-Solano Greenbelt Authority (VFSGA). The agreement established
general boundaries for the area and set forth preservation and land use goals
including a buffer between cities, trail linkages, and Travis AFB protection.
The City also works with local and regional private nonprofit organizations. The
Solano Land Trust, based in Fairfield, has taken a leading role in local open space
planning. For example, the Land Trust worked with the Cooperative Planning Group
to fund the purchase of over 6,000 acres of permanently preserved open space in
the Planning Area. The Land Trust is currently working with the County of Solano to
operate Lynch Canyon Regional Open Space.
City of Fairfield General Plan             OS - 39                           August 2013
Public Facilities and Services
Element
Introduction
The Public Facilities and Services Element is an optional element of the General
Plan. It addresses the changing public facility and service needs of Fairfield and
provides guidance for their logical and timely extension to keep pace with City growth.
Public facilities and services include all those related to government, educational,
recreational, health, safety, and cultural benefit, whether provided by public or private
sources. Recreational and open space public facilities, such as parks, are addressed
in the Open Space and Conservation Element. Public facilities related to
transportation and circulation are addressed in the Circulation Element.
City of Fairfield General Plan             PF - 1                              June 2002
Goal
The goal of the Public Facilities and Services Element is:
To provide superior levels of public facilities and services, based upon
timely planning and adequate funding.
Objectives, Policies, and Programs
Objective PF 1
Provide superior levels of facilities and services prior to or concurrent with
planned development. (See Objective LU 4)
    Policy PF 1.1
    New development shall be phased according to the capacity of public facilities
    and services to serve new development. (See Policy LU 4.2)
    Policy PF 1.2
    Encourage the concurrent (as opposed to piecemeal) annexation of adjacent
    unincorporated properties in order to facilitate the formation of assessment
    districts, Mello-Roos districts, and other financial mechanisms which will provide
    public facilities in an efficient and effective manner.
Objective PF 2
New development shall pay such fees and taxes as necessary to meet all
identified costs associated with that development. (See Policy ED 7.4)
    Policy PF 2.1
    New development shall be responsible for the public costs attached to each
    development project, which include, but are not limited to, the acquisition of
    permanent open space, the provision of adequate school facilities, and the
    provision of streets, street lighting, sidewalks, landscaping, storm drains, and
    other infrastructure needs.
    Policy PF 2.2
    New development shall be responsible for paying a financial contribution to
    mitigate the effect of the development on the provision of such public services as
    police and fire protection, public education, water, and sewer.
    Policy PF 2.3
    Construction permits shall not be granted until the developer provides for the
    installation and/or financing of needed public facilities.
City of Fairfield General Plan               PF - 2                          June 2002
Objective PF 3
Maintain existing public facilities and services.
    Policy PF 3.1
    Upgrade facilities and services that experience deterioration or obsolescence.
         Program PF 3.1 A
         Include in the Capital Improvements Program the upgrading of existing
         facilities that have experienced deterioration or obsolescence.
Objective PF 4
Provide an adequate supply of quality water to support the General Plan level
of development.
    Policy PF 4.1
    The City shall condition approval of new development projects on the availability
    of adequate water supply and infrastructure to serve the new development.
    Policy PF 4.2
    The City shall work with other urban water agencies to secure additional water
    supplies for new development so that the local affordable agricultural water
    supply is not reduced.
    Policy PF 4.3
    The City shall acquire water supplies to serve all foreseeable needs in the
    General Plan with a minimum 90 percent reliability (e.g. water supplies may be
    deficient in no more than 10 percent of the years).
         Program PF 4.3 A
         The City shall implement contingency plans for deficient years, including use
         of "banked" water, acquisition of short-term water supplies from other
         agencies, implementation of temporary "drought-response" conservation
         programs, and reducing consumption by interruptible users.
         Program PF 4.3 B
         Develop and implement a water allocation plan that specifies the water
         supplies for the various future uses, including residential, commercial,
         industrial, and recreational and which reserves some water allocation to
         accommodate employers who may desire to locate in Fairfield. New
         development shall be conditioned on consistency with the water allocation for
         the type of land use proposed.
    Policy PF 4.4
    The City shall extend water service to new areas in accordance with the capital
    phasing of the City's Water Service Master Plan.
City of Fairfield General Plan             PF - 3                             June 2002
         Program PF 4.4 A
         Update the Water Service Master Plan to include all new growth areas
         identified in the Land Use Element.
    Policy PF 4.5
    The City should attempt to obtain a minimum 5 day supply of more localized raw
    water storage than the Solano Project at Lake Berryessa (nearly 30 miles away)
    in order to provide additional water supply reliability.
    Policy PF 4.6
    The City should encourage development of a nonpotable water system to serve
    large irrigation and industrial process users in order to extend potable water
    supplies and reduce maximum day demands on the potable system.
    Policy PF 4.7
    The City shall encourage and actively promote long-term water conservation
    according to the water management programs established in the City's Urban
    Water Management Plan.
         Program PF 4.7 A
         Continue to update the Urban Water Management Plan as mandated by the
         State of California. Potential programs to be added as part of the updates
         include: residential water audits, an ultra low-flow toilet ordinance, plumbing
         retrofit program, landscape audits, and commercial and industrial water
         audits.
    Policy PF 4.8
    New development shall include water conservation features and drought resistant
    landscaping. (See Policy OS 8.5)
Objective PF 5
Provide adequate water infrastructure.
    Policy PF 5.1
    Treatment facilities shall meet or exceed current standards set by federal, state,
    or local regulatory agencies.
    Policy PF 5.2
    Treatment capacity should be maintained at 1 maximum day of demand plus 20
    percent.
    Policy PF 5.3
    The City should have a goal to maintain a treated water storage capacity of 2
    maximum days of demand.
    Policy PF 5.4
City of Fairfield General Plan            PF - 4                                June 2002
    Treated water storage reservoirs should be distributed throughout the service
    area to optimize system reliability during emergencies.
    Policy PF 5.5
    Treated water piping systems should be interconnected ("looped") wherever
    economically feasible to facilitate the reliable delivery of water anywhere in the
    City.
    Policy PF 5.6
    Pipes should be sized to provide minimum operating pressure of 45 pounds per
    square inch (psi) under normal conditions and 20 psi under emergency conditions
    (e.g. fires). (See Program HS 4.5 A)
Objective PF 6
Ensure provision of superior wastewater collection and treatment facilities to
support the existing and future development at General Plan buildout.
    Policy PF 6.1
    Continue to provide sewer services and operate major public facilities through the
    Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District (FSSD).
         Program PF 6.1 A
         Cooperate with the FSSD in a revision and update of the Fairfield-Suisun
         Sewer District's Capital Improvement Program to provide the required
         facilities to support the adopted General Plan land uses. The Capacity Study
         update should include: proposed capital improvement sewer facilities and
         estimated costs for trunk main system, pump stations, and wastewater
         treatment plant expansion, and a phasing schedule for all improvements. The
         Capacity Study should be coordinated with input from affected agencies and
         large wastewater producers.
    Policy PF 6.2
    Support the Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District's efforts to continue to provide sewer
    system maintenance for all trunk lines (12" diameter and larger), pump stations
    and treatment plant facilities. The City of Fairfield will provide maintenance for all
    sewer trunk lines less than 12" in diameter.
    Policy PF 6.3
    Closely coordinate with the FSSD regarding new development projections to
    allow FSSD to continue to construct sewerage capital improvements in a planned
    and orderly manner consistent with the levels of General Plan growth and
    recommendations in the updated "Sewer System Capacity Study."
City of Fairfield General Plan             PF - 5                              June 2002
    Policy PF 6.4
    Support the Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District's coordination with Travis Air Force
    Base and Anheuser Busch brewery on the sewage generation requirements
    during the General Plan buildout.
    Policy PF 6.5
    Require new development to be responsible for construction of all sanitary sewer
    lines serving such development (including oversizing of sewers if requested by
    Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District or the City; the costs of oversizing shall be borne
    by the beneficiary of the oversizing).
    Policy PF 6.6
    Continue to support the Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District Act which requires
    annexation in order to receive Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District sewer service.
Objective PF 7
Reduce wastewater discharge flows through water conservation efforts and
wastewater reclamation.
    Policy PF 7.1
    Promote water conservation. (See Policy PF 4.8)
         Program PF 7.1 A
         The City shall implement its Water Conservation Plan, and coordinate the
         program with Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District, Suisun City, and other agencies
         as appropriate. (See Program PF 4.8 A)
    Policy PF 7.2
    The City shall promote the use of reclaimed water with priority to recreational,
    industrial and agriculture users and irrigation for landscaping along roadways.
Objective PF 8
Provide a flood control and drainage system that serves the General Plan level
of development in a planned and orderly manner, minimizes flood-related
hazards, and protects natural resources. (See Objective HS 3)
    Policy PF 8.1
    The City shall condition approval of development projects on the provision of
    adequate storm drainage improvements. (See Policy HS 3.2)
    Policy PF 8.2
    The City shall extend storm drains to new areas in accordance with the phasing
    of a storm drainage master plan.
City of Fairfield General Plan           PF - 6                                June 2002
         Program PF 8.2 A
         Prepare Master Storm Drainage Plans to support General Plan and areawide
         plan land uses, including proposed drainage facilities and estimated costs, for
         the following watersheds: (1) McCoy Creek upstream of the Bureau of
         Reclamation Retention Basin, (2) Union Creek north of Travis Air Force Base,
         (3) Dan Wilson Creek, Suisun Creek and Green Valley Creek, and (4)
         unnamed creeks east of Union Creek.
    Policy PF 8.3
    Complete flood control and storm drainage improvement projects on the Capital
    Improvements list to permit timely development under the General Plan and to
    remove identified flood hazards.
    Policy PF 8.4
    Improve long-term drainage management in the watersheds affecting the City of
    Fairfield by establishing cooperative relationships with other agencies or
    jurisdictions for the purpose of planning and coordinating drainage programs and
    policies on a regional basis. (See Policy HS 3.1)
         Program PF 8.4 A
         Cooperate with the Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District implement and annually
         update the Urban Stormwater Runoff Management Program to control
         stormwater pollution of Suisun Marsh and San Francisco Bay.
    Policy PF 8.5
    Detention basins should be considered for multiple use (recreation, parking, etc.)
    particularly larger basins, providing the basic detention function is not lost or
    impaired, and maintenance and liability issues are satisfactorily resolved.
Objective PF 9
Maintain flood control and drainage facilities to preserve their function and
capacity.
    Policy PF 9.1
    Natural and manmade channels, detention basins, and other drainage facilities
    shall be maintained to ensure that their full use and carrying capacity is not
    impaired.
    Policy PF 9.2
    Continue to require new development to discharge storm runoff at volumes no
    greater than the capacity of any portion of the existing downstream system by
    utilizing detention or retention or other approved methods, unless the project is
    providing drainage pursuant to an adopted drainage plan.
City of Fairfield General Plan            PF - 7                              June 2002
         Program PF 9.2 A
         Consolidate policies, programs, and standards for flood control and storm
         drainage in a Storm Drainage ordinance.
    Policy PF 9.3
    All drainage improvements shall comply with the City of Fairfield Standard
    Specifications and Details, Engineering Design Standards (Section 4 - Storm
    Drainage).
    Policy PF 9.4
    Utilize a variety of means for floodplain management, including structural
    improvements, land use and zoning controls, erosion control techniques, set
    backs, levees, floodways, detention and retention of storm runoff, and other
    measures as circumstances dictate. Priority will be given to those measures
    which provide results in a cost-effective way while complying with the Goals of
    this General Plan, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
    requirements, and aesthetic, environmental, and recreational considerations.
         Program PF 9.4 A
         Cooperate with FEMA to revise and update Flood Insurance Maps as
         drainage improvements occur. (See Policy HS 3.4)
Objective PF 10
Promote adequate health care facilities.
    Policy PF 10.1
    Protect the viability of existing health care facilities by preventing the
    encroachment of incompatible land uses and structures such as noise-sensitive
    uses and structures that obstruct emergency helicopter flight paths.
    Policy PF 10.2
    The City shall ensure that the Zoning Ordinance provides for adequate lands for
    a variety of health care facilities.
    Policy PF 10.3
    The City should encourage additional health care capacity as needed by the
    increasing population in the Fairfield area.
    Policy PF 10.4
    The Fire Department shall exercise its licensing authority in a manner that
    ensures that there are no unnecessary barriers to the timely response of health
    care providers to medical emergencies.
Objective PF 11
Provide timely, functional, safe, and attractive public buildings in order to
provide high levels of public service.
City of Fairfield General Plan            PF - 8                          June 2002
    Policy PF 11.1
    Maintain the Fairfield Civic Center as the City government center.
         Program PF 11.1 A
         Proceed with implementation of the Fairfield Civic Center Master Plan.
    Policy PF 11.2
    Continue to promote the use of the Fairfield Civic Center for various educational,
    cultural, and civic programs by the Fairfield community.
    Policy PF 11.3
    Community centers, including cultural facilities, should be located on highly visible
    and easily accessible locations.
    Policy PF 11.4
    The clustering of public and quasi-public uses such as schools, parks, libraries,
    child care facilities, and community activity centers is encouraged.
    Policy PF 11.5
    Support the Fairfield Center for the Creative Arts in providing a diversity of
    performing and visual arts programs.
    Policy PF 11.6
    Promote the use of local public schools by school and community creative arts
    groups.
Objective PF 12
Provide adequate public utilities.
    Policy PF 12.1
    The City shall designate adequate, appropriately located land for utility uses.
    Policy PF 12.2
    The City shall continue to circulate development proposals to local utility
    providers, including Pacific Gas and Electric, Pacific Bell, and local cable
    television providers, for their review and comment and to ensure that they can
    and will provide service to development.
    Policy PF 12.3
    The City shall continue to work with local utility providers to allow them adequate
    time to prepare plans for servicing new planned growth.
Objective PF 13
Support adequate solid waste disposal capacity.
City of Fairfield General Plan            PF - 9                               June 2002
    Policy PF 13.1
    Reduce the amount of waste disposed of at the landfill by reducing 25 percent
    of the solid waste stream by the year 1995 and 50 percent by the year 2000 as
    mandated by State law. (See Policy OS 8.6)
         Program PF 13.1 A
         Implement programs within the Source Reduction and Recycling Element
         (not a General Plan element) which promote source reduction, recycling, and
         composting as ways of reducing waste and increasing landfill capacity. (See
         Program OS 8.6 A)
    Policy PF 13.2
    Continue to participate as member of the County Local Task Force For
    Integrated Waste Management by providing input on county-wide waste
    management issues. (See Objective LU 5, Policy LU 5.1)
Objective PF 14
Generate and develop an environmentally responsible hazardous waste
management system. (See Objective HS 7)
    Policy PF 14.1
    Reduce the amount of household hazardous waste improperly disposed of by
    City residents by providing a convenient means of disposing of these materials.
         Program PF 14.1 A
         Implement the programs within the Household Hazardous Waste Element
         (not a General Plan element) which promote source reduction, recycling, and
         reuse of household hazardous waste materials as well as the proper handling
         and disposal of these materials.
Objective PF 15
Ensure adequate fire protection. (See Objective HS 4)
    Policy PF 15.1
    Provide enough staffing and fire stations to ensure that at least 80 percent of the
    residential dwelling units in any response area are located within five minutes
    maximum travel time of a station. Where the number of dwelling units within five
    minutes travel time of any response area falls below 80 percent, the City shall
    take the appropriate steps (e.g., construct a new fire station) to ensure that the
    above standard is maintained. In addition, fire stations shall be located to ensure
    that all target hazards are within five minutes travel time from a fire station where
    feasible.
         Program PF 15.1 A
         Continue to maintain and monitor a run-time log and compile and publish
         statistics annually.
City of Fairfield General Plan            PF - 10                                June 2002
    Policy PF 15.2
    Require grouping of residential units to provide for more localized and effective
    fire protection measures such as consolidation of fuel buildup abatement, fire
    break maintenance, firefighting equipment access, and water service provision.
Objective PF 16
Insure adequate police protection.
    Policy PF 16.1
    Maintain an average emergency response time of under 5 minutes and an
    average non-emergency response time of under 20 minutes.
         Program PF 16.1 A
         Continue to maintain and monitor a response-time log and compile and
         publish statistics annually.
Objective PF 17
Assist in the adequate provision of County services.
    Policy PF 17.1
    Continue to collect fees from new development to fund its share of County-
    provided facilities and services (e.g. library, health, welfare, and justice system).
Objective PF 18
Balance development of existing open space with the acquisition of permanent
open space in and around Fairfield in order to mitigate the effects of ongoing
development depriving the community of existing open space.
    Policy PF 18.1
    All new residential development shall be required to annex to a Mello-Roos
    Community Facilities District or to otherwise financially contribute for the purpose
    of acquiring land or development rights to preserve open space buffers between
    Fairfield and its neighboring cities and to preserve open spaces as defined in the
    Open Space and Conservation Element. Developers shall be given the option of
    delaying development until sufficient open space is acquired to mitigate proposed
    residential development. (See Policy OS 5.2)
Objective PF 19
Provide adequate corporation yard space to service local public service and
utility needs.
    Policy PF 19.1
    Explore the possible relocation of existing City, County, and various utility
    corporation yards to a joint-use corporation yard.
Objective PF 20
City of Fairfield General Plan            PF - 11                                June 2002
Strive for the provision of adequate schools, superior educational programs,
and uncrowded classroom space. (See Policy ED 7.8)
    Policy PF 20.1
    Adopt mechanisms to ensure that the rate of growth and the rate of school
    construction are compatible. (See Program ED 7.8 A)
         Program PF 20.1 A
         Deleted
    Policy PF 20.2
    Deleted
    Policy PF 20.3
    Cooperate with the Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District and the Travis Unified
    School District in the assessment and collection of school impact fees on new
    development.
    Policy PF 20.4
    Work with the City of Suisun City, the City of Vacaville, Solano County, the
    Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District, and the Travis Unified School District to
    devise a permanent means of financing school construction within the Districts to
    accommodate the residential, industrial, and commercial growth policies of the of
    the Cities and County. The permanent means of financing school construction
    must recognize that adequate school facilities are in the best interests of the
    public and private sectors and that only through the cooperation of all parties can
    a permanent solution be devised. The solution must address (a) its cost
    effectiveness; (b) the timeliness of funding; (c) its flexibility; (d) cash flow needs
    of the school district involved; and (e) political acceptability.
Objective PF 21
Ensure that schools are appropriately located within attendance areas.
    Policy PF 21.1
    Elementary schools should be planned as an integral part of neighborhoods,
    located away from major arterial streets and linked with recreational parks and
    community corridors serving residential neighborhoods, and situated so as to
    reduce or eliminate the need for pupil transportation.
    Policy PF 21.2
    Middle schools and high schools should be located with respect to the student
    populations which they will serve, with direct access provided from collector or
    major arterial streets.
    Policy PF 21.3
City of Fairfield General Plan            PF - 12                                  June 2002
    Middle schools are generally considered compatible with most residential and
    park uses but are not generally considered compatible with retail commercial and
    general industrial uses.
    Policy PF 21.4
    High schools are generally considered compatible with most residential, park,
    service commercial, office, and light industrial uses, but are not generally
    considered compatible with retail commercial and general industrial uses.
    Policy PF 21.5
    Continuation high schools and technical schools shall be considered compatible
    uses in industrial parks in order to encourage vocational training and provide
    opportunities for gaining firsthand experience in technical skills.
    Policy PF 21.6
    Wherever possible, school sites should be integrated with recreation parks and
    community recreation corridors to maximize the benefits of recreation experience
    as part of the education process and to permit pedestrian and bicycle access with
    a minimum of interruption by the street system.
Objective PF 22
Promote school facilities that meet demand.
    Policy PF 22.1
    Notify the appropriate school district(s) affected by newly proposed developments
    as soon in the review process as possible to allow ample time for the assessment
    of impacts on school facility needs.
    Policy PF 22.2
    Work with the school districts in developing long-range land use plans to allow
    adequate time for the preparation of school facility plans for servicing new
    planned growth.
    Policy PF 22.3
    Encourage the school districts to explore means for maximizing the service
    potential of all existing and planned school facilities, including year-round
    enrollments and increased school capacities.
    Policy PF 22.4
    Use Exhibit PF-5 as a guide for locating new schools.
         Program PF 22.4 A
         Use the following procedure for review of potential school sites designated in
         Exhibit PF-5.
City of Fairfield General Plan            PF - 13                             June 2002
         1. When the City receives either (a) the first complete development
              application for a site designated as a "potential" school site or (b) a
              preapplication concept plan of sufficient detail to clearly describe the
              proposal, the City shall send written notification and a copy of the concept
              plan or development application to the school district.
         2. Within 45 days of receipt of the development application or concept plan,
              the school district shall schedule a public hearing with the Governing
              Board. The purpose of the public hearing is to evaluate District site needs
              relating to the subject potential school site and to accept public testimony
              relating to this issue. The developer would be encouraged to participate
              in this hearing.
         3. A second hearing would be scheduled within 90 days of the public hearing,
              whereby, the District Governing Board would take one of the following
              actions:
              Option 1 - Determine that the site is no longer needed by the District or
              Option 2 - Determine that the site should be converted to a "planned"
              school site and initiate the acquisition process, as defined below.
         4. If the Governing Board selects Option 1 above, the District shall notify the
              City of such decision with the recommendation that the "potential" school
              site designation be deleted.
         5. If the Governing Board selects Option 2 above, the District shall have two
              years from the date of their decision to either acquire the site or enter into
              an agreement with the property owner to acquire the site.
         6. At the time either school district determines that a potential school site is
              not needed, the district shall notify the City that the potential school site
              should be eliminated from the General Plan - Public Facilities Element,
              Exhibit PF-5. The site may then be developed in accordance to the
              property's land use designation on the Land Use Diagram.
         7. Additional school sites, other than those identified in Exhibit PF-5, may be
              identified during the term of the General Plan. Consideration of these sites
              would be evaluated through the General Plan amendment process.
    Policy PF 22.5
    The City shall continue to work with the school districts to designate additional
    potential sites for new school facilities as the future need for them becomes
    known.
    Policy PF 22.6
City of Fairfield General Plan               PF - 14                              June 2002
    Facilitate cooperative arrangements between the Fairfield-Suisun Unified School
    District, the Travis Unified School District, and/or the City to share facilities.
Objective PF 23
Promote post-secondary educational facilities and programs that meet the
needs of existing and future residents of Fairfield.
    Policy PF 23.1
    Cooperate with Solano Community College, Solano County, and the cities within
    Solano County in the provision of adequate classroom space and facilities to
    serve the area.
    Policy PF 23.2
    Encourage shared use of facilities between Solano College, the City, the Fairfield-
    Suisun Unified School District, and the Travis Unified School District.
    Policy PF 23.3
    Work with adjacent communities to encourage a wide variety of vocational,
    technical, and post-secondary educational opportunities.
City of Fairfield General Plan           PF - 15                                  June 2002
Supporting Text
Water
The City of Fairfield provides potable water to users within its corporate limits except
for Travis Air Force Base, which gets its water from Vallejo and base-owned wells.
The City provides nonpotable water to Rancho Solano golf course, and is just
beginning a recycled water system (see below). All water the City presently delivers
is surface water as opposed to groundwater. The City’s primary water supply comes
from the Solano Project and the State Water Project through contracts with the
Solano County Water Agency. The City also has agreements with the Solano
Irrigation District (SID) that provide the City with a specified amount of SID Solano
Project water. SID serves irrigation water to some customers in Fairfield directly.
The City's water resources are shown on Exhibit PF-1. The Solano Project stores
raw water in Lake Berryessa and delivers it to the City via Putah Creek and the Putah
South Canal; the State Water Project stores raw waterin Lake Oroville and delivers
it via the Sacramento River, Barker Slough and the North Bay Aqueduct..
The City has various water service master plans that address the phasing of capital
improvements needed to extend water service to new areas. The City also has an
Urban Water Management Plan required by state law that addresses water
conservation and resource management programs. Periodic updating of the Plan is
mandated by law, at which time, new programs can be added. The City is further
required to practice water conservation by virtue of its contracts for State Project and
Solano Project water, and by its voluntary membership in the California Urban Water
Conservation Council.
Even with good water conservation practices, the City will have to add water supplies
as it grows. Projections indicate that 50,500 acre-feet per year (AF/year) of water
will by needed to accommodate buildout of the General Plan, exceeding currently
identified water supplies by 14,600 AF/year. Additional water sources are available
and may include a water right permit under the state’s watershed-of-origin law,
additional State Water Project supplies, additional Solano Project supplies, and other
water transfers. The City’s water needs projections include assumptions about
growth in demand from new water intensive users. The City has the flexibility to limit
water intensive users as a means to address potential shortfalls in water supply.
Raw water is filtered and disinfected in one of two water treatment plants in the City;
Waterman or North Bay Regional Water Treatment Plants. The Waterman
Treatment Plant has a present 22.5 million gallon per day (mgd) treatment capacity,
ultimately expandable to 45 mgd. The North Bay Regional Water Treatment Plant
has a 40 mgd capacity (26.7 mgd for Fairfield and 13.3 mgd for Vacaville) with
sufficient land available at the site for expansion to 90 mgd (60 mgd for Fairfield and
30 mgd for Vacaville). Together, the City’s two treatment plants provide treatment
capacity far in excess of that needed to serve the City at buildout.
City of Fairfield General Plan             PF - 16                             June 2002

The City's goal for total treated water storage capacity is approximately two maximum
days of demand. The water system has nine storage reservoirs, providing over 55
million gallons of treated water capacity, distributed throughout the service area to
optimize system reliability during emergencies.              Storage reservoirs under
development will meet the City's needs for the next 10 to 20 years. The City can
expand existing reservoirs or add new reservoirs as needed so that treated water
storage capacity does not represent a constraint to development under the General
Plan. The City will, however, require additional water transmission pipelines to better
distribute the water from the treatment plants.
Recycled Water
The City, in cooperation with the Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District, is now implementing
a system of delivering recycled, highly treated wastewater within the City’s water
service area. Presently, the Sewer District uses some recycled water from irrigation
at its wastewater treatment plant site and SID recycles water for turf irrigation while
the remainder is discharged to the Suisun Marsh. The benefits of using recycled
water and developing the necessary dual water systems will have many of the same
benefits as conservation, i.e. effectively increasing the basic water supply, providing
flexibility in the nonpotable water supply for irrigation and industrial use, and reducing
costs for water treatment and storage expansions in proportion to the recycled water
used. Dual water lines are being installed as part of some new developments. Water
recycling also benefits the wastewater treatment operation by limiting unnecessary
flows of treated wastewater into the Suisun Marsh. The City is planning to develop
and use 3,000 acre-feet per year of recycled water at buildout.
Sewer
The Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District (FSSD) provides and operates the wastewater
treatment plant, wastewater pump stations and force mains, and the trunk main
collection facilities in the City of Fairfield.
The FSSD is in the midst of a planned 20 year program of facilities construction that
will increase treatment plant, trunk main, and pump station capacities to correct
existing system capacity deficiencies and accommodate future growth within the
present General Plan limits of Fairfield and Suisun. The planned expansion program
will increase the treatment plant capacity in multiple stages from the present 17.5
mgd Average Dry Weather Flow (ADWF) to ultimate capacity of about 25 mgd.
The City's largest single wastewater discharger is the Anheuser Busch Brewery.
Travis Air Force Base wastewater is collected on-base by a system owned and
maintained by the Air Force.
The sewer system is divided into four sewer basins, as shown on Exhibit PF-3. For
two of the basins, the Cordelia and the Inlet Basins, the existing sewer facilities with
City of Fairfield General Plan               PF - 17                             June 2002

extensions and minor updates are adequate to meet the General Plan buildout
needs. The other two basins, the Suisun and Central Basins, will requirepump station
expansions and additional trunk sewer capacity to serve development in
unincorporated areas east of Peabody Road.
The Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District (FSSD) operates a wastewater treatment plant
located off Chadbourne Road in the City of Fairfield. The plant has undergone a
series of expansions over the years to reach its current rating of 17.5 mgd ADWF.
Plant expansions can result in an ultimate capacity of 30 mgd ADWF.
The preliminary analysis of the General Plan land uses indicates the projected
capacity of the treatment plant is adequate to handle the projected sewage flows
from the General Plan. If development exceeds the amount planned, further
expansion of the sewage treatment plant will be necessary.
Storm Drainage
Storm drainage and flooding problems have historically had a strong influence on
development patterns in the Fairfield area.
Flooding has usually been the result of overbank flow caused by limited channel
capacity and restricted bridge or culvert crossings. In lowland areas, particularly the
lower reaches of McCoy, Laurel, and Ledgewood Creeks, and in old Cordelia,
flooding is aggravated by backwater from high tides in sloughs in Suisun Marsh.
Another significant factor affecting flooding is the condition of the channels,
particularly the amount of sediment buildup and rush and vegetation growth, which
reduces channel size and carrying capacity. Debris which collects at crossings also
reduces bridge and culvert carrying capacity.
A major improvement in flood protection for the Fairfield area has recently been
accomplished with the 1990 completion of the Corps of Engineers Fairfield Vicinity
Streams project improvements on Laurel, McCoy, and Union Avenue Creeks. These
improvements will greatly reduce flooding in central Fairfield for all but the very
largest storms. However, the flooding in Suisun Valley along the west side of
Ledgewood Creek has not been removed, nor have any changes been made in the
historic flooding conditions along Suisun Creek between Fairfield and Cordelia.
A new program to control pollutant levels in stormwater discharges has been
mandated by EPA under Federal Law (40 CFR Parts 122, 123, and 124). It is being
implemented by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board. The San
Francisco Regional Water Quality Control Board intends to require the City of
Fairfield to implement a comprehensive control program. The initial application is
proposed to be filed by May 18, 1992. Such a program would include operation and
maintenance programs for new and existing public and private storm drain systems;
ordinances or other means requiring the control of runoff from new development and
significant redevelopment both during construction and after construction is
City of Fairfield General Plan          PF - 18                              June 2002
completed; and education measures to inform the public, commercial entities, and
industries on the proper use and disposal of materials and waste and correct
practices of urban runoff control; and a number of other possible programs.
Health Care Facilities
Health care facilities in Fairfield include Fairfield Convalescent Hospital, Solano Park
Psychiatric Hospital, the Kaiser Permanente Medical Offices, NorthBay Medical
Center, and David Grant Medical Center USAF. NorthBay Medical Center is
undergoing a long-term project to expand the hospital facilities in central Fairfield.
The first phase, consisting of 121 beds, will be completed in 1993 (121 beds) and the
second phase in 1995 (150 beds). The site has the potential to further expand to
200 beds to serve the area's projected hospital needs through the life of the General
Plan.
Public Buildings
With the exception of park buildings, fire stations, and water treatment plants all City
public buildings are contained in the Fairfield Civic Center complex which includes
City Hall, the Senior Center, and the Community Center. All municipal government
functions and services are provided from complex, which is centrally located close to
the downtown. The Civic Center Master Plan has reserved adequate vacant land
located in the complex and in the surrounding area to accommodate future civic
facilities.
Community Facilities
The City operates the Fairfield Civic Arts Theater located downtown. Completed in
1990, the Theater hosts numerous local performing arts events, including ballet,
opera, symphonic concerts, and plays.
A 72-acre site has been designated for a future Sports Park. The site is located south
of the future Manuel Campos Parkway, between the future extensions of Clay Bank
Road and Walters Road. The Sports Park is expected to attract regional softball
tournaments and provide a number of sporting opportunities for Fairfield residents.
Other recreational facilities are discussed in the Open Space, Conservation, and
Recreation Element.
Integrated Waste Management
Solid waste management, including waste disposal and curbside recycling is handled
by a local franchised hauler under contract with the City. Solid wastes are currently
taken to Potrero Hills Landfill and recyclables processed at an interim facility in
Fairfield.
City of Fairfield General Plan             PF - 19                              June 2002
All solid waste management in Solano County is governed by the County Integrated
Waste Management Plan. However, the Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989
(AB 939) resulted in many changes to solid waste management in California. Among
other things, it mandated that each City and County in the State development a
Source Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE) for inclusion in the County
Integrated Waste Management Plan. The SRRE, which is not a General Plan
element, promotes source reduction (including reuse), recycling and composting,
and transformation (combustion) as means of managing solid waste. The City's
SRRE complies with the Integrated Waste Management Act of 1990's requirement
that each local jurisdiction in the State divert from disposal 25 percent of its waste
stream by 1995 and 50 percent by 2000 or risk substantial fines.
Fire Suppression
Fire suppression services are provided by the City's Fire Department from five fire
stations located throughout the city. A new fire station is planned on the east side
of North Texas Street, south of Dickson Hill Road. In addition, the station on
Magellan Road will be replaced with a station on Pennsylvania Avenue in the Civic
Center. The Union Avenue station will be converted into an administrative facility.
Two new fire stations are planned in Cordelia, which would replace the existing
temporary station. A total of six stations will be needed to accommodate buildout
of the General Plan in order to maintain fire response times of under five minutes.
Law Enforcement
Police protection services are provided by the City's Police Department located in the
Fairfield Civic Center. In order to maintain adequate police protection for the City's
growing population, additional police staff, vehicles and equipment will have to be
added to the force as needed. As a general rule, the ratio of sworn officers to
population should be in the range of 1.13-1.20 per one thousand residents. Given
the growth projections at General Plan buildout, the following is an approximation
of required total staff and vehicles:
City of Fairfield General Plan           PF - 20                             June 2002
                                        2000            2010            2020
Police officers                          107              128            150
Police support staff                       63              76             89
Police vehicles                            81              96            113
Note: information is based upon a projected population of approximately 130,000 at buildout.
There will be an additional need for police facilities. It is assumed that the main
administration building will continue to be located at or near the Civic Center.
By 2010 there will be a need for approximately 60,000 square feet of workspace
to accommodate police needs. The current police administration building has
approximately 40,000 square feet. Until a new administration building can be
constructed, police would likely require one or more substations to accommodate
the additional workspace requirements.
County Services
Fairfield serves as the Solano County seat. All county government functions are
provided in buildings in an area known as the County Complex, just east of the
Downtown. County services include: alcohol and drug services, animal shelter,
assessment, the County justice system, environmental management, libraries, public
health, tax collection, and police protection through the Sheriff's Department. One of
the library branches, the Fairfield-Suisun Public Library, is located in the Civic Center.
Conservation Open Space
The Fairfield planning area contains numerous natural resources which are
described in the Open Space and Conservation Element. The City has embarked
on several planning studies to explore mechanisms for permanently maintaining
open space in Green Valley, in the Fairfield-Vallejo-Benicia Triangle Area, and in the
Fairfield/Vacaville Greenbelt. The City works cooperatively with the Solano County
Farmlands and Open Space Foundation (an independent, non-profit, private
corporation) to acquire permanent open space in and around the Fairfield.
Developers are required to join a Mello-Roos Community Facilities District or
otherwise contribute financially for the purpose of acquiring permanent open space.
Development of existing open space can also be delayed until sufficient open space
has been acquired.
Corporation Yards
There are three existing corporation yards: the City of Fairfield Corporation Yard
located south of Texas Street, the Solano County Corporation Yard located on North
Texas Street, and the CalTrans Corporation Yard on West Texas Street. The
corporation yards provide storage, machinery, service, and headquarter facilities for
City of Fairfield General Plan              PF - 21                                  June 2002
the various public works crews and equipment. The City has identified a site for a
potential corporation yard south of Cordelia Road, west of Chadbourne Road for joint
use by the City, County, and some local public utilities in order to consolidate those
uses in a more appropriate area. If opened, the existing corporation yards will be
relocated to the joint facility.
Educational Facilities
Fairfield is served by two school districts providing public elementary and secondary
education. The Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District (FSUSD) serves the City of
Suisun City, portions of Solano and Napa Counties and most of Fairfield. Travis
Unified School District serves the area of Fairfield north and east of Air Base Parkway
and Walters Road (including Travis Air Force Base). Travis Unified School District
also serves portions of Solano County and southeast Vacaville.
Existing, planned and potential school sites are shown on Exhibit PF-5. In the
Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District, there are fourteen public elementary schools,
four middle schools, three comprehensive high schools, one continuation high
school, one alternative high school, and one adult school located in the Fairfield
General Plan area. In the Travis Unified School District, there are three elementary
schools, one middle school, one high school, and one continuation high school in the
Fairfield General Plan area.
Excellence in education requires elementary schools which have capacity to
accommodate children in neighborhood schools and intermediate and high schools
which are adequately sized to provide opportunities for excellence. Standards for
new school facilities adopted by the school districts are as follows:
                                                   Approximate
                               Grades              Capacity              Size
Elementary Schools             K-61/K-52,K-62,K-82 8001*/8002            7-10 acres
Middle Schools                 6-81/6-82,7-82      850-1,0001/750-8002   15-20 acres
High Schools                   9-12                1400-1,6001/2,0002    50 acres
Continuation High Schools      9-12                varies                2-3 acres
1 Travis Unified 2 Fairfield-Suisun Unified
*Assumes year-round school
Existing schools will also conform to these standards as conditions and facilities
allow. Both districts also indicate that schools, especially new elementary schools,
will be utilized on year-round schedules when feasible and when benefits warrant.
Approximately one half of the existing elementary schools in the Fairfield-Suisun
School District are on a year-round calendar.                      Year-round scheduling is
City of Fairfield General Plan                  PF - 22                              June 2002
advantageous because it maximizes the use of school assets and reduces the need
for new facilities.
Projections indicate that by the year 2005, facilities will need to be provided for
approximately 1,360 additional elementary students and 500 middle school students.
The 1997 Facilities Plan for Travis Unified School District projects a need for three
additional elementary schools, one additional middle school, and one additional high
school to accommodate development in Fairfield and Vacaville. The City and the
Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District have identified planned and potential school
sites to meet their school facility needs as shown in Exhibit PF-5. For the Travis
Unified School District, potential sites have been identified in the Peabody-Walters
master Plan area. Within the Peabody-Walters area, site locations for two
elementary schools have been specifically identified as a part of the Goldridge
Planned Development project These projections and the identified planned and
potential school sites are based upon the standards and grade alignments listed
above and are subject to change as these standards may change.
Planned sites are those sites approved by the FSUSD Governing Board and which
FSUSD intends to purchase and build schools on. Potential school sites are those
in which FSUSD is interested but has not yet made arrangements or plans for
acquisition. Sites designated as potential school sites are not prevented from
development to non-school uses. However, the potential school site designation
does give the School District an opportunity to acquire the site for schools. Sites that
are not secured as a result of this process shall be replaced as appropriate, and sites
that are no longer deemed necessary for school facilities shall be converted to the
land use designated in the Land Use Diagram. The boundaries and the location of
the sites are not necessarily meant to be exact but can serve as a general guide to
potential sites.
New school facilities are funded through a variety of means. In certain areas, new
development is subject to a Mello-Roos tax. New development in other areas will
pay a school mitigation impact fee determined by the findings of a Facilities Funding
Needs Analysis pursuant to Senate Bill 50. The City is committed to assisting the
Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District and the Travis Unified School District in
preparing annual updates to the Facilities Funding Needs Analysis so that fees can
be revised, if necessary.
City of Fairfield General Plan           PF - 23                              June 2002
Travis Air Force Base Protection
Element
Introduction
The purpose of this General Plan Element is to demonstrate the City's strong support
for Travis Air Base and to emphasize the City's commitment to ensuring the
continued operation of Travis AFB. Many of the policies contained in this Element
are also contained in other elements of the General Plan, including the Land Use;
Circulation; Open Space, Conservation & Recreation; Health and Safety; and
Economic Development. Their grouping into one cohesive element ensures that
pertinent General Plan policies related to the protection of Travis AFB can be easily
recognized and used.
Travis Air Force Base (AFB) is home to the world's largest military airlift unit, the 60th
Air Mobility Wing, and also serves as the home base for the Wing's reserve
counterpart, the 349th Air Mobility Wing (Associate). In 1995, the function of the
Base was expanded by the addition of air refueling assets from March Air Force
Base. The United States Department of Defense has been using the site for military
operations since the early 1940's. The Base is vitally important to Fairfield's and
Solano County's overall economic health.
Fairfield General Plan                  TP - 1                            February 2003
Goal
Protect the mission and operation of Travis Air Force Base.
Objectives, Policies & Programs
Objective TP 1
Ensure that future land uses are compatible with the continued operation of
Travis AFB.
    Policy TP 1.1
    Future development shall not conflict with the viability of Travis AFB. (See Policy
    LU 13.3and Policy ED 1.9)
    Policy TP 1.2
    Continue to notify the Air Force of proposed development activities in the vicinity
    of Travis AFB.
    Policy TP 1.3
    Proposed land uses shall be consistent with the land use compatibility policies
    and criteria of the 2002 Land Use Compatibility Plan (LUCP) for Travis Air Force
    Base. (See Policy LU 13.3, and Policies HS 5.1, HS 5.2, HS 5.3, and HS 9.2)
    Policy TP 1.4
    Projects within the LUCP Compatibility Zones A, B1, B2, C, D or the Height
    Review Overlay Zone as shown on Exhibit HS-3 of the General Plan shall be
    referred to the Solano County Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) as required
    by the Travis AFB Land Use Compatibility Plan (LUCP).
    Policy TP 1.5
    Maintain current agricultural zoning in the area east of Northgate Road, including
    the Jepson Prairie, for land that is not within the boundaries of the Base. (See
    Policy OS 1.3, Policy OS 9.3, and Program OS 9.3 A,)
    Policy TP 1.6
    Continue to support the role of Travis Air Force Base as a significant contributor
    to the economic base of the community. (See Policy ED 1.9)
Fairfield General Plan                   TP - 2                           February 2003
    Policy TP 1.7
    Two hundred units of housing shall be exempt from any special funding
    mechanism established to pay for new infrastructure to serve the northeast area
    of the City and shall provide preference for affordable housing for military
    personnel stationed at Travis Air Force Base.
Objective TP 2
Protect the citizens of Fairfield from excessive noise and protect Travis Air
Force Base from noise complaints by preventing incompatible land uses from
encroaching upon the base. (See Objective HS 9)
    Policy TP 2.1
    All new land use proposals shall comply with the noise and overflight policies of
    the 2002 LUCP for Travis Air Force Base. (See Policy HS 9.2 and Program HS
    9.2A and Policy LU 12.3)
    Policy TP 2.2
    No new residential zoning will be applied to land in Compatibility Zones A, B1,
    B2, or C and no new schools will be permitted in these areas. (See Policy HS
    9.2 and Program HS 9.2 A)
    Policy TP 2.3
    For all new residential development east of Claybank Road, require homebuyer-
    renter notification of the aircraft noise associated with Travis AFB.
Objective TP 3
Ensure the safety of persons on the ground from potential hazards from the
operation of Travis Air Force Base. (See Objective HS 5 and Policy LU 12.3)
    Policy TP 3.1
    No new development shall be permitted in the Compatibility Zones A, B1, and B2.
    Development shall be limited in Compatibility Zone C, per the 2002 LUCP.
Objective TP 4
Protect the safety of aircraft in flight. (See Objective HS 6)
    Policy TP 4.1
    Objects and structures within the Compatibility Zones C, D, and the Height
    Review Overlay Zone as shown in Exhibit HS-3 shall conform to FAR Part 77
    height limits. (See Policy HS 6.1)
Fairfield General Plan                      TP - 3                        February 2003
    Policy TP 4.2
    Development proposals shall be reviewed for hazards to aircraft in flight,
    including: uses that release into the air any substance such as steam, dust and
    smoke which would impair pilot visibility; uses that produce light emissions, glare
    or distracting lights which could interfere with pilot vision or be mistaken for airfield
    lighting; sources of electrical emissions which would interfere with aircraft
    communications or navigation; and uses which would attract birds or waterfowl to
    the extent that they would pose a danger to aircraft operation in the vicinity of the
    Base.
Objective TP 5
Protect the viability of Travis AFB to accommodate expansions and new and/or
different missions consistent with the changing world role of the United States.
    Policy TP 5.1
    Establish a reserve of land to be set aside for the expansion of Travis AFB or a
    change in its mission.
    Policy TP 5.2
    Establish mechanisms to facilitate the exchange of information between the City
    of Fairfield and the Air Force as follows:
    a. Early notification by the City to the Air Force of development projects east of
        Claybank Road;
    b. Early notification by the Air Force to the City of changes in aircraft flight
        patterns;
    c. An ongoing consultation mechanism between the City and the Air Force on
        issues of mutual concern.
    Policy TP 5.3
    The projected need for additional utilities and other municipal services by Travis
    AFB should be considered in the development of new infrastructure plans.
    Policy TP 5.4
    The City will cooperate with Travis Air Force Base officials in identifying strategies
    to meet the housing needs of military personnel. (See Policy HO 7.5 and Program
    HO 7.5 A)
Fairfield General Plan                     TP - 4                            February 2003
Supporting Text
Community Encroachment Issues
Airports, both civilian and military, can come under substantial pressure to close or
relocate because of complaints of noise and other health and safety concerns from
area residents, even in cases where the airports preexisted the residential
development. Development in the vicinity of an airport can be considered as
encroachment if there are not adequate mechanisms to ensure that the development
is compatible with the operations of the Air Force. The Travis Air Force Base
Protection Element policies are intended to provide for compatibility between the
operations of Travis Air Force Base and future development in the City. The Element
is therefore considered as a means to prevent encroachment by the City on the Base.
History of Land Use Compatibility Planning in the Vicinity of
Travis AFB
In 1974, the City of Fairfield entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with the
Air Force and the California Office of Planning and Research which established a
process for the three agencies to report and comment on development projects within
the vicinity of Travis AFB. The intent of the MOU is to assure that proposed activities
are compatible with State, Regional, Local and Base plans and programs.
In 1976, the Air Force prepared the first Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ)
Study for Travis AFB. This AICUZ was updated by the Air Force in 1989 and in 1995.
The purpose of the AICUZ study is to promote compatible land development in areas
subject to aircraft noise and accident potential. In 1990, the Solano County Airport
Land Use Commission (ALUC) adopted the Comprehensive Airport Land Use Plan
for Travis Air Force Base (ALUP). The purpose of the ALUP is to protect Travis AFB,
the safety and general welfare of people in the vicinity of the Base, and the safety of
air navigation.
The 1990 ALUP was based on the 1989 AICUZ Report. Both the 1989 AICUZ and
the 1990 ALUP include noise contours and accident potential zones for the current
flying activity of the Base. Both documents contain comprehensive land use
compatibility guidelines. These guidelines are similar in the two documents, however
the ALUP has stricter standards for residential development and schools. The ALUP
also contains specific policies regarding land use compatibility in relation to
obstruction clearance, noise and overflight, and safety. In 1992, the
Fairfield General Plan                    TP - 5                          February 2003
ALUC found the City of Fairfield General Plan consistent with the ALUP; and in 1994,
the ALUC found the Peabody Walters Master Plan consistent with the ALUP.
In March of 1995, the Air Force released a new AICUZ for Travis AFB. The new
AICUZ differs from the 1989 AICUZ by the inclusion of a maximum mission scenario
in addition to the current mission scenario. The maximum mission noise contours
were generated by expanding current aircraft operations and aircraft types to reflect
projected training and operational requirements. The intent of the maximum mission
is to assist local agencies in their long-term land use planning in the vicinity of the
base.
In June 2002, the ALUC adopted an updated ALUP, now called the Travis AFB Land
Use Compatibility Plan (LUCP). The ALUC also adopted a new review procedures
document for all Solano County Airports. Should the LUCP become invalid of be set
aside, the protection zones and noise contours as shown in Air Installation
Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) shall govern.
Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC)
The Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act established a process to review
military installations for realignment and closure. The 1994 BRAC process resulted
in the realignment of air refueling assets from March AFB to Travis AFB. The
selection of Travis AFB to expand its mission resulted from Air Force plans to
establish an air mobility wing to align airlift and air refueling assets under one
commander.
For the 1995 BRAC process, eight major criteria and a number of sub-elements were
established for selecting installations for closure or realignment. Of these criteria,
military value of the installation was given priority. The 1995 BRAC ratings included
Travis AFB in the group of Air Force installations with the highest relative merit.
Travis was given the highest possible rating (green) on existing and future local
community encroachment. Travis received a low rating (red) for air quality and a
moderately low rating (yellow minus) for affordability of off-base housing.
Fairfield General Plan                    TP - 6                        February 2003
Urban Design Element
Introduction
Community character is comprised of the perception and experience of the
community by those living, working, and passing through. It is largely determined by
the built environment and the surrounding natural environment as affected by urban
development. Careful urban design can provide direction and guidance for
development to enhance community character by creating a greater sense of time,
place, and well being. This Urban Design Element seeks to enhance Fairfield's
image as a unique community and to retain that image in attractive and orderly
development which preserves the beauty of the natural setting.
This Element is implemented mainly through the Fairfield Urban Design Plan. The
Urban Design Plan contains specific design guidelines that expound upon the
general objectives and policies contained within this Element. Together, these two
documents set standards for the design of site layouts, community plans, single and
multiple family residential projects, hillside residences, shopping centers,
commercial, office, and industrial developments, landscaping, parking, signs,
streetscapes, and the integration of development with the surrounding area.
City of Fairfield General Plan          UD - 1                              June 2002
Goal
The goal of the Urban Design Element is:
Enhance Fairfield's image as a unique community and retain that
image in attractive and orderly development which preserves the
beauty of the natural setting.
Objectives, Policies and Programs
Objective UD 1
Cultivate distinctiveness so that Fairfield remains unique among San
Francisco Bay Area and Central Valley communities.
    Policy UD 1.1
    Create entryways to the City that achieve a sense of arriving into the City. These
    entryways shall incorporate signage, landscaping, architectural features, and
    combinations of land uses that enhance the image of the City. (See Policy CI
    2.9)
         Program UD 1.1 A
         Identify the key entryways to the City, and incorporate guidelines into the
         Urban Design Plan and Zoning Ordinance for the signage, landscape
         features, architectural motif and land uses for each entryway.
    Policy UD 1.2
    Enhance core areas of more intensive and higher image development to function
    as centers in key areas of the City (i.e. Downtown and the Fairfield Gateway in
    Central Fairfield, the Fairfield-Vacaville Train Station, and the I-80/I-680
    Interchange in Cordelia). (See Policy LU 2.2)
    Policy UD 1.3
    Connect areas of the city by concerted streetscape development along major
    arterials and pedestrian pathways.
    Policy UD 1.4
    Develop positive, high quality edges along Interstate 80, major arterials, and the
    city limits. (See Policy CI 2.9)
    Policy UD 1.5
    Continue to support the Art in Public Places Program
City of Fairfield General Plan             UD - 2                             June 2002
Objective UD 2
Promote design that is innovative and varied but unified. (See Objective HO 9)
    Policy UD 2.1
    New development should be compatible with the City's overall development
    profile.
         Program UD 2.1 A
         Include in the Urban Design Plan citywide guidelines for the character of
         residential, commercial and industrial development.
    Policy UD 2.2
    Encourage variety in the use of complementary colors, textures, forms, styles,
    structures, and/or materials.
    Policy UD 2.3
    Allow the careful use of contrast where it would be appropriate for providing focus
    and interest to an area.
    Policy UD 2.4
    Reinforce key patterns that positively characterize an area through the use of
    common design features.
Objective UD 3
Emphasize Fairfield's small-scale identity.
    Policy UD 3.1
    Include guidelines in the Urban Design Plan to enhance the City's small-scale
    identity, such as creation of a sense of neighborhood in residential areas. (See
    Policy HO 9.2, Objective LU 10, Objective ED 2)
    Policy UD 3.2
    Promote pedestrian and bicycle orientation through separated sidewalks, bicycle
    paths, interior walkways, planting of canopy trees adjacent to pedestrian paths,
    etc. (See Objective CI 9, Policy CI 9.1, Policy CI 9.2, Policy CI 9.5, Policy CI 9.8,
    Program CI 9.1 A, Program CI 9.2 A, Objective CI 10, Policy CI 10.1, Policy CI
    10.2, Policy CI 10.3, Policy CI 10.4, Policy CI 10.5, Policy CI 10.6, and Policy ED
    4.3)
    Policy UD 3.3
    Require new development to respect the scale and character of nearby structures
    and minimize or mitigate abrupt and excessive differences. (See Policy ED 4.3)
City of Fairfield General Plan            UD - 3                               June 2002
    Policy UD 3.4
    Encourage private preservation of buildings which have historic significance
    and/or architectural merit. (See Policy OS 10.1 and OS 10.9)
Objective UD 4
Ensure high standards of quality in development.
    Policy UD 4.1
    Adhere to the design guidelines of the Fairfield Urban Design Plan.
         Program UD 4.1 A
         Adopt, and regularly update the Fairfield Urban Design Plan.
         Program UD 4.1 B
         Regularly review and update the design guidelines and manuals that have
         been prepared for specific areas of the City (i.e., Cordelia Area Design
         Compatibility Guidelines, Downtown Design Guidelines, Interim Design
         Manual for the Fairfield Regional Center Project, and the Fairfield Gateway
         Design Manual).
    Policy UD 4.2
    All aspects of development, including, but not limited to, grading, site planning,
    signage, fencing, landscaping, screening, lighting, color scheme, size, bulk,
    height, etc., must be integrated and relate to their surroundings in a
    complementary manner.
    Policy UD 4.3
    Require the use of water features, sculptures, or other elements to help define
    the entrance to large projects.
    Policy UD 4.4
    Encourage rehabilitation or upgrade of aging residential neighborhoods,
    commercial centers, and industrial areas.
         Program UD 4.4 A
         Adopt design plans and rehabilitation programs for the commercial corridors
         along Texas Street between Pennsylvania Avenue and the I-80 interchange
         and along North Texas Street between Union Avenue and Air Base Parkway.
         Include in the program for North Texas Street, a review of land uses in the
         vicinity of the Travis Blvd./North Texas intersection, including the former
         Ellsworth Court Mobile Home Park. (See Program ED 9.1 A)
    Policy UD 4.5
    Screen negative views through site planning, architectural, and landscape
    devices.
City of Fairfield General Plan           UD - 4                              June 2002
    Policy UD 4.6
    Include regulations in the Urban Design Plan which prevent a cluttered
    appearance in the front of the buildings.
    Policy UD 4.7
    Include regulations in the Urban Design Plan to limit excessive repetition of the
    same residential building elevations within a subdivision.
Objective UD 5
Preserve the natural scenic quality of the surrounding setting. (See Objective
OS 6, Policy OS 6.1 and Policy OS 6.5)
    Policy UD 5.1
    Development should be designed to provide continuity with features of the
    surrounding area.
    Policy UD 5.2
    Restrict development from significantly encroaching on public views of ridgelines,
    agricultural areas, the Cement Hill Range, and the Suisun Marsh. (See Policy
    OS 6.1)
    Policy UD 5.3
    Develop hillside areas in a manner which respects their topography and
    maintains their visual integrity. (See Policies OS 6.1, OS 6.2, and OS 6.3 and
    Programs OS 6.3 A, OS 6.4 A, and OS 6.4 B)
Objective UD 6
Utilize extensive landscaping to beautify Fairfield's urban areas.
    Policy UD 6.1
    Preserve existing significant trees and extensively plant new trees where
    appropriate. (See Policy OS 7.7)
         Program UD 6.1 A
         Develop a Comprehensive Tree Preservation/Planting Plan for the City
         incorporating policies for the use of canopy trees for shade, accent trees for
         color, etc.
    Policy UD 6.2
    Landscape materials should consist of drought resistant plant varieties
    complementary to the area. (See Policy PF 4.8 and Policy OS 8.5)
    Policy UD 6.3
    Landscaping shall be continuously maintained in good condition in accordance
    with the City's Property Maintenance Ordinance.
City of Fairfield General Plan            UD - 5                             June 2002
Objective UD 7
Encourage more efficient use of nonresidential land.
    Policy UD 7.1
    Develop guidelines for new community commercial centers that encourage:
             A minimum FAR of .5;
             60% of arterial frontage and 100% of street front have building
              within ten feet of the property line; and
             20% of the square footage be housing.
    Policy UD 7.2
    Evaluate the City’s current standards for parking and recommend measures to
    reduce the amount of land area devoted to parking on new projects.
    Policy UD 7.3
    Encourage shared use of parking facilities and promote planning for land uses
    that can utilize the same parking area at different times.
Objective 8
Encourage and approve infill development which is compatible with the
surrounding area.
    Policy UD 8.1
    Encourage and facilitate the development of identified vacant, contiguous
    properties zoned for medium density housing with a prototypical “neo-traditional”
    type subdivision of single-family detached and attached homes.
         Program UD 8.1A
         Revise residential street development standards and adopt alternative minor
         residential standards which allow for a reduced total width of 24 feet, where
         on-street parking required for a residential project can be provided in 90-
         degree angle “pods” or other common parking facilities.
    Policy UD 8.2
    Encourage the use of traffic circles, hardscape treatments at crossroads and
    other traffic-calming devices in the street layout and land plans for new residential
    subdivisions, in order to make new neighborhoods more friendly to the
    pedestrian.
City of Fairfield General Plan              UD - 6                             June 2002

Supporting Text
The Setting
Fairfield's character is distinctly unique from other communities in the San Francisco
Bay Area and the Central Sacramento Valley. The Fairfield experience is different
even from Vallejo and Vacaville's, though the two cities are in close proximity. It can
be said that Fairfield's charm comes from the natural beauty and small town feeling
it has managed to maintain even as the City has grown.
The surrounding natural environment is one of the most significant resources
available to Fairfield because of the way it defines Fairfield among other communities
along the rapidly urbanizing Interstate 80 corridor. The surrounding area includes
hills to the north, east, and west sides and the Suisun Marsh to the south. Orchards,
vineyards, rangeland, and row crops dot the perimeter of the City providing a rural
backdrop to the developing areas.
Development in Fairfield is characterized by a variety of architectural styles and
design themes. Overall, development is of small scale and moderate intensity.
Residential development is the predominate land use in Fairfield.                Older
neighborhoods were generally made up of modest bungalow-style homes of
wood/stucco construction. Houses in newer developments tend to be larger and
more ornate, utilize a greater variety of construction methods and materials, and
incorporate more landscaping. Most of the new residential development is part of
comprehensively planned communities incorporating a high level of amenities.
Office, commercial, and industrial development has followed a similar pattern.
Recent developments tend toward larger and more innovative designs that
incorporate more amenities, unique design features, and extensive landscaping than
before.
In large part, Fairfield's move upscale can be attributed to the City's increasing
awareness of urban design issues and the growing demand for high-amenity
development. In turn, the City's urban design policies have reflected increasingly
higher design standards through the years.
Fairfield Urban Design Plan
Fairfield's urban design policies are contained in the following documents:
     • Downtown Design Guidelines, September 1983.                Contains guidelines
        addressing design issues specific to the Downtown Fairfield area.
City of Fairfield General Plan             UD - 7                             June 2002

    • Cordelia Area Design Compatibility Guidelines, March 1982. Contains
        guidelines intended to implement the design policies of the Cordelia Area
        Specific Plan on commercial and industrial development in the Cordelia area.
    • Interim Design Manual for the Fairfield Regional Center Project, June 1977.
        Provides design guidelines for all development within the Fairfield Regional
        Center Redevelopment Area.
    • Fairfield Gateway Design Manual, September 1981. Sets specific design and
        performance requirements for the Fairfield Gateway portion of the Fairfield
        Regional Center Redevelopment Area.
The above documents have been incorporated into the Fairfield Urban Design Plan
(February 1990), together with the appropriate policies from the City's General Plan.
A revised Urban Design Plan is currently in production.
The Urban Design Plan sets design standards for public and private development
reflecting Fairfield's desire to achieve high quality in all development. It coalesces
public and private development towards common city design goals, defines what
each development project must contribute toward this image, and encourages high
standards of planning and development.
Thirteen districts are delineated based on a combination of visual, physical, and land
use characteristics. Urban design goals and objectives are established for each of
the districts. Further, the Plan's design guidelines address site plans, community
plans, single and multiple family residential, hillside residential, shopping center,
commercial, office, and industrial development, landscaping, parking, signs, and the
integration of development with the surrounding areas.
These guidelines expound upon the general objectives and policies contained in the
Urban Design Element and are complementary to it.
City of Fairfield General Plan           UD - 8                               June 2002

