                                                                                Introduction
                             Rancho Santa Margarita has a well-planned, well-developed
                             circulation system consisting of arterial roadways and local streets.
                             The Foothill Transportation Corridor (SR-241) provides regional
                             access to the City, and a commercial airport is located approximately
                             15 miles to the west. Established transit service connects the City to
the nearby communities of Mission Viejo and Lake Forest, and many of the Planned
Communities that comprise the City were developed with pedestrian and bicycle trails.
The Circulation Element emphasizes the maintenance of layered transportation networks for the
City (see Figure C-1) that respond to demands of current and planned land uses, as set forth in
the Land Use Element. This Element establishes acceptable roadway service levels and
identifies improvements required to maintain the service levels. The use of non-vehicular travel
modes such as transit, walking, and biking is promoted to reduce the demand for transportation
system improvements and improve air quality.
Purpose of the
Circulation Element
The purpose of the Circulation Element is to provide a safe, efficient, and adequate circulation
system for the City. State planning law requires:
 “….a circulation element consisting of the general location for proposed major thoroughfares,
transportation routes, terminals, and other local public utilities and facilities, all correlated with
the land use element plan.”
To meet this purpose, the Circulation Element addresses the circulation improvements needed to
provide adequate capacity for future land uses. The Element establishes a hierarchy of
transportation routes with typical development standards described for each roadway category.
The State General Plan Guidelines recommend that the circulation policies and plans should:
    ♦ Coordinate the transportation and circulation system with planned land uses;
    ♦ Promote the safe and efficient transport of goods and the safe and effective movement of
        all segments of the population;
    ♦ Make efficient use of existing transportation facilities; and
    ♦ Protect environmental quality and promote the wise and equitable use of economic and
        natural resources.
                                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita

Circulation Element
Figure C-1. Rancho Santa Margarita Layered Transportation Networks (GPCE Traffic
Study Exhibit 4-1)
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                                Circulation Element
The Guidelines indicate that the Circulation Element should address all facets of circulation
including streets and highways, transportation corridors, public transit, railroads, bicycle and
pedestrian facilities, and commercial, general, and military airports. The Rancho Santa
Margarita Circulation Element fulfills State requirements with a plan to provide effective
circulation facilities supporting desired community development. Along with circulation, public
utilities must be addressed in the General Plan. Instead of addressing utilities within the
Circulation Element, the Rancho Santa Margarita General Plan contains a public services and
facilities section in the Land Use Element.
Scope and Content
of the Circulation
Element
This Element contains goals and policies to improve overall circulation in the City, as well as
layered transportation networks (Figure C-1) designed to improve the balance between
environmental concerns, community objectives, and performance (mobility and safety). Within
Rancho Santa Margarita, further progress toward a sustainable transportation system can be
advanced by focusing on the following principles:
     ♦ Network Connectivity (more than one route between land uses and a mixture of low
         speed and high speed road connections wherever possible)
     ♦ Operational Balance (flexibility to achieve community objectives and place making
         without sacrificing safety and mobility)
     ♦ Emissions Reduction / Energy Efficiency (prioritize designs which minimize idling times
         and vehicle miles traveled, help conserve resources and minimize waste)
     ♦ Pedestrian and Bicycle Accommodations (walkways and bikeways fully integrated)
     ♦ Transit Readiness (access to transit stops and effective interface of modes)
For vehicular transportation, a hierarchical roadway network is established with designated
roadway types and design standards. The roadway type is linked to anticipated traffic levels, and
acceptable levels of service are established to determine when capacity improvements are
necessary. Because local circulation is linked with the regional system, the Element also focuses
on participation in regional programs to alleviate traffic congestion and construct capacity
improvements. Alternative transportation modes are also emphasized in this Element to reduce
dependency on the automobile and thereby improve environmental quality.
The Circulation Element consists of three sections: 1) Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals, and
Policies; and 3) the Circulation Plan. In the Issues, Goals, and Policies section, major issues
pertaining to the transportation system are identified, and related goals and policies are
established. The goals are overall statements of the City desires and include broad statements of
purpose and direction. The policies serve as guides for planning circulation improvements to
accommodate anticipated population growth, maintaining acceptable service levels while
                                                                           City of Rancho Santa Margarita

Circulation Element
development occurs, coordinating with local and regional jurisdictions to phase regional
transportation facilities, and promoting alternative transportation modes. The Circulation Plan
explains how the goals and policies will be achieved and implemented. Specific implementation
programs are included in the General Plan Implementation Program in Appendix A of this
General Plan.
Related Plans
and Programs
Several transportation plans prepared by the County and other regional agencies focus on the
regional transportation system. Strategies to handle anticipated traffic levels from future
regional development are discussed. The regulatory setting for the 2013 Update of the City of
Rancho Santa Margarita General Plan Circulation Element includes the following:
     ♦    California Assembly Bill 32 (2006) and Senate Bill 375 (2008)
     ♦    AB 1358 California Complete Streets Act of 2008
     ♦    The Regional Transportation Plan (RTP)
     ♦    Orange County Congestion Management Program (CMP)
     ♦    Orange County Master Plan of Arterial Highways
     ♦    OCTA Commuter Bikeways Strategic Plan
     ♦    Orange County Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS)
AB32 and SB375
Assembly Bill 32, the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32), is the primary state
policy created with the purpose of reducing greenhouse gas emissions in California. AB 32
created emissions reduction targets and granted authority over emissions reduction to the
California Air Resources Board (ARB). Senate Bill 375, the Sustainable Communities and
Climate Protection Act of 2008 (SB 375), which was passed by the legislature as a tool for
working towards AB 32’s reduction goals, requires ARB to set regional GHG emissions targets
and requires each California metropolitan planning organizations (MPO) to develop a
Sustainable Community Strategy (SCS) that integrates housing, transportation, and land use
policy.
Complete Streets Act
The Complete Street Act of 2008 (Assembly Bill 1358) was developed in response to and in
support of other legislation aimed at reducing vehicle emissions through reduced trip length and
frequency combined with changes in land use policies. The City of Rancho Santa Margarita
Circulation Plan meets the goals and policies of the Complete Streets Act by addressing a variety
of modes in layered transportation networks.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita

                                                                               Circulation Element
County of Orange Master Plan of Arterial Highways (MPAH)
The County of Orange Master Plan of Arterial Highways (MPAH) forms part of the Orange
County General Plan and designates the arterial system in the Circulation Element of the General
Plan. Defined according to specific arterial functional classifications, the MPAH identifies the
intended future roadway system for the County. Cities within the County are expected to
achieve consistency with the MPAH in individual General Plan circulation elements. As the
administrator of the MPAH, OCTA is responsible for maintaining the integrity of the MPAH
system through its coordination with cities and the County and determinations of cities; and
County consistency with the MPAH. To aid in establishing consistency among plans, all
jurisdictions are encouraged to use common land use assumptions and travel demand projections.
OCTA facilitates the use of these common assumptions through administration of the Orange
County Transportation Analysis Model (OCTAM).
To maintain eligibility for all Measure M2 funding programs, the City of Rancho Santa
Margarita General Plan Circulation Element must be consistent with the MPAH. To demonstrate
consistency with the MPAH, the City of Rancho Santa Margarita shall have the minimum
planned carrying capacity equivalent to the MPAH. The “planned carrying capacity” shall be
measured by the number of through lanes on each arterial highway as shown on the Circulation
Element.
County of Orange Congestion Management Program
Urbanized areas such as Orange County are required to adopt a Congestion Management
Program (CMP). The goals of the CMP are to reduce traffic congestion and to provide a
mechanism for coordinating land use development and transportation improvement decisions.
The Congestion Management Program in effect in Orange County was approved by the (OCTA)
in 2011. OCTA has adopted a minimum Level of Service threshold of LOS “E” for CMP
facilities.
For the most part, the Orange County CMP is a composite of local agency submittals in which
each local jurisdiction develops the required data in accordance with the guidelines established
by OCTA. The OCTA compiles the data and submits the results to the Southern California
Association of Governments (SCAG) for a finding of regional consistency. The Foothill
Transportation Corridor (SR-241) is a roadway component of the Congestion Management Plan
system. Development projects in the City are required to evaluate whether there are project
impacts to the CMP system. An impact is defined as having project contribution of 0.03 or
greater (V/C or ICU). The City of Rancho Santa Margarita will continue to coordinate with
OCTA and the County of Orange to ensure that impacts to the SR-241 toll road are addressed,
consistent with sub regional initiatives.
                                                                          City of Rancho Santa Margarita

Circulation Element
Measure M Transportation Investment Plan (M2)
Measure M is the half cent sales tax for transportation improvements first approved by Orange
County voters in 1990, and renewed by voters for a 30-year extension in 2006. The combined
measures raise the sales tax in Orange County by one-half cent through 2041 to alleviate traffic
congestion. Under the first Measure M program (M1), more than $4 billion worth of
transportation improvements for Orange County were achieved. As a result, M1 was responsible
for adding 192 freeway lane miles, improving 170 intersections and 38 freeway interchanges,
and implementing Metrolink service in Orange County.
With the sunset of M1, voters approved a continuation of transportation improvements through
the Measure M Transportation Investment Plan (M2). By the year 2041, the M2 program plans to
deliver approximately $15.5 billion worth of transportation improvements to Orange County.
Major improvement plans target Orange County freeways, streets and roads, transit and
environmental programs.
OCTA Commuter Bikeways Strategic Plan
The 2009 Commuter Bikeways Strategic Plan (CBSP), developed by the Orange County
Transportation Authority (OCTA), encourages the enhancement of Orange County’s regional
bikeways network in order to make bicycle commuting a more viable and attractive option.
OCTA’s action plan includes improving the regional bikeway network (funding, encouraging,
and supporting where possible), external coordination (maintaining the Plan, facilitating
coordination), internal coordination, and addressing regional priorities. The plan is financially
unconstrained, so it is the responsibility of each implementing agency to identify funding sources
for the projects within their purview. The Circulation Element contains a bikeway plan that links
to CBSP routes.
Orange County Sustainable Communities Strategy
Although SCAG is also responsible for developing the Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS)
for the SCAG Region, SB 375 also allows for a subregional council of governments and county
transportation commission to work together to propose a subregional SCS. As one of these
subregions, Orange County has prepared its own subregional SCS (OC SCS). It was prepared by
the Orange County Council of Governments (OCCOG) and the Orange County Transportation
Authority (OCTA), in collaboration with multiple Orange County stakeholders including city
agencies, the County of Orange, County special districts, OCTA, the Center for Demographic
Research (CDR), the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans), and Transportation
Corridor Agencies.
The OC SCS begins with the setting of current population, housing, and employment in Orange
County, and then describes projected long-term trends for these socio-economic variables. The
resulting assessment is that a majority of Orange County’s projected growth of population,
housing, and employment will occur near existing and future job centers, which will positively
impact transportation patterns and therefore be beneficial to GHG emission reductions.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita

                                                                                  Circulation Element
Because of the interconnectedness between Orange County’s population, housing and
employment and the transportation systems that support them, the OC SCS also delineates the
foundational transportation systems that currently exist in Orange County. Transportation
systems described include freeways, arterial streets and local roads, rail and bus transit,
bikeways, and demand responsive services and transportation demand management.
Regional Transportation Plan
On April 4, 2012, the Regional Council of the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG) adopted the 2012-2035 Regional Transportation Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy
(RTP/SCS): Towards a Sustainable Future. The 2012–2035 RTP/SCS includes a strong
commitment to reduce emissions from transportation sources to comply with SB 375, improve
public health, and meet the National Ambient Air Quality Standards as set forth by the federal
Clean Air Act. As such, the 2012–2035 RTP/SCS contains a regional commitment for the broad
deployment of zero- and near-zero emission transportation technologies in the 2023–2035 time
frame and clear steps to move toward this objective.
The SCS focuses the majority of new housing and job growth in high-quality transit areas and
other opportunity areas in existing main streets, downtowns, and commercial corridors, resulting
in an improved jobs-housing balance and more opportunity for transit-oriented development.
This overall land use development pattern supports and complements the proposed transportation
network that emphasizes system preservation, active transportation, and transportation demand
management measures.
This RTP/SCS achieves greenhouse gas emission-reduction targets set by CARB by achieving a
9 percent reduction by 2020 and 16 percent reduction by 2035 compared to the 2005 level on a
per capita basis. This air quality benefit is made possible largely by more sustainable planning,
integrating transportation and land use decisions to allow Southern Californians to live closer to
where they work and play and to high-quality transit service. As a result, more residents will be
able to use transit and active transportation as a safe and attractive means of travel.
Air Quality Management Plan
The federal Clean Air Act requires preparation of plans to improve air quality in any region
designated as a non-attainment area. (A nonattainment area is a geographic area identified by the
Environmental Protection Agency and/or California Air Resources Board as not meeting state or
federal standards for a given pollutant). The plan must outline specific programs and strategies
and timelines for bringing the area into compliance with national and/or State air quality
standards.
The Air Quality Management Plan prepared by the South Coast Air Quality Management
District, first adopted in 1994 and updated on a three-year cycle, contains policies and measures
designed to achieve federal and state standards for healthier air quality in the South Coast Air
Basin (a non-attainment area). Many of the measures identified in the AQMP address circulation
improvements, since fossil-fuel-powered vehicles account for more than 60 percent of the NOx
emissions and 70 percent of the carbon monoxide emissions within the basin.
                                                                             City of Rancho Santa Margarita

Circulation Element
Planned Communities
Rancho Santa Margarita has been developed as a series of Planned Communities approved prior
to incorporation. The Planned Communities comprising the incorporated City include Rancho
Santa Margarita Planned Community, Rancho Trabuco Planned Community, Robinson Ranch
Planned Community, and Dove Canyon Planned Community. Each of the community plans
featured a planned roadway system of collector and local streets that interface with MPAH
roadways. These roadways are contained in the Circulation Plan described in this Element.
Relationship to
Other General
Plan Elements
According to State planning law, the Circulation Element must be independent, but consistent
with the other General Plan elements. All elements of the General Plan are interrelated to a
degree, and certain goals and policies of each element may also address issues that are the
primary subjects of other elements. The integration of overlapping issues throughout the General
Plan elements provides a strong basis for implementation of plans and programs, and
achievement of community goals. The Circulation Element relates most closely to the Land Use,
and Conservation and Open Space Elements.
The Land Use and Circulation Elements are inextricably linked. The planned development
identified in the Land Use Element is the basis for determining future road improvements. The
circulation policies and plans ensure that existing transportation facilities will be improved and
new facilities will be constructed to adequately serve traffic generated by planned development.
An efficient circulation system is a critical factor for diversifying and expanding local economic
activities. In addition, the Circulation Element promotes alternative transportation modes to
minimize the regional impacts of planned local development.
The Circulation Element provides for a trail system that accommodates bicycles and pedestrians.
Trails for these uses will connect with recreational areas and support the City’s recreational goals
articulated in the Open Space and Conservation Element. In addition to promoting bicycle and
pedestrian transportation, the Circulation Element promotes the use of public transit. Alternative
transportation modes will help achieve the air quality goals identified in the Conservation and
Open Space Element.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita

                                                                               Circulation Element
                                                        Issues, Goals and Policies
                            Rancho Santa Margarita is a community with a well-defined
                            circulation system featuring vehicular, public transit, bicycle, and
                            pedestrian components. An independent system is created by the
                            connection of this local system with a larger regional circulation
                            system. A safe and convenient circulation system operation is needed
                            to support a variety of land uses in the community.
Four major issues are addressed by the goals, policies and plans of the Circulation Element.
These major issues include: 1) providing a suitable system of City roadways; 2) successful
integration with the regional roadway system; 3) promotion of alternative modes of travel; and 4)
providing and maintaining an extensive trails network.
Local Circulation
System
Safe and convenient access to activities in the community can be provided by a well-designed
local roadway system. To allow for new development or redevelopment to occur without
negatively affecting the existing community, improvements to the circulation system may be
required.
Goal 1:        Provide a circulation system that keeps traffic moving while accommodating
               other modes and meeting other community values.
Policy 1.1:    Provide and maintain a City circulation system that promotes safety and satisfies
               the demand created by land uses in the Rancho Santa Margarita area. We require
               our roadways to:
                   •   Comply with federal, state and local design and safety standards.
                   •   Meet the needs of multiple transportation modes and users.
                   •   Be compatible with the streetscape and surrounding land uses.
                   •   Be maintained in accordance with best practices.
Policy 1.2:    Improve the Rancho Santa Margarita circulation system roadways in concert with
               land development to maintain sufficient levels of service.
Policy 1.3:    Coordinate improvements to and maintenance of the City circulation system with
               other major transportation improvement programs.
Policy 1.4:    Utilize traffic calming methods within residential areas where necessary to create
               a pedestrian-friendly circulation system, while accommodating local street
               patterns that unify neighborhoods whenever feasible.
                                                                          City of Rancho Santa Margarita

Circulation Element
Policy 1.5:       Apply creative traffic management approaches to address congestion in areas with
                  unique problems, such as schools, businesses with drive-through access, and other
                  special situations
Regional
Circulation System
Transportation and traffic congestion in Rancho Santa Margarita is directly related to an overall
transportation network for the region as surrounding city residents pass through Rancho Santa
Margarita on the Foothill Transportation Corridor (SR-241) and other major roadways. In
addition, a healthy economy depends on the ability of businesses to move their goods from one
location to another. To support the continued success of local businesses, the local circulation
system must provide adequate local and regional access. Planning for the needs of the
community necessarily includes recognition of the related transportation needs and planning
efforts of the surrounding cities, county, region, and state. With this recognition is the need for
the City to actively work with other public agencies responsible for transportation and
development in surrounding areas.
Goal 2:           Achieve a local circulation system that is integrated with the larger regional
                  transportation system to ensure the economic well-being of the community.
Policy 2.1:       Coordinate planning, construction and maintenance of local circulation
                  improvements with adjacent jurisdictions and transportation agencies.
Policy 2.2:       Work closely with adjacent jurisdictions and transportation agencies to ensure that
                  development projects outside Rancho Santa Margarita (e.g., development of
                  Rancho Mission Viejo, Trabuco Canyon and Ladera Ranch) do not adversely
                  impact the City or providers of public transportation service within the City.
Policy 2.3:       Monitor efforts to create additional freeway corridors or toll roads in the Rancho
                  Santa Margarita area and oppose such a link if unacceptable negative impacts to
                  Rancho Santa Margarita are created and cannot be mitigated to less than
                  significant levels.
Policy 2.4:       Reduce pollutants associated with vehicles and increasing traffic resulting from
                  development. Coordinate local traffic management reduction efforts with Orange
                  County Transportation Authority’s Congestion Management Plan.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita

                                                                                Circulation Element
Public
Transportation
System
Public transportation and alternative modes of travel, such as bicycling and walking, are an
important component of a comprehensive circulation system. Public and alternative modes of
transportation offer an alternative to the use of automobiles and help reduce air pollution and
road congestion. To promote the increased usage of these modes of transportation, adequate
facilities must be provided.
Goal 3:         Promote the increased use of multi-modal transportation.
Policy 3.1:     Maintain a proactive working partnership with transit providers to ensure that
                adequate public transit service is available, and encourage the increased use and
                expansion of public transportation opportunities.
Policy 3.2:     Monitor the effectiveness of regional alternative transportation programs, such as
                bus systems, providing service to the City.
Policy 3.3:     Work with regional transit agencies to encourage the provision of additional
                regional public transportation services and support facilities, such as park-and-
                ride lots.
Policy 3.4:     Collaborate with neighboring cities and regional transportation providers to
                encourage the provision of affordable transportation programs for elderly and
                youth to desirable locations in the region (e.g., malls, youth and senior program
                providers, the Inter-Generation Community Center (IGCC), and other senior and
                community centers).
Policy 3.5:     Incorporate design features into public improvement projects that promote and
                support the use of public and alternative modes of transportation.
Trails Network
Non-vehicular methods or modes of transportation offer an option to the traditional use of
automobiles. These modes of transportation, such as bicycling and walking, also help to reduce
roadway congestion and air pollution. Trail systems also provide recreational opportunities for
the community.
Goal 4:         Provide and maintain extensive public bikeway and community pedestrian
                networks that facilitate and encourage non-motorized travel throughout the
                City.
Policy 4.1:     Coordinate with other public and private organizations and jurisdictions to
                provide and maintain an extensive trails network in the Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                           City of Rancho Santa Margarita
Circulation Element
                   area that: supports bicycles and pedestrians; links to activity nodes within the
                   community; and is coordinated with the trail networks of adjacent jurisdictions.
Policy 4.2:        Enhance the biking and walking environment by providing and maintaining safe
                   and attractive sidewalks, walkways and bike lanes for both recreational and
                   commuting purposes. We require our on- and off-street pathways to:
                       •    Comply with federal, state and local design and safety standards.
                       •    Meet the needs of multiple types of users (families, commuters,
                            recreational beginners, exercise experts), and meet ADA standards and
                            guidelines.
                       •    Be compatible with the streetscape and surrounding land uses.
                       •    Be maintained in accordance with best practices.
Policy 4.3:        Protect public access to the trails network, and identify future opportunities to
                   enhance the network.
Related Goals
and Policies
The goals and policies described in the Circulation Element are related to and support subjects
included within other General Plan elements. In turn, many goals and policies from the other
elements directly or indirectly support the goals and policies of the Circulation Element. These
supporting goals and policies are identified in Table C-1.
                                                   Table C-1
                                   Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                                 Circulation Element Issue Areas
        General Plan            Local           Regional                Public
           Element          Circulation       Circulation         Transportation     Trails Network
                               System            System                System
                         1.1, 1.2, 1.3,   1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2.2,
        Land Use         2.1, 2.2, 2.4,   2.4, 2.6, 3.1, 3.2,   1.3, 2.1, 2.2, 2.4 1.3, 2.2, 2.4
                         2.6, 3.3         3.3
        Housing          1.1, 1.3, 1.4                          3.1
        Circulation
        Economic
                         1.3, 2.1, 2.5    1.2, 2.1              2.8                2.8
        Development
        Conservation/    1.3, 2.1, 6.1,
                                          1.3, 2.1, 6.1, 6.2    6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4 6.4
        Open Space       6.2, 6.3
                         2.1, 2.3, 2.5,
        Safety                            2.1, 2.3, 2.5, 3.8    2.1, 2.5, 3.7, 3.8 3.7, 3.8
                         3.7, 3.8
        Noise            2.1, 2.2, 2.3    2.1, 2.2, 2.3         2.1, 2.3
City of Rancho Santa Margarita

Circulation Element
                                                                        Circulation Plan
                            A diverse circulation system with vehicle, transit, pedestrian and
                            bicycle linkages supports the City. The local system connects with the
                            larger regional system. The operation of the two systems is
                            interdependent.    This section of the Element establishes the
                            Circulation Plan. The Plan summarizes the approach to ensure safe
and convenient operation of the circulation system and identifies improvements required to
accommodate traffic from planned development.
Vehicle transportation is presently the primary mode of travel. An Arterial Highway Plan is
established with hierarchical roadway designations, physical design standards for the roadway
designations, and service standards. The Arterial Highway Plan includes regional arterials and
anticipated regional traffic levels. The use of alternative modes of transportation is promoted to
reduce dependency on automobiles.
The Plan is based on the issues, goals, and policies identified in the previous section. The
Circulation Element Implementation Program, which is part of the General Plan Implementation
Program contained in Appendix A, is an extension of the Circulation Plan and contains specific
programs to coordinate planned development with vehicular and non-vehicular circulation
improvements.
Local Circulation
System
The arterial roadway system in Rancho Santa Margarita is defined using a hierarchical
classification system. Roadway functional classifications are differentiated by size, function, and
capacity. The arterial roadway functional classification system is derived directly from the
County Master Plan of Arterial Highways, since all City arterials were developed using County
standards. The dimensions and characteristics of local streets are determined in large part by
circulation systems contained in the community plans for each of the various Planned
Communities within the City.
There are four basic categories within the functional classification hierarchy in Rancho Santa
Margarita, ranging from a six-lane divided roadway with the highest capacity, to a two-lane
undivided roadway with the lowest capacity. The categories are briefly summarized below:
Major Arterial: The major arterial is generally a six-lane roadway section with a raised curbed
median, although an eight lane version of this classification (designated as a Principal arterial by
OCTA) can be accommodated if necessary (previously considered in at least one location in the
City). A Major arterial is designed with emphasis for automobile, goods movement, and/or
transit, and is designed to accommodate an upper limit of approximately 56,300 vehicle trips per
day. A Major arterial may consist of three through lanes, two left-turn lanes and a dedicated
right-turn lane. Major arterials may carry a large volume of regional through traffic not handled
937517.1
Circulation Element
by the toll road system. In the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, the three major arterial roadways
include Santa Margarita Parkway, Antonio Parkway and Alicia Parkway. The major arterial
roadway classification restricts on-street parking and provides pavement markings for Class II
on-street bike lanes.
Primary Arterials (Augmented): A primary arterial roadway is a four-lane divided (raised
median) roadway which may be designed with emphasis for automobile, goods movement,
transit, and/or bicycle. Primary arterials function similarly to major arterials. The principal
difference is capacity. A Primary arterial may consist of two through lanes, one left-turn lane
and a dedicated right-turn lane. An additional left-turn lane or optional right-turn lane may be
allowed if warranted by traffic demand. The primary arterial restricts on-street parking and
provides pavement markings for Class II on-street bike lanes. . While the Primary arterial
(Augmented) is designed to accommodate four through travel lanes, the pavement and right-of-
way (width) may be able to accommodate up to six-through travel lanes.
Secondary Arterials: A secondary arterial is also a four lane roadway, although it may be
divided or undivided. In the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, secondary arterials generally
include divided raised medians. A Secondary arterial serves to distribute traffic between local
streets and major and primary arterials. Along Secondary arterials, shoulders may accommodate
exclusive bike lanes or on-street parking. Sidewalks may be curb-adjacent or separated from the
roadway by a landscaped parkway. A Secondary arterial may consist of two through lanes, one
left-turn lane and a dedicated right-turn lane. An additional left-turn lane or optional right-turn
lane may be allowed if warranted by traffic demand. Many of the Secondary arterials within the
City of Rancho Santa Margarita effectively function as Primary arterials without the on-street
parking restrictions.
Collectors: Collector roadways move traffic from local streets to arterial roads. Unlike arterials,
collector roads are designed to provide access to residential areas. Two versions of the Collector
classification are shown on Exhibit 4-2. The “Collector – 2 Lanes Divided” may have a painted
or raised median which can be utilized where left turn pockets are needed while also providing a
shoulder for on-street parking or cyclists. Finally, the “Collector – 2 Lanes Undivided” is a
conventional two-lane section with shoulders that can accommodate on-street parking and / or
cyclists.
Figure C-2 shows the schematic or typical cross sections of each category of arterial and
collector roadway. These sections represent desirable standards, but variation in right-of-way
width and specific road improvements will occur in certain cases due to physical constraints
and/or right-of-way limitations. In particular, the median width of Major and Primary Arterials
will vary according to the area being served, right-of-way constraints and turn lane requirements.
Any of the arterial classifications may deviate from the standards where physical constraints
exist or where preservation of community character dictates special treatment. Bikeways and
sidewalks also affect the specific standards applied to various facilities. Another design
consideration is the need to comply with MPAH capacity requirements. The overriding
circulation goal is that all roadways keep traffic moving while providing for other modes of
transportation and meeting other community values.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita

                                                                     Circulation Element
Figure C-2. Typical Roadway Cross-Sections (GPCE Traffic Study Exhibit 4-2)
                                                                City of Rancho Santa Margarita
Circulation Element
Performance Criteria
Evaluating the ability of the circulation system to serve the desired future land uses requires
establishing suitable “performance criteria.” These are the means by which future traffic
volumes are compared to future circulation system capacity, and the adequacy of that circulation
system assessed. The technical evaluation of the Rancho Santa Margarita roadway system was
conducted with volume-to-capacity (V/C) ratios. V/C ratios are calculated based on existing or
future average daily traffic (ADT) volumes and daily capacity values for the various types of
arterials. Daily capacity values for the city’s roadway geometric classifications are provided in
Table C-2. Based on the V/C ratio, each study area roadway segment is classified into one of
four categories; Acceptable (V/C 0.00-0.79), Approaching Capacity (V/C 0.80-1.00), Potentially
Exceeds Capacity (V/C 1.01-1.25), and Exceeds Capacity (V/C > 1.26). As the V/C ratio
approaches or exceeds the average daily vehicle capacity thresholds, roadway capacity may be
expanded by restricting on-street parking, improving signal timing, widening intersections, and
adding through and turn lanes.
                                                     Table C-2.
                              Roadway Classifications and Daily Capacities1
              Roadway Geometry Classification                                 Capacity
              Major Arterial – 6 Lanes Divided                      56,300     Vehicles Per Day
              Primary Arterial – 4 Lanes Divided                    37,500     Vehicles Per Day
              Secondary Arterial – 4 Lanes Divided                  31,300     Vehicles Per Day
              Collector – 2 Lanes Divided                           18,800     Vehicles Per Day
              Collector – 2 Lane Undivided                          12,500     Vehicles Per Day
                1   These roadway capacities are approximate figures only, and are used at the General
                    Plan level. They are affected by such factors as intersections (numbers &
                    configuration), degrees of access control, roadway grades, design geometrics
                    (horizontal & vertical alignment).
The roadway segment V/C analysis is used as a planning tool to evaluate the adequacy of
roadway segment capacities; however, a level of service deficiency occurs when adjacent
intersections experience LOS D or worse conditions during one of the peak hours (Table C-3). A
V/C ratio of greater than 1.01 to 1.25 suggests that additional review is required; however, if
adjacent intersections provide the lanes needed to achieve acceptable peak hour LOS, then segment
capacity improvements between key intersections may not be needed.
Due to the generalized nature of ADT capacities, the daily capacity values in Table C-2 are
typically viewed as general rather than absolute guides for estimating levels of service and sizing
the future roadway system. A more detailed intersection evaluation (using peak hour level of
service ranges, such as those shown in Table C-4) will be carried out for individual projects.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita

                                                                                            Circulation Element
                                                  Table C-3.
                               Circulation System Performance Criteria
                Peak Hour Intersection Performance Policy for Future Development
                Projects
                   Level of Service D – All signalized intersections
                   Peak hour level of service is based on peak hour intersection capacity
                   utilization (ICU) values calculated using the following assumptions:
                      •  Saturation Flow Rate: 1,700 vehicles/hour/lane
                      •  Clearance Interval: .05
                      •  “De-facto” right-turn lane is assumed in the ICU calculation if 19 feet
                         from edge to outside of through-lane exists and parking is prohibited
                         during peak periods.
                                                  Table C-4.
                                  Peak Hour Level of Service Ranges
                                   Intersection                Average Vehicle Delay
                                     Capacity
               Level of Service
                                    Utilization          Signalized              Unsignalized
                    (LOS)
                                      (ICU)
               A                   0.00 - 0.60    0 - 10.00 seconds         0 - 10.00 seconds
               B                   0.61 - 0.70    10.01 - 20.00 seconds     10.01 - 15.00 seconds
               C                   0.71 - 0.80    20.01 - 35.00 seconds     15.01 - 25.00 seconds
               D                   0.81 - 0.90    35.01 - 55.00 seconds     25.01 - 35.00 seconds
               E                   0.91 - 1.00    55.01 - 80.00 seconds     35.01 - 50.00 seconds
               F                   Above 1.00     Above 80.00 seconds       Above 50.00 seconds
Development proposals and amendments within Planned Communities will be reviewed for
consistency with transportation infrastructure and fee requirements established in approved
development plans and agreements.
Relationship to Land Use
Future traffic volumes and highway capacity needs are directly related to future land use. A
refined version of the Orange County Transportation Analysis Model (OCTAM) has been used
to evaluate future vehicular traffic conditions. Cumulative growth to 2035 includes full
occupancy of residential and non-residential land uses projected for buildout of the City’s
General Plan. Even though the City of Rancho Santa Margarita is nearly built out, additional
future growth has been identified for the Circulation Element to ensure that the analysis reflects
the potential for increased future traffic.
                                                                                       City of Rancho Santa Margarita

Circulation Element
The proposed Arterial Highway Plan presented in the next section is designed to accommodate
current and anticipated regional traffic levels, including the development of the northeast area
future planned community (Robinson Ridge).
General Plan Circulation System
The circulation element goals and policies emphasize the need for a circulation system capable
of serving existing and future traffic, and successfully integrating that system with a regional
circulation network. The location and design of the circulation system have major impacts on air
quality, noise, community appearance and other environmental resources. The Rancho Santa
Margarita General Plan Circulation Plan depicted in Figure C-3 delineates the planned
circulation system.
Truck Traffic
Rancho Santa Margarita experiences moderate amounts of truck traffic generated by commercial
and light industrial uses. Truck traffic will increase in future years to support new businesses.
Noise impacts and congestion can be caused by truck traffic in urban areas. To avoid such
impacts on a case-by-case basis, streets can be evaluated in the future for implementation of
weight restrictions should problems occur. Given the current roadway system, such problems
are not anticipated.
Neighborhood Traffic Safety
One of the major components of the Circulation Plan is the importance of non-vehicular modes
of transportation. To increase the number of people using non-automobile means of
transportation, an existing and safe transportation network has to be in place. This network
should include crosswalks, grade separations (bridges), and walkways that ensure the safety of
pedestrians and bicyclists. Where appropriate, traffic calming devices should be considered to
reduce speeds on neighborhood streets. Special traffic problems caused by schools, businesses
with drive-through access, and land uses that generate high traffic volumes at specific times will
be studied and solutions developed to reduce the impact of increased traffic on neighborhoods.
The City will continue to work with homeowner associations to ensure that sufficient
improvements are in place to serve the needs of pedestrians and bicyclists, to investigate the
potential for traffic calming devices in neighborhoods, and to assess and mitigate the impacts of
special traffic problems.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                   Circulation Element
Figure C-3
General Plan Roadway Network (GPCE Traffic Study Exhibit 4-3)
                                                              City of Rancho Santa Margarita
Circulation Element
Regional Circulation
System
Southern California has experienced rapid urban growth within the last three decades. The
success of existing and future development is in part dependent on the availability of an effective
regional transportation system. The system must link localities with outside commerce centers
and regional transportation hubs. In addition, the regional circulation system must meet the
needs of local residents. Rancho Santa Margarita is well connected with the regional system.
The Foothill Transportation Corridor (SR-241) bisects the planning area and provides
connections with other freeways in Orange, Riverside, and Los Angeles Counties, and beyond.
Once completed, this toll way will connect Rancho Santa Margarita with San Clemente to the
south, providing direct access to San Diego County.
Ensuring adequate circulation for residents and businesses will require coordination with
regional and state transportation planning efforts, as well as with adjacent jurisdictions.
Development projects outside the City, including, development of Rancho Mission Viejo (“The
Ranch:), Trabuco Canyon and Ladera Ranch, will be monitored to ensure that they do not
adversely impact circulation in Rancho Santa Margarita. In addition, the City will monitor
efforts to develop additional regional freeways/toll roads and oppose any proposed project that
creates unacceptable negative impacts on City circulation.
Public Transportation and Trails Network
One of the key components of the Circulation Plan is to promote the use of alternative modes
such as transit, bicycling and walking. Increasing the use of alternative transportation modes
will produce a number of community benefits, including reduced traffic, less need for costly
roadway improvement projects and improved air quality. Facilities for biking and walking
provide recreational opportunities as well.
The Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) provides fixed route bus service within
the City of Rancho Santa Margarita and neighboring jurisdictions as shown on Figure C-4.
Fixed route service represents established routes that follow fixed timetables. OCTA currently
provides two fixed routes that operate within and through the City of Rancho Santa Margarita
serving residential, business and educational institutions. OCTA reviews and updates fixed route
bus service periodically, and makes adjustments to the system as needed to address ridership,
budgetary and other factors. Bus stops are generally placed by OCTA on public rights of way.
These stops may include signage only, bus bench, shelter or other amenities. Maintenance of bus
stops is provided either by OCTA or by the City according to an agreement.
Transit ridership in some communities is high enough to warrant a transit node or center. Transit
nodes often host multiple routes that overlap or converge for efficient transfers from one bus to
another. Transit nodes may be located within shopping centers, school campuses or other transit-
dense locations. As the City of Rancho Santa Margarita matures, a transit node may be
considered to facilitate commuter express bus service, fixed route bus service, connections to the
Irvine Station Metrolink station and carpools.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita

                                                                Circulation Element
Figure C-4
Potential Transit Network (GPCE Traffic Study Exhibit 4-6)
                                                           City of Rancho Santa Margarita
Circulation Element
The City has in place an extensive network of bicycle routes and trails. The proposed bikeway
network is presented in Figure C-5. Table C-6 summarizes the three bikeway classifications
present within the City. As Figure C-5 indicates, the bikeway system is composed of a network
of Class I off-road bike trails within O’Neill Regional Park, Class II bike lanes along major and
primary arterial roadways, and unmarked shared bike lanes (Class III). Class I bike trails are
also described in the Open Space and Conservation Element.
The City will continue to enhance the bikeway system as roadway signing and striping
improvements occur. Bikeway projects will focus primarily on the following:
     ♦ Along the Bike Lane routes designated on the General Plan Bikeway Network,
          implement on-street parking restrictions, and
     ♦ Along the routes that are designated for “Shared Lane Markings Adjacent to On-Street
          Parking,” implement pavement markings or signs at the discretion of Public
          Works/Engineering.
                                                      Table C-6
                                     Bikeway Classification Descriptions
             Type       Description
             Class I    Bicycle paths with exclusive rights-of-way intended to serve cyclists with the
                        safest means of travel, such as the route through O’Neill Regional Park.
                        Pedestrians and cyclists use these routes.
             Class II   Bicycle lanes along the curb lane of a street or highway, such as along Santa
                        Margarita Parkway or Antonio Parkway. The path provides for one-way travel
                        and is generally delineated with special striping and signage to restrict on-street
                        parking.
             Class III  Bike routes for shared use with pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic. Pavement
                        markings and/or signs for shared use of outside travel lanes should be considered
                        on Secondary and Collector roads where on-street parking or physical constraints
                        prohibit the provision of on-street bike lanes.
           Source: AASHTO (2012), Caltrans (2012) and Orange County Commuter Bikeways Strategic Plan
           (CBSP, 2009).
Enhanced local pedestrian linkages exist throughout the City (see Figure C-6). The goal is to
link residential areas, schools, parks and commercial centers so that residents can travel within
the community without driving. New development projects will be required to include safe and
attractive sidewalks, walkways, and bike lanes, and homeowners associations will be encouraged
to construct links to adjacent areas and communities where appropriate.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita

                                                      Circulation Element
Figure C-5
Bikeway Network (GPCE Traffic Study Exhibit 4-5)
                                                 City of Rancho Santa Margarita
Circulation Element
Figure C-6
Pedestrian Network (GPCE Traffic Study Exhibit 4-4)
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                             Circulation Element
Transportation System and Demand Management
The efficiency of the circulation system will be improved with transportation system
management (TSM) and transportation demand management (TDM) strategies. TSM involves
physical improvements to the circulation infrastructure to expand capacity and increase traffic
flow, while TDM involves reducing the demand for vehicular transportation. In addition to
enhancing the operation of the circulation system, TSM and TDM strategies provide relief from
increasing demands for more improvements to transportation facilities.
Traffic signal coordination and intersection capacity improvements will be implemented as
needed to improve traffic flow. Fees for traffic impacts of new development will be collected
according to established local and regional fee programs.
The City will support the implementation of the employer TDM provisions of the South Coast
Air Quality Management District Air Quality Management Plan and participate in regional
efforts to implement TDM requirements. Programs to increase transit ridership and use of non-
vehicular transportation such as walking and bicycling will be pursued.
Transportation Financing
Implementing circulation improvements to accommodate planned growth will require financing.
Funding for transportation improvements is available from several local, state, and federal
sources. The City will identify available funding sources and establish a Development
Mitigation Program, Comprehensive Phasing Program, Performance Monitoring Program and
Capital Improvement Program to guide construction and funding of transportation system
improvements.
The standards and programs required to qualify for revenue from the Congestion Management
Plan and Measure M2 will be applied in the planning area. Circulation improvements to
accommodate new development projects will be constructed and/or funded by project
proponents. Fees will be collected for traffic impacts of new development in accordance with
established fee programs.
                                                                        City of Rancho Santa Margarita
                                   68
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
                                                                                           Conservation/Open Space Element
                                                     Table of Contents
Section                                                                                                                                     Page
Introduction .....................................................................................................................................1
        Purpose of the Conservation/Open Space Element .............................................................1
        Scope and Content of the Conservation/Open Space Element ............................................1
        Related Plans and Programs ................................................................................................2
        Relationship to Other General Plan Elements .....................................................................6
Issues, Goals and Policies ................................................................................................................8
        Ecological and Biological Resources ..................................................................................8
        Scenic Resources .................................................................................................................9
        Water Supply and Conservation ..........................................................................................9
        Water Quality.....................................................................................................................10
        Air Quality .........................................................................................................................10
        Energy Conservation..........................................................................................................11
        Cultural Resources .............................................................................................................11
        Related Goals and Policies ................................................................................................12
Conservation/Open Space Plan .....................................................................................................13
        Ecological and Biological Resources ................................................................................13
            Sensitive Resources .....................................................................................................13
            Parks and Recreation ...................................................................................................17
        Scenic Resources ...............................................................................................................22
            Natural Scenic Qualities ..............................................................................................22
            Architecture and Landscape Design Standards ...........................................................25
        Water Supply and Conservation ........................................................................................25
            Santa Margarita Water District ....................................................................................27
            Trabuco Canyon Water District ...................................................................................27
            Conservation in Rancho Santa Margarita ....................................................................28
        Water Quality.....................................................................................................................28
        Air Quality .........................................................................................................................30
        Energy Conservation..........................................................................................................31
        Cultural Resources .............................................................................................................31
                                                                                                              City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                                         i                                                             General Plan
Conservation/Open Space Element
                                                    List of Tables
Table                                                                                                                                Page
COS-1 Conservation/Open Space Related Goals and Policies by Element ...............................12
COS-2 Existing Parks and Facilities in Rancho Santa Margarita...............................................20
COS-3 Active and Passive Parkland in Rancho Santa Margarita...............................................21
                                                   List of Figures
Figure                                                                                                                               Page
COS-1 Open Space Resources ...................................................................................................14
COS-2 Vegetation Communities ................................................................................................16
COS-3 Park Sites ........................................................................................................................18
COS-4 Scenic Highways.............................................................................................................24
COS-5 Water District Service Areas ..........................................................................................26
COS-6 Surface Water Sources....................................................................................................29
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                                  ii                                                          December 2002
                                                          Conservation/Open Space Element
                                                                        Introduction
                       The uniqueness of Rancho Santa Margarita is due, in large part, to its
                       many natural and open space resources including creeks, parks,
                       vegetation and scenic vistas. The Conservation/Open Space Element
                       focuses on the preservation and enhancement of these resources to
                       ensure a high quality living environment in future years.
        Purpose of the The Rancho Santa Margarita Conservation/Open Space Element
         Conservation/ meets the State requirements for Conservation and Open Space
                       elements as defined in Sections 65302(d) and 65302(e) of the
 Open Space Element    Government Code.           According to these requirements, the
                       Conservation element must contain goals and policies to protect and
                       maintain natural resources such as water, soils, wildlife, and
                       minerals, and prevent wasteful resource exploitation and destruction.
                       The Open Space element must address several open space
                       categories, such as those used for the preservation of natural
                       resources, outdoor recreation, as well as open space maintained for
                       public health and safety. This last category of open space is
                       addressed in the Safety Element. Additionally, while air quality is
                       not a State-mandated element, air quality is included in the
                       Conservation/Open Space Element to address reducing pollutant
                       levels through stationary source, mobile source, transportation and
                       land use control, and
                       energy      conservation
                       measures. Because the
                       subjects required to be
                       addressed under the
                       Conservation element
                       and Open Space element
                       overlap     substantially,
                       the two elements have
                       been combined for this
                       Plan.
   Scope and Content   The Conservation/Open Space Element expresses community goals
 of the Conservation/  to protect environmental resources and open space. Resources
                       addressed in this Element include: a) ecological and biological
           Open Space  resources; b) scenic resources; c) water supply and conservation; d)
              Element  water quality; and e) and energy conservation. Because daily
                                                                     City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                          1                                               General Plan
Conservation/Open Space Element
                               activities in Rancho Santa Margarita affect air quality outside City
                               boundaries, regional air quality issues are also addressed in this
                               Element.
                               The Conservation/Open Space Element is comprised of three
                               sections: 1) this Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals and Policies; and 3)
                               the Conservation/Open Space Plan. In the Issues, Goals and Policies
                               section, community open space needs and resource management
                               issues are identified and corresponding goals and policies are
                               established. The goals, which are overall statements of the City’s
                               desires, are comprised of broad statements of purpose and direction.
                               The policies serve as guidelines for planning and maintaining
                               recreational facilities, enhancing the natural amenities of Rancho
                               Santa Margarita and minimizing the environmental effects of
                               planned development.
           Related Plans       The plans and programs described below relate to resources
          and Programs         addressed in the Conservation/Open Space Element.
                               Federal Endangered Species Act
                               The Federal Endangered Species Act (ESA), administered by the
                               U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, applies to federally listed species and
                               habitat occupied by federally listed species. Federally listed species
                               are most likely to occur within riparian habitat areas in the City’s
                               floodplains, canyons and hillsides. ESA Section 9 forbids specified
                               acts that directly or indirectly harm listed species. Section 9 also
                               prohibits “taking” any species of wildlife or fish listed as
                               endangered. These restrictions apply to all federal agencies and all
                               persons subject to United States jurisdiction.
                               U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and Department of Fish and
                               Game Regulations
                               Both the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department
                               of Fish and Game have regulations to protect wildlife resources.
                               Special permits are required for the alteration, dredging, or any
                               activity in a lake or stream, as well as other activities that may affect
                               fish and game habitat. Both agencies also regulate impacts to
                               sensitive plant and animal species as described above. Future
                               development in Rancho Santa Margarita that has the potential to
                               affect wildlife habitat will be subject to the regulations of these
                               federal and state agencies.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                         2                                      December 2002

                                                Conservation/Open Space Element
              Federal Clean Water Act
              The Federal Clean Water Act (CWA), administered by the
              Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), employs a variety of
              regulatory and non-regulatory tools to sharply reduce direct pollutant
              discharges into waterways, finance municipal wastewater treatment
              facilities, and manage polluted runoff. These tools are employed to
              achieve the broader goal of restoring and maintaining the chemical,
              physical, and biological integrity of the nation's waters so that they
              can support the protection and propagation of fish, shellfish, and
              wildlife.
              For many years following the passage of CWA in 1972, efforts
              focused on regulating discharges from traditional point source
              facilities, such as sewage plants and industrial facilities, with little
              attention paid to runoff from streets, construction sites, farms, and
              other wet-weather sources. Starting in the late 1980s, efforts to
              address polluted runoff have increased significantly, primarily
              through voluntary programs, including cost-sharing with landowners
              who must manage runoff. Also, there has been a slight shift from a
              pollutant-by-pollutant and source-by-source approach to holistic
              watershed-based strategies.
              California Environmental Quality Act
              The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by
              the State legislature in response to a public mandate for thorough
              environmental analysis of projects impacting the environment. The
              provisions of the law and environmental review procedures are
              described in the CEQA statutes and CEQA Guidelines. CEQA will
              continue to be instrumental in ensuring that the environmental
              impacts associated with local development projects are appropriately
              assessed and mitigated.
              California Endangered Species Act
              The California Endangered Species Act (CESA) (Fish & Game Code
              §§2050, et. seq.) generally parallels the main provisions of the
              Federal Endangered Species Act and is administered by the
              California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). CESA prohibits
              the “taking” of listed species except as otherwise provided in State
              law. Any future development or redevelopment in Rancho Santa
              Margarita that has the potential to affect wildlife will be subject to
              the restrictions contained in CESA.
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                   3                                             General Plan

Conservation/Open Space Element
                               National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
                               Rancho Santa Margarita is under the jurisdiction of the San Diego
                               Regional Water Quality Control Board (SDRWQCB), which
                               implements the NPDES permit for the San Diego area (including
                               southern Orange County). The NPDES permit, a requirement under
                               the Clean Water Act, addresses pollution from urban runoff that
                               impacts water quality of receiving waters (such as streams and
                               lakes). Under the NPDES permit, each jurisdiction must implement
                               measures to reduce urban runoff during all phases of development:
                               planning, construction and existing uses. Requirements include
                               incorporating Best Management Practices to reduce runoff from
                               construction and existing uses, reporting any violations to the
                               SDRWQCB and education regarding the negative water quality
                               impacts from urban runoff.
                               South Coast Air Quality Management Plan
                               The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) mandates a
                               variety of measures to reduce traffic congestion and improve air
                               quality.    These measures include the requirement that each
                               jurisdiction develop an air quality component within its General
                               Plan.
                               County of Orange General Plan Resources Element
                               The County of Orange General Plan Resources Element includes an
                               inventory of the Countywide resources, such as wildlife, energy,
                               water, air and open space. The Element also includes goals, policies
                               and programs for development, management, preservation and
                               conservation of the County resources. This Element provides
                               sources of regional information affecting Rancho Santa Margarita
                               and identifies resource policies and programs that apply to the
                               unincorporated northeast portion of the Rancho Santa Margarita
                               planning area.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                       4                                  December 2002
                                                 Conservation/Open Space Element
              National Recreation and Park Association
                                   The National Recreation and Park Association
                                   (NRPA) is a membership organization that
                                   focuses on advancing parks, recreation and
                                   environmental conservation efforts that enhance
                                   the quality of life for all people. The NRPA
                                   provides many services related to parks and
                                   recreation, including the development of youth
                                   programs, parks and recreation career
                                   information, safety and education. The NRPA
                                   also publishes national guidelines for parks and
                                   recreation development and conservation.
              California Subdivision Map Act
              Section 66477 of the Government Code provides local jurisdictions
              with the authority to acquire parklands in association with new land
              divisions. This provision of State law allows a city, by ordinance, to
              require the dedication of land, dedication of improvements, payment
              of an in-lieu fee, or any combination of these items, for park and
              recreational purposes as a condition on approving a subdivision map.
              Master Plan of Local Parks
              The County of Orange Master Plan of Local Parks is designed to
              meet the local recreation needs of the unincorporated county area. In
              conjunction with the Local Park Code, the Master Plan of Local
              Parks is intended to provide for comprehensive local park planning
              and programming.
              Master Plan of Regional Riding and Hiking Trails
              The County of Orange Master Plan of Regional Riding and Hiking
              Trails includes an inventory of existing and proposed trails, and
              standards and criteria for the provision of new trails. This plan also
              provides policies and programs to implement the future development
              and operation of the Countywide trails system to which Rancho
              Santa Margarita links.
              Master Plan of Regional Recreation Facilities
              The County of Orange Master Plan of Regional Recreational
              Facilities includes an inventory of existing and proposed regional
              parks, County harbors, marine life refuges, County beaches and
              historical sites. The purpose of the plan is to provide a countywide
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                   5                                             General Plan
Conservation/Open Space Element
                               regional recreation network to meet the needs of present and future
                               residents of Orange County.
                               County of Orange Recreation Element
                               The Recreation Element of the County of Orange General Plan
                               provides an inventory of existing and proposed parks and open
                               space, and includes the Local Parks, Regional Trails and Regional
                               Recreation Facilities Master Plans. O’Neill Regional Park is located
                               within Rancho Santa Margarita and is subject to the County
                               Recreation Element.
                               Planned Communities
                               Rancho Santa Margarita has been developed as a series of Planned
                               Communities prior to incorporation. The Planned Communities
                               comprising the incorporated City include Rancho Santa Margarita
                               Planned Community, Rancho Trabuco Planned Community,
                               Robinson Ranch Planned Community, and Dove Canyon Planned
                               Community. In addition, the planning area includes the Northeast
                               Rancho Santa Margarita Planned Community located outside of the
                               existing City boundaries.        This future Planned Community
                               designation includes provisions for recreational and open space
                               resources.
         Relationship to       The Conservation/Open Space Element must be consistent with the
           Other General       other General Plan elements and all elements of the General Plan are
                               interrelated to a degree. Certain goals and policies of one element
          Plan Elements        may also address issues that are the primary subjects of other
                               elements. Table COS-1 located in the following section identifies
                               related goals and policies by General Plan element. The integration
                               of overlapping issues throughout the General Plan elements provides
                               a strong basis for the implementation of plans and programs and
                               achievement of community goals. The Conservation/Open Space
                               Element most closely relates to the Land Use and Safety Elements.
                               The Land Use Element provides a planned land use pattern with the
                               following general land use designations: Residential; Commercial
                               and Business; Public/Quasi Public; Open Space and Other land use
                               designations. The more specific Parks, Open Space, Open Space
                               Golf and Regional Open Space designations are applied to public
                               and private lands that are intended for conservation, open space, and
                               recreational uses. These designations apply to areas that have an
                               abundance of natural resources, visual resources, recreational value,
                               and/or public safety concerns.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        6                                   December 2002

                                                Conservation/Open Space Element
              The Safety Element relates to the Conservation/Open Space Element
              by identifying hazard-prone areas such as floodplains, potentially
              unstable hillside areas and seismic hazard areas that should be
              conserved as open space.
                                                          City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                 7                                             General Plan
Conservation/Open Space Element
                                                          Issues, Goals and Policies
                               Rancho Santa Margarita possesses valuable assets in the form of its
                               open space and natural resources. Conservation and enhancement of
                               these assets can be accomplished by addressing certain issues
                               affecting the City.        The goals, policies, and plan in the
                               Conservation/Open Space Element address six major issues
                               including: 1) ecological and biological resources; 2) scenic
                               resources; 3) water supply and conservation; 4) water quality; 5) air
                               quality; and 6) energy conservation. Each issue and the related goals
                               and policies are included in this section of the Conservation/Open
                               Space Element.
          Ecological and       Rancho Santa Margarita contains important ecological and biological
 Biological Resources          resources such as Tijeras and Trabuco Creeks, O’Neill Regional
                               Park, and the natural plants and wildlife that inhabit them. In a
                               region of growth and urbanization, these resources are threatened by
                               the encroachment of urban development. To conserve these
                               important resources for future generations and to preserve the quality
                               of life in the community, these important ecological and biological
                               resources need to be protected.
                               Goal 1:       Protect and enhance the significant ecological and
                                             biological resources within and surrounding the
                                             community.
                               Policy 1.1: Preserve ecological and biological resources by
                                             maintaining these resources as open space.
                               Policy 1.2: Continue to preserve the coast live oak woodlands in
                                             the City by retaining the habitat as open space.
                               Policy 1.3: Protect and enhance the creeks, lakes and adjacent
                                             wetlands for their value in providing visual amenity,
                                             habitat for wildlife and recreational opportunities.
                               Policy 1.4: Through land use planning, environmental review, and
                                             conditions placed on development projects, reduce the
                                             impact of urban development on important ecological
                                             and biological resources, including the beneficial uses
                                             of receiving waters.
                               Policy 1.5: Coordinate with local, regional, state and federal
                                             agencies with jurisdiction over parks and open space in
                                             the community to secure permanent access easements
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        8                                     December 2002

                                                            Conservation/Open Space Element
                                     for passive recreational and trail purposes where
                                     needed.
                        Policy 1.6: Coordinate with park owners and operators to convert
                                     existing passive parkland to active recreational space.
                        Policy 1.7: Establish and ensure maintenance of a standard of 3
                                     acres of active park land per 1,000 population.
                 Scenic Rancho Santa Margarita is rich with scenic resources such as Lake
              Resources Santa Margarita, its ridgelines, creeks, open space and views of the
                        surrounding hillsides. These resources provide open vistas and
                        variety in the scenic quality of the City. The preservation of these
                        resources is key to maintaining the community’s character and
                        identity.
                        Goal 2:      Maintain community character and identity by
                                     protecting the City’s scenic resources and vistas.
                        Policy 2.1: Maintain scenic resources, such as the City’s hillsides,
                                     ridgelines and surface water resources as open space.
                        Policy 2.2: Encourage and maintain high-quality architectural and
                                     landscaping design to preserve the community’s visual
                                     character.
         Water Supply   The City depends on imported water for its urban activities. Urban
    and Conservation    development depends on adequate supplies of water. The City must
                        promote the conservation of water resources in order to sustain
                        existing and future economic and population growth.
                        Goal 3:      Promote an adequate supply of water through the
                                     conservation of water resources.
                        Policy 3.1: Coordinate water supply programs with responsible
                                     local, regional state and federal agencies.
                        Policy 3.2: Encourage the production, distribution, and use of
                                     recycled water.
                        Policy 3.3: Participate in and implement local and regional
                                     programs that promote water conservation.
                        Policy 3.4: Promote water conservation in residential and non-
                                     residential uses.
                                                                       City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                            9                                               General Plan

                                                            Conservation/Open Space Element
        Water Quality   The City contains ground and surface water resources (Lake Santa
                        Margarita, the Upper Oso Reservoir, Tijeras Canyon Creek, and
                        Trabuco Creek) that are subject to various sources of pollution
                        associated with urban runoff. To protect public safety and these
                        water resources the quality of our water resources needs to be
                        monitored and protected.
                        Goal 4:      Promote a safe supply of potable water for
                                     community uses.
                        Policy 4.1: Coordinate water quality programs with responsible
                                     local, regional, state and federal agencies.
                        Policy 4.2: Participate in applicable and enforceable local, regional,
                                     state, and federal efforts to protect and enhance potable
                                     water quality.
                        Policy 4.3: Encourage the development of new water sources, and
                                     encourage efforts for development of new water sources
                                     by the Santa Margarita and Trabuco Canyon Water
                                     Districts.
                        Goal 5:      Protect the beneficial uses of ground and surface
                                     waters.
                        Policy 5.1: To the maximum extent practicable, adopt and enforce
                                     regulations and engage in educational efforts to
                                     eliminate pollution from urban runoff.
                        Policy 5.2: Preserve, and where possible, create or restore areas
                                     that provide important water quality benefits, such as
                                     riparian corridors, wetlands, and buffer zones.
                        Policy 5.3: Limit disturbances of natural water bodies and natural
                                     drainage systems caused by development including
                                     roads, highways and bridges.
            Air Quality Air quality within the South Coast Air Basin does not presently meet
                        state and federal standards. Cooperation among all agencies in the
                        basin is necessary to achieve desired improvements to air quality.
                        Rancho Santa Margarita can participate and contribute its share to
                        those efforts by proper planning and participation in regional air
                        quality management programs.
                                                                       City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                           10                                               General Plan
                                                          Conservation/Open Space Element
                      Goal 6:       Cooperate with local and regional agencies to
                                    improve air quality.
                      Policy 6.1: Cooperate with the South Coast Air Quality
                                    Management District and Southern California
                                    Association of Governments in their efforts to
                                    implement the regional Air Quality Management Plan.
                      Policy 6.2: Integrate air quality planning with land use, economic
                                    development, and transportation planning.
                      Policy 6.3: Encourage the expansion and retention of local serving
                                    retail businesses (e.g., restaurants, family medical
                                    offices, drug stores) to reduce the number and length of
                                    automobile trips to comparable services located in other
                                    jurisdictions.
                      Policy 6.4: Encourage alternative modes of transportation, such as
                                    walking, biking, and public transportation to reduce
                                    emissions associated with automobile use.
 Energy Conservation  Urban development depends on adequate supplies and distribution of
                      energy. The City must promote the conservation of energy in order
                      to sustain existing and future economic and population growth.
                      Goal 7:       Encourage energy conservation.
                      Policy 7.1: Participate in local, regional, and state programs that
                                    promote energy conservation and alternative energy
                                    sources.
                      Policy 7.2: Collaborate with energy suppliers and distributors to
                                    institute energy conservation programs, and inform the
                                    public of these programs.
                      Policy 7.3: Enforce building code requirements and                     apply
                                    standards that promote energy conservation.
   Cultural Resources Rancho Santa Margarita contains important archeological and
                      palentological sites. In a region of growth and urbanization, these
                      resources are threatened by the encroachment of urban development.
                      Goal 8:       Preserve and protect historical, archaeological, and
                                    palentological resources.
                                                                      City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                          11                                               General Plan
Conservation/Open Space Element
                                 Policy 8.1: Balance the benefits of development with a project’s
                                                potential impacts to existing cultural resources.
                                 Policy 8.2: Identify, designate, and protect sites of historic
                                                importance.
           Related Goals         The goals and policies in the Conservation/Open Space Element are
             and Policies        directly related to and support subjects included in other General
                                 Plan elements. In turn, many goals and policies from other elements
                                 directly support the goals and policies of the Conservation/Open
                                 Space Element. These supporting goals and policies are identified in
                                 Table COS-1.
                                                  Table COS-1
                                     Conservation/Open Space Related
                                        Goals and Policies by Element
                                           Conservation/Open Space Element Issue Areas
 General Plan       Ecological
                                                  Water Supply
 Element                and           Scenic                         Water                          Energy
                                                        and                       Air Quality
                     Biological     Resources                        Quality                    Conservation
                                                  Conservation
                     Resources
                  1.3, 1.5, 2.4,
                                                  5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3,
 Land Use         12.1, 12.2,     2.1, 2.3, 2.6                                  3.3
                                                  5.4, 5.5, 5.6  4.4, 5.1, 5.4
                  12.4, 12.5
 Housing          1.7             2.1
                                                                                 2.3, 3.1, 3.3,
 Circulation      4.1, 4.2, 4.3   4.3                            2.4
                                                                                 3.5
 Economic
                                  2.7, 2.8
 Development
 Conservation
 /Open Space
 Safety           3.5             1.3             1.2            1.6             2.1
 Noise                            1.2, 3.2                                                      1.3
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                             12                                     December 2002

                                                         Conservation/Open Space Element
                                        Conservation/Open Space Plan
                      The combination of unique environmental amenities and modern
                      development gives Rancho Santa Margarita a positive, enduring
                      identity. The Conservation/Open Space Plan establishes an approach
                      to protect and enhance these assets. The Plan addresses the issues
                      and related goals and policies identified in the previous section. The
                      goals and policies, serving as the basis for the Plan, are supported by
                      several approaches to protect and enhance these valuable resources.
                      The Conservation/Open Space Implementation Program contained in
                      Appendix A of this General Plan is an extension of this plan and
                      contains specific programs to achieve the goal of the protection and
                      enhancement of these resources.
       Ecological and The setting of Rancho Santa Margarita is unique among urban
 Biological Resources communities due to the many open space areas around and within
                      the City. Figure COS-1 illustrates the open space resources that add
                      to the natural beauty of the area. Approximately 66% of the land
                      area within the City is designated for some form of passive open
                      space or active park use. The Land Use Element has four separate
                      open space land use designations: P (Parks), OS (Open Space), OSG
                      (Open Space Golf), and ROS (Regional Open Space). These
                      designations provide for a variety of passive and active recreational
                      opportunities as well as preserving natural resources that add to the
                      character of the community.
                      Sensitive Resources
                      The City of Rancho Santa Margarita contains a combination of
                      developed areas dominated by residential and commercial buildings,
                      roads, golf courses and other human made features, and designated
                      open space areas containing undeveloped native vegetation. Within
                      the developed areas are extensive non-native landscape plantings.
                      Areas of native vegetation located within the City include: O’Neill
                      Regional Park, both sides of the Foothill Transportation Corridor in
                      the southern portion of the City, and portions of open space located
                      east/northeast of Dove Canyon and northeast of Robinson Ranch.
                      Seven vegetation communities are located in the City of Rancho
                      Santa Margarita: urban/developed, agriculture, chaparral, non-native
                                                                     City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                          13                                              General Plan

          City of
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                             Live                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                         Trabuco Oaks
                                                          Rd
                                                To                                                                                                             O ak                                                                                         C a n y on
                                                   ro
                                                                                                                                                                 Can y o
                                     El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                    O'Neill
                                                                   Regional                                                                                           n                                                                             R ose
                                                                     Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e   ek
                                                                                                                    a                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr
                                                                                        Via         Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                                  Rd                                                                                                        Trabu c o
                                                                                Meli                                                                                                                               n                      Rd
                                                                                     n       da                                                                                                           n   yo
              Los                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                          lis
                               os                                                                       Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A nt
                                                                                                                                                                                   co
                                           Rd                                                                                                                                  a   bu                                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                            Tr                                                                                                                         Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    es                                                                                                                    ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               or                                                                                                                              ee
        Santa                                                                                                  FOO                                                                                                           Fl                                                                                                          Bir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d Dr
                      Ma r g                                                                                      TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dh o llow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   las                    ida
                               arit                                                                                                                                                                                                    en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pkwy
                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Av
                                      a
                                                                                                                          LL                                                                             de                                                                                                                                          Dr
                                            Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pkwy
                                                 wy                                                                                                                                               da
                                                                                                                                                                                             ni                                              de l
                                                                                                                                                                                    Av
                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r   it a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                os Fund
                                                                                                                                        TR                                                                             ar
                                                                                                                                                AN                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                 SPO
                               Rd                                                                                                                                                        S ant                                             or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e   ad
                 da                                                                                                                                       IO
                                                                                                                                                       AT
            in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                     RT
        Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ov e
                                                                         Sant                                                 wy                         N
                                                                                a                                             Pk
                                                                                             Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n              Dr
                                                                                                                        Av e ntura                              CO          Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                              m               de
                                                                                                                                                                                             Al
                                                                                                                                  Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                              ID O R                                                                                                                                         cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                                       wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sy
                                                                                                                                                           RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vi a
                                                                                                                                                                peranza
                                                                                                                                                             Es
                                           wy                                                                                                                                                ni
                                                                                                                                                                                         o
                                      Pk                                                                                                                                                to
                               cia                                       O'Neill                                                                                               An
                         Ali                                            Regional                                         ra
                                                                                                                              s          Em
                                                                                                                                                p re                                                                                       C ot o                                                              C any
                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                nd                     a
                                                                                                                                  st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P aj a ro
                                                                                                               Ba        Vi                      sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  on
                                                                                                          las                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                    yo                                                                                                                                                                                                  Country Club
                                                                                                     de         ro
        City of                                                                                                Ar                                                                                                                         de                                                                        Dr
     Mission Viejo                                                                                     nida
                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C aza
                                                                Vis
                               Rd                                   ta
                                                                                                  wy                                                                                                                                                      Vi s t a
                                                                                             Pk
                          Olympiad
                                                               r o yo
                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                      nio                       IDO                                                                                                                       Dr
                                                              Ar                                                                                                                                                                                            Sa   n
                                                                                                               RR                                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                    An t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            el
                                                                                                               CO                                                                                                                                                                        igu
                                                                                                     TATI
                                                                                                          ON
                                                                                                  TRA NSPOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Coto de Caza
                                 O'Neill                                                                                                                 Chiquita
                                Regional                                                                                                                 Canyon
                                  Park                                                                                                                 Conservation
                                                                                                                                                          Area
                                                                                                   ILL
                                                          y                                         F O OT H
                                                     Pkw
                                                  io                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Legend
                                                An t on
                                                                                  Chiquita                                                                            Oso
                                                                                  Canyon                                                                                    Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                   wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Open Space
                                                                                Conservation
                                                                                   Area                                                                                                                                                                                                            Open Space-Regional Park
                      Oso Pkwy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sphere of Influence Boundary
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Future Planned Community Boundary
        Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001
        0               2,000                      4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure COS-1
 N          1,000                     3,000                   5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                              Open Space Resources
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                                                                                                                                          14                                                                                                                                                                             December 2002
                                                  Conservation/Open Space Element
              grasslands, marsh habitat, riparian habitat, scrub habitat (including
              coastal sage scrub), and woodland habitat. Figure COS-2 depicts the
              location of these vegetation communities.
              While the urban/development and disturbed vegetation communities
              are located within developed areas of the City, non-native grasslands
              are located along the upper edges of Trabuco Canyon in the O’Neill
              Regional Park area and within areas of Tijeras Canyon. This plant
              community is commonly found adjacent to coastal sage scrub, oak
              woodlands, and urban/developed areas within the City. Native
              coastal sage scrub vegetation occurs in the open space and regional
              open space areas of the City. The Southern coast live oak riparian
              forest vegetation community is generally located along the edges of
              the southern sycamore-alder riparian forest. Southern sycamore-
              alder riparian forest is dominated by large western sycamores, and as
              depicted in Figure COS-2, this vegetation community is located in
              the two riparian areas in the City: Trabuco Creek and Tijeras Creek.
              Due to the number of different vegetation communities located
              within the City, a large number of different plant species are also
              present. Common tree species found throughout the developed
              portions of the City include sycamore, eucalyptus, pine, date palm,
              magnolia, alder, and Peruvian pepper trees.               Sensitive plant
              communities that occur within the City include coastal sage scrub,
              southern coast live oak riparian forest, and southern sycamore-alder
              riparian forest. These plant communities can be found in two main
              locations within the City limits, O’Neill Regional Park and Tijeras
              Canyon. The sensitive plant communities are located in designated
              open space areas and are not contained within any developed areas.
              Sensitive plant species with a high potential for occurring in the City
              include intermediate mariposa lily, many-stemmed dudleya and
              southern tarplant.
              Within the planning area, four wildlife species that are federally
              listed as endangered and one federally listed threatened species are
              present: the arroyo toad, San Diego fairy shrimp, Riverside fairy
              shrimp, least Bell’s vireo and coastal California gnatcatcher. The
              California gnatcatcher is the only federally listed species known to
              occur within the City. Three special status species are considered to
              be present within the City based on known, recorded occurrences:
              the California gnatcatcher, coastal cactus wren, and northern harrier.
                                                             City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                  15                                              General Plan

          City of
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                             Live                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                         Trabuco Oaks
                                                          Rd
                                                To                                                                                                             O ak                                                                                         C a n y on
                                                   ro
                                                                                                                                                                 Can y o
                                     El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                    O'Neill
                                                                   Regional                                                                                           n                                                                             R ose
                                                                     Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e    ek
                                                                                                                    a                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr
                                                                                        Via         Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                                  Rd                                                                                                        Trabu c o
                                                                                Meli                                                                                                                               n                      Rd
                                                                                     n       da                                                                                                           n   yo
              Los                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                          lis
                               os                                                                       Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A nt
                                                                                                                                                                                   co
                                           Rd                                                                                                                                  a   bu                                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                            Tr                                                                                                                         Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    es                                                                                                                    ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               or                                                                                                                              ee
        Santa                                                                                                  FOO                                                                                                           Fl                                                                                                          Bir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d Dr
                      Ma r g                                                                                      TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dh o llow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   las                    ida
                               arit                                                                                                                                                                                                    en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pkwy
                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Av
                                      a
                                                                                                                          LL                                                                             de                                                                                                                                          Dr
                                            Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pkwy
                                                 wy                                                                                                                                               da
                                                                                                                                                                                             ni                                              de l
                                                                                                                                                                                    Av
                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r   it a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                os Fund
                                                                                                                                        TR                                                                             ar
                                                                                                                                                AN                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                 SPO
                               Rd                                                                                                                                                        S ant                                             or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e   ad
                 da                                                                                                                                       IO
                                                                                                                                                       AT
            in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                     RT
        Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ov  e
                                                                         Sant                                                 wy                         N
                                                                                a                                             Pk
                                                                                             Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n              Dr
                                                                                                                        Av e ntura                              CO          Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                              m               de
                                                                                                                                                                                             Al
                                                                                                                                  Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                              ID O R                                                                                                                                         cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                                       wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sy
                                                                                                                                                           RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vi a
                                                                                                                                                                peranza
                                                                                                                                                             Es
                                           wy                                                                                                                                                ni
                                                                                                                                                                                         o
                                      Pk                                                                                                                                                to
                               cia                                       O'Neill                                                                                               An
                         Ali                                            Regional                                         ra
                                                                                                                              s          Em
                                                                                                                                                p re                                                                                       C ot o                                                              C any
                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                nd                     a
                                                                                                                                  st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P aj a ro
                                                                                                               Ba        Vi                      sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  on
                                                                                                          las                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                    yo                                                                                                                                                                                                  Country Club
                                                                                                     de         ro
        City of                                                                                                Ar                                                                                                                         de                                                                        Dr
     Mission Viejo                                                                                     nida
                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C aza
                                                                Vis
                               Rd                                   ta
                                                                                                  wy                                                                                                                                                      Vi s t a
                                                                                             Pk
                          Olympiad
                                                               r o yo
                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                      nio                       IDO                                                                                                                       Dr
                                                              Ar                                                                                                                                                                                            Sa   n
                                                                                                               RR                                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                    An t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            el
                                                                                                               CO                                                                                                                                                                        igu
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Coto de Caza
                                                                                                     TATI
                                                                                                          ON
                                 O'Neill                                                          TRA NSPOR
                                                                                                                                                         Chiquita
                                Regional                                                                                                                 Canyon
                                  Park                                                                                                                 Conservation
                                                                                                                                                          Area
                                                                                                   ILL                                                                                                   Legend
                                                          y                                         F O OT H                                                                                                                               Agriculture                                                                                 Riparian Habitat
                                                     Pkw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chaparral Habitat                                                                           Scrub Habitat
                                                  io                                                                                                                                                                                       Grassland Habitat                                                                           Woodland Habitat
                                                An t on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (includes live oak woodland)
                                                                                  Chiquita
                                                                                  Canyon
                                                                                                                                                                      Oso
                                                                                                                                                                            Pk                                                             Marsh Habitat
                                                                                                                                                                                   wy
                                                                                Conservation
                                                                                   Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Boundary
                      Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sphere of Influence Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Future Planned
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;
        Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001                                                                                                                                                                                                   Community Boundary
        0               2,000                      4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure COS-2
 N          1,000                     3,000                   5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                      Vegetation Communities
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                                                                                                                                          16                                                                                                                                                                            December 2002
                                                  Conservation/Open Space Element
              Two main areas in the City are considered to be regional wildlife
              movement corridors: Trabuco Canyon and the coastal sage scrub
              habitat located in the eastern portion of the City. Wildlife movement
              on a regional basis has continued in these corridors following
              development of the City.
              The City preserves important biological resources with the large
              open space areas within the community. This open space will be left
              in a natural state to support habitat for plant and animal species.
              During development of the planned communities now incorporated
              into the City, the preservation of oak woodlands was encouraged.
              Since the Southern coast live oak riparian forest is ranked by the
              California Natural Diversity Data Base as a “secure” habitat, this
              Plan supports continued protection of oak woodlands in the City.
              Additionally, the City assesses development proposals for potential
              impacts to sensitive resources pursuant to the California
              Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and requires consultation with
              natural resource regulatory agencies when necessary. The Land Use
              Element has established development guidelines for the Northeast
              Rancho Santa Margarita Planned Community. These guidelines
              include a requirement that 35 percent of the land is designated as
              open space, including preservation of bluffs located southeast of
              Trabuco Creek and north and east of the Porter Ranch area.
              Parks and Recreation
              The private park and recreation system located in Rancho Santa
              Margarita consists of neighborhood parks, community parks, O’Neill
              Regional Park, joint use parks, community services and facilities,
              along with the extensive open space system described earlier.
              The      establishment      of
              parkland within Rancho
              Santa Margarita occurred
              during the development of
              the Planned Communities
              that have been incorporated
              into the City. Figure COS-3
              shows the location of parks
              within the City. All local
              parks in the City are
              privately owned and operated by homeowner associations and can be
              characterized as primarily neighborhood-serving. Most of the
              neighborhoods in the City are within walking distance from an
              existing park. Rancho Santa Margarita currently has 22 developed
                                                             City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                  17                                              General Plan

          City of
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                                Live                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                            Trabuco Oaks
                                                           Rd
                                                 To                                                                                                               O ak                                                                                          C a n y on
                                                    ro
                                                                                                                                                                    Can y o
                                      El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                     O'Neill
                                                                    Regional                                                                                             n                                                                              R ose
                                                                      Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e    ek
                                                                                                                       a                                                                                                                                                                                   Cr
                                                                              22           Via         Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                                     Rd                                                                                                         Trabu c o
                                                                                   Meli                                                                                                                               n                       Rd
                                                                                        n       da                                                                                                           n   yo
              Los                                                                                                                                                                                         Ca
                          A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                           lis
                                os                                                                         Rd                                                                                                                                                                             9                8                               Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A nt
                                                                                                                                                                                      co
                                            Rd                                                                                                                                    a   bu                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                                                                                                                               Tr                                                                                                                          Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             on i o                                                                   5   Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10                                                                                             ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ee
        Santa                                                                                                     FOO                                                                                                          Fl                                                                                                            Bir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d Dr
                       Ma r g                                                                                        TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dh o llow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      las                      ida
                                arit                                     21                                                                                                                                                                 en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pkwy
                                                                                                                            I                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Av
                                       a
                                                                                                                             LL                                                                               de                                                                                                                                           Dr
                                             Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pkwy
                                                  wy                                                                                                                                           i     da       12
                                                                                                                   20                                                                       en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a       de l                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                       Av                                      ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   os Fund
                                                                                                                                           TR                                                                             ar          11
                                                                                                                                                   AN                                                              M
                                                                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                    SPO
                                Rd                                                                                                                                                          S ant                                            or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e   ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                             IO
                   a
                nd
                                                                                                                                                          AT
            i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                                                                        RT
        Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ov  e
                                                                          Sa  nt                                                 wy                         N
                                                                                   a                                             Pk                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                19                              Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                       n                  Dr
                                                                                                                           Av e ntura                              CO          Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                                                                 m               de
                                                                                                                                                                                                Al
                                                                                                                                     Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                                 ID O R                                                                                                                                          cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                                          wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sy
                                                                                                                                                              RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Vi a
                                                                                                                                                                   peranza      14
                                                                                                                                                                Es
                                            wy                                                                                                                                                  ni
                                                                                                                                                                                            o
                                       Pk                                                                                                                                                  to
                                cia                                       O'Neill                                                                                                 An
                          Ali                                            Regional                                           ra
                                                                                                                                 s          Em
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C any
                                                                           Park                                    nd
                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                          a        p re     15                                                                                 C ot o
                                                                                                                                     st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P aj a ro
                                                                                                                  Ba        Vi                      sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      on
                                                                                                             las                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dove Canyon
                                                                                                18                 ro
                                                                                                                       yo                                                                                                                                                                                                   Country Club
                                                                                                        de
        City of                                                                                                   Ar                                                                                                                          de                                                                        Dr
     Mission Viejo                                                                                        nida
                                                                                                      Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C aza
                                                                 Vis
                                Rd                                   ta
                                                                                                     wy                                                                                                                                                      Vi s t a
                                                                                                Pk
                                                                                                        17
                           Olympiad
                                                                r o yo
                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                         nio                       IDO                                                                                                                        Dr
                                                               Ar                                                                                                                                                                                               Sa   n
                                                                                       An t o                     RR                                                                                                                                                                     M                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                el
                                                                                                                  CO                                                                                                                                                                         igu
                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Coto de Caza
                                                                                                        TATI
                                                                                                             ON
                                  O'Neill                                                            TRA NSPOR                                                                                                                        Legend
                                                                                                                                                            Chiquita
                                 Regional                                                                                                                   Canyon                                                              1. Trail Rest Area                                                                                     12. Monte Vista Park
                                   Park                                                                                                                   Conservation
                                                                                                                                                             Area                                                               2. Sycamore Canyon Drive                                                                               13. Central Park (RSM)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3. Swim & Racquet Complex                                                                              14. Vista Verde Park
                                                                                                      ILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4. Walden Park                                                                                         15. Tijeras Creek Park
                                                                                                       F O OT H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5. Central Park (TH)                                                                                   16. Canada Vista Park
                                                           y                                                                                                                                                                    6. Heritage Drive Trailhead                                                                            17. Mesa Linda Park
                                                      Pkw                                                                                                                                                                       7. Ike Arnold Park                                                                                     18. Arroyo Vista Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8. Country Hollow Lane Park                                                                            19. San Benito Park
                                                   io                                                                                                                                                                           9. Trabuco Mesa Park                                                                                   20. Estrella Vista Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10. Lago Santa Margarita                                                                                21. Solano Park
                                                 An t on
                                                                                     Chiquita                                                                            Oso
                                                                                                                                                                               Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11. Cielo Vista Park                                                                                    22. Altisima Park
                                                                                     Canyon                                                                                           wy
                                                                                   Conservation
                                                                                      Area                                                                                                                                                                   Parks
                       Oso Pkwy                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sphere of Influence Boundary
 Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;                                                               Note: O'Neill Regional Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Future Planned Community Boundary
          Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001.                                                             is a 1,206-acre park, portions of which
        0                2,000                      4,000
                                                                                                       are located along western and eastern
                                                                                                       sides of Antonio Parkway. Portions of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure COS-3
 N          1,000                      3,000                   5,000 Feet
                                                                                                       the 8,000 acre Caspers Wilderness Park
                                                                                                       are located on the eastern side of the City.                                                                                                                                                                                        Park Sites
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                         18                                                                                                                                                    December 2002
                                                 Conservation/Open Space Element
              parks that range in size from the 0.5 acre Dove Canyon Trail Rest
              Area to the 21.4 acre Central Park in Trabuco Highlands. Several of
              the smaller parks function only as passive parks. Active recreational
              parkland is provided in the City at 17 of the 22 parks. Table COS-2
              summarizes the existing parks and recreational facilities in the City.
              The provision and availability of parks in Rancho Santa Margarita is
              of particular importance to the community given the community’s
              youthful population. Approximately 40% of the population in
              Rancho       Santa       Margarita
              consists of persons under 24
              years of age. This segment of
              the population presents an
              increased demand for active
              recreational     facilities   and
              services, including playgrounds,
              ball fields and organized
              sporting events.
              A survey of park managers conducted in April 2000 by the National
              Recreation and Park Association (NRPA) generally defined active
              recreational facilities as areas where competitive, organized team
              sports are played, or areas that may require specially built facilities
              for such competition. In contrast, facilities for passive activities
              were defined as unstructured and unscheduled, comprising
              hiking/walking trails, picnic/sitting areas, general open space, and
              “people watching” areas. No national standards are advocated by
              NRPA pertaining to passive versus active park space.
              Of the approximately 152 acres of parkland located in the City,
              approximately 85 acres (56 percent) are devoted to active
              recreational use. Approximately 68 acres (44 percent) are devoted to
              passive uses. This does not include the O’Neill Regional Park,
              which is 1,206 acres in size, and runs along the western portion of
              the City. This regional park is maintained and operated by the
              County of Orange. Table COS-3 approximates the acreages within
              each park dedicated to active and passive uses.
              Applying the definitions of active and passive neighborhood park
              space from the NRPA to the existing recreational facilities in Rancho
              Santa Margarita (refer to Table COS-2), the City has approximately
              3.22 park acres per 1,000 persons and 1.79 active park acres per
              1,000 persons.
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                  19                                             General Plan

    Conservation/Open Space Element
                                                                      Table COS-2
                                                              Existing Parks and Facilities
                                                               in Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                            Children’s Play Area/
                                                                                                                    Performance Stage                                                               Roller Hockey Rink
                                Organized Sports
                                                                                                                                        Picnic Tables         Swimming Pool
                                                                                   Tot lot
                                                               Basketball                           Hiking Trails                                                                      Volleyball                        Other Uses
                                                   Baseball                                                                                                                   Tennis
                                                                                                                                                        Spa
                                                                                Community
                                     Fields
                                                                             Center/Club House
 Dove Canyon
 3 Swim and Racquet
   Complex/Golf
   Clubhouse                            ?           ?                                                                                   ?               ?     ?               ?        ?
 2 Sycamore Canyon Drive                ?                                                                                               ?
 1 Trail Rest Area                                        ?                                                                             ?
 Rancho Santa Margarita Planned Community
 18 Arroyo Vista             ?    ?           ?                                                                                         ?                     ?               ?        ?
 14 Vista Verde Park              ?                                                                                                     ?
 16 Cañada Vista             ?    ?     ?                                                                                               ?                                                                                ?
 13 Central Park (RSM)                        ?     ?                                                                ?                  ?                                                           ?
 11 Cielo Vista                               ?                                                                                         ?                                     ?
 10 Lago Santa Margarita                            ?     ?                                                          ?                  ?                     ?                        ?                                 ?
 17 Mesa Linda                          ?     ?                                                                                         ?                                     ?        ?
 12 Monte Vista              ?    ?     ?     ?                                                                                         ?                     ?
 15 Tijeras Creek            ?    ?           ?           ?                                                                             ?
  9 Trabuco Mesa             ?    ?     ?     ?                                                                                         ?                                     ?
 Rancho Trabuco
 22 Altisima Park            ?    ?     ?     ?                                                                                         ?                     ?               ?
 19 San Benito Park                     ?     ?                                                                                         ?                     ?               ?        ?
 20 Estrella Vista Park      ?                            ?                                                                             ?
 21 Solano Park              ?    ?     ?     ?                                                                                         ?                     ?                        ?
 Robinson Ranch, Trabuco Highlands, Walden, and Rancho Cielo
 5 Central Park (Trabuco
       Highlands)            ?          ?     ?                                                                                         ?                     ?
 8 Country Hollow Lane            ?     ?     ?                                                                                                               ?
 6 Heritage Drive
   Trailhead                                              ?                                                                             ?
 7 Ike Arnold                ?    ?     ?     ?                                                                                         ?
 4 Walden                                           ?     ?                                                                                             ?     ?
# Corresponds to legend on Figure COS-3, Park Sites.
Source: CBA site visits; RSM Facility Inventory from “Final Report on Programs and Services
Developed by the IGCC Committee,”May 2001.
    City of Rancho Santa Margarita
    General Plan                                                                          20                                                                                       December 2002

                                                                         Conservation/Open Space Element
                                                 Table COS-3
                                         Active and Passive Parkland
                                         in Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                                                 OC
                                                         Total      NRPA       NRPA          Park Code
                                                        Acres1     Active2    Passive2    Requirements
 Dove Canyon
 3 Swim and Racquet Complex/Golf
    Clubhouse3                                            6.5         6           .5
 2 Sycamore Canyon Drive                                  2.5         --         2.5
 1 Trail Rest Area                                        0.5         --          .5
 Community Total                                           9.5        6          3.5            12.4
 Rancho Santa Margarita Planned Community
 18 Arroyo Vista                                          8.4        5.5         2.9
 14 Vista Verde Park                                      3.5        3.2          .3
 16 Cañada Vista                                            6        5.5          .5
 13 Central Park (RSM)                                    8.5        1.8         6.7
 11 Cielo Vista                                           2.5         1          1.5
 10 Lago Santa Margarita                                   16         --          16
 17 Mesa Linda                                            2.1        1.3          .8
 12 Monte Vista                                           6.9        6.2          .7
 15 Tijeras Creek                                           4        3.5          .5
   9 Trabuco Mesa                                        11.9        9.5         2.4
 Community Total                                         69.8       37.5        32.3            71.3
 Rancho Trabuco
 22  Altisima Park                                       11.3        9.3           2
 19  San Benito Park                                      4.6        .7          3.9
 20  Estrella Vista Park                                  2.1         --         2.1
 21  Solano Park                                         11.9        9.8         2.1
 Community Total                                          29.9      19.8        10.1            26.8
 Robinson Ranch, Trabuco Highlands, Walden, and Rancho Cielo
 5  Central Park (Trabuco Highlands)                     21.4        8.0        13.4
 8  Country Hollow Lane                                   2.4        1.4           1
 6  Heritage Drive Trailhead                                1         --           1
 7  Ike Arnold                                           13.6         9          4.6
 4  Walden                                                4.6        2.8         1.8
 Community Total                                           43       21.2        218             14.3
 City of Rancho Santa Margarita                          152.2      84.5        67.7           124.8
Source: CBA, Inc., 2001.
Notes:
    1. Total acreage derived from Orange County GIS Land Base.
    2. CBA park inspections to determine active and passive acreage in the City. Active areas do not include
        areas characterized by steep slopes. These are included as passive areas.
    3. Acreage does not include golf course.
    # Corresponds to the legend on Figure COS-3, Park Sites.
                                                                                     City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                      21                                                  General Plan

Conservation/Open Space Element
                               In accordance with the California Subdivision Map Act, a standard
                               of 3 acres of parkland space per 1,000 persons at a minimum should
                               be established in Rancho Santa Margarita. This Plan establishes a
                               parkland standard of 3 acres of active parkland space per 1,000
                               persons. New development in the City and the Northeast Rancho
                               Santa Margarita Planned Community will be subject to the 3 acres of
                               active parkland per 1,000 persons requirement.
                               This Plan supports the increase of active recreational facilities in
                               existing parks and improving the utilization of these facilities. A full
                               range of recreational opportunities to serve the community can be
                               achieved by:
                               ?   Promoting a high level of public outreach by coordinating with
                                   community organizations, special interest groups and private
                                   businesses to provide recreational program opportunities, and
                                   distributing newsletters or brochures to inform the community of
                                   available recreation programs and facilities;
                               ?   Coordinating with the park owners/operators and other
                                   organizations such as the School Districts, private schools and
                                   other appropriate agencies to achieve maximum utilization of
                                   recreation programs and facilities in the community;
                               ?   Exploring means to provide programs to those who cannot afford
                                   to pay by utilizing corporate sponsorships, volunteers and joint
                                   use of school facilities and services; and
                               ?   Working with the park owners/operators to develop new
                                   recreation programs to reflect new needs and interests of the
                                   Rancho Santa Margarita community.
       Scenic Resources        Rancho Santa Margarita is located within a natural setting that
                               provides a unique visual character. Along with slopes and ridgelines
                               and bluffs, several surface water resources are located in and near the
                               City. The City has built on this natural character with high-quality
                               architecture and design standards.
                               Natural Scenic Qualities
                               The visual character of the City includes the following features:
                               ?   Ridgelines
                               ?   Native vegetation (described under Ecological and Biological
                                   Resources)
                               ?   Natural watercourses
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        22                                    December 2002
                                                 Conservation/Open Space Element
              ?   Viewpoints from within the area and scenic roadways
              Several ridgelines and vista points are located in Rancho Santa
              Margarita. These include Trabuco Canyon, Live Oak Canyon, Plano
              Trabuco, Ashbury Canyon, Cochise Canyon and Bell Canyon,
              among others.
              Surface watercourses in the City include Lake Santa Margarita, the
              Upper Oso Reservoir, Tijeras Canyon Creek and Trabuco Creek.
              Several small tributaries are also located within the open space areas
              of the City.
              The County of Orange has a Scenic Highways Plan included in the
              General Plan Transportation Element. The County’s designated
              scenic highways have been divided into two categories: Viewscape
              Corridors and Landscape Corridors.
              ?   Viewscape Corridor: A route that traverses a corridor within
                  which unique or unusual scenic resources and aesthetic values
                  are found. This designation is intended to minimize the impact
                  of the highway and land development upon the significant scenic
                  resources along the route.
              ?   Landscape Corridor: A corridor that traverses developed or
                  developing areas and has been designated for special treatment to
                  provide a pleasant driving environment as well as community
                  enhancement.
              As depicted on Figure COS-4, Scenic Highways, the planning area
              has viewscape corridors and landscape corridors designated on the
              County Scenic Highways Plan. These corridors include:
              Viewscape Corridors:
              ?   Santa Margarita Parkway: west of City boundary; between
                  Avenida Empresa and Plano Trabuco Road
              ?   Plano Trabuco Road: south of Santa Margarita Parkway; north of
                  Robinson Ranch Road
              ?   Trabuco Canyon Road between Live Oak Canyon Road and
                  Plano Trabuco Road
              ?   Live Oak Canyon Road between El Toro Road and Trabuco
                  Canyon Road
              ?   El Toro Road throughout planning area
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                 23                                              General Plan

          City of
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                             Live                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                         Trabuco Oaks
                                                          Rd
                                                To                                                                                                             O ak                                                                                         C a n y on
                                                   ro
                                                                                                                                                                 Can y o
                                     El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                    O'Neill
                                                                   Regional                                                                                           n                                                                             R ose
                                                                     Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e    ek
                                                                                                                    a                                                                                                                                                                                   Cr
                                                                                        Via         Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                                  Rd                                                                                                        Trabu c o
                                                                                Meli                                                                                                                               n                      Rd
                                                                                     n       da                                                                                                           n   yo
              Los                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd
                          lis
                               os                                                                       Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A nt
                                                                                                                                                                                   co
                                           Rd                                                                                                                                  a   bu                                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                            Tr                                                                                                                          Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    es                                                                                                                     ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               or                                                                                                                               ee
        Santa                                                                                                  FOO                                                                                                           Fl                                                                                                           Bir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d Dr
                      Ma r g                                                                                      TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dh o llow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   las                    ida
                               arit                                                                                                                                                                                                    en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pkwy
                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Av
                                      a
                                                                                                                          LL                                                                             de                                                                                                                                           Dr
                                            Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pkwy
                                                 wy                                                                                                                                               da
                                                                                                                                                                                             ni                                              de l
                                                                                                                                                                                    Av
                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r   it a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                os Fund
                                                                                                                                        TR                                                                             ar
                                                                                                                                                AN                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                 SPO
                               Rd                                                                                                                                                        S ant                                             or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e   ad
                 da                                                                                                                                       IO
                                                                                                                                                       AT
            in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                     RT
        Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ov  e
                                                                         Sant                                                 wy                         N
                                                                                a                                             Pk
                                                                                             Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n              Dr
                                                                                                                        Av e ntura                              CO          Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                              m               de
                                                                                                                                                                                             Al
                                                                                                                                  Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                              ID O R                                                                                                                                          cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                                       wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sy
                                                                                                                                                           RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vi a
                                                                                                                                                                peranza
                                                                                                                                                             Es
                                           wy                                                                                                                                                ni
                                                                                                                                                                                         o
                                      Pk                                                                                                                                                to
                               cia                                       O'Neill                                                                                               An
                         Ali                                            Regional                                         ra
                                                                                                                              s          Em
                                                                                                                                                p re                                                                                       C ot o                                                               C any
                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                nd                     a
                                                                                                                                  st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P aj a ro
                                                                                                               Ba        Vi                      sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   on
                                                                                                          las                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                    yo                                                                                                                                                                                                   Country Club
                                                                                                     de         ro
        City of                                                                                                Ar                                                                                                                         de                                                                         Dr
     Mission Viejo                                                                                     nida
                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C aza
                                                                Vis
                               Rd                                   ta
                                                                                                  wy                                                                                                                                                      Vi s t a
                                                                                             Pk
                          Olympiad
                                                               r o yo
                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                      nio                       IDO                                                                                                                       Dr
                                                              Ar                                                                                                                                                                                            Sa   n
                                                                                                               RR                                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                    An t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            el
                                                                                                               CO                                                                                                                                                                        igu
                                                                                                     TATI
                                                                                                          ON
                                                                                                  TRA NSPOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Coto de Caza
                                 O'Neill                                                                                                                 Chiquita
                                Regional                                                                                                                 Canyon
                                  Park                                                                                                                 Conservation
                                                                                                                                                          Area
                                                                                                   ILL
                                                          y                                         F O OT H
                                                     Pkw
                                                  io
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Legend
                                                An t on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Viewscape Corridor
                                                                                  Chiquita                                                                            Oso
                                                                                  Canyon                                                                                    Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                   wy
                                                                                Conservation                                                                                                                                                                                                       Landscape Corridor
                                                                                   Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City Boundary
                      Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sphere of Influence Boundary
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Future Planned Community Boundary
        Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001
        0               2,000                      4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure COS-4
 N          1,000                     3,000                   5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                Scenic Highways
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                                                                                                                                               24                                                                                                                                                                        December 2002
                                                        Conservation/Open Space Element
                      Landscape Corridors:
                      ?   Santa Margarita Parkway between Melinda Road and Avenida
                          Empresa
                      ?   Antonio Parkway between Oso Parkway and Avenida Empresa
                      ?   Avenida Empresa between Santa Margarita Parkway and
                          Antonio Parkway
                      ?   Oso Parkway throughout planning area
                      Within these corridors, buffering and scenic preservation easements
                      adjacent to the roadway may be required, consistent with current
                      County General Plan policy.
                      During development of the Planned Communities that are now the
                      City of Rancho Santa Margarita, the Feature Plans, Area Plans
                      Specific Plans, Site Plans, and corresponding environmental
                      documentation evaluated the visual resources within and around each
                      plan area. Each plan was designed to complement the natural
                      landscape and preserve the vistas and ridgelines to the extent
                      feasible. These visual resources will continue to be maintained
                      throughout the City, as any new development or redevelopment will
                      require review of a site plan and environmental review by City staff.
                      The Northeast Rancho Santa Margarita Planned Community will
                      meet requirements for natural resource preservation as outlined in
                      the Land Use Element. This includes the preservation of bluffs
                      located southeast of Trabuco Creek and north and east of the Porter
                      Ranch area.
                      Architecture and Landscape Design Standards
                      The development of commercial and residential uses in Rancho
                      Santa Margarita have included high-quality architecture and
                      landscape design standards to complement the natural setting that
                      surrounds the City. Development of the Planned Communities that
                      now comprise the City included landscape and design standards in
                      the Feature Plans, Area Plans and Specific Plans. Standards
                      established for each planned community will continue to apply to all
                      new development and redevelopment in the City. The Northeast
                      Future Planned Community documents will address design standards
                      for development in this area.
         Water Supply Two water districts provide the City’s water supply: the Santa
    and Conservation  Margarita Water District (SMWD) and the Trabuco Canyon Water
                      District (TCWD). Figure COS-5 shows the boundaries of the two
                      district service areas. As shown in this figure, SMWD serves the
                                                                  City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                          25                                           General Plan

          City of
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                             Live                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                         Trabuco Oaks
                                                          Rd
                                                To                                                                                                             O ak                                                                                         C a n y on
                                                   ro
                                                                                                                                                                 Can y o
                                     El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                    O'Neill
                                                                   Regional                                                                                           n                                                                             R ose
                                                                     Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e    ek
                                                                                                                    a                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr
                                                                                        Via         Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                                  Rd                                                                                                        Trabu c o
                                                                                Meli                                                                                                                               n                      Rd
                                                                                     n       da                                                                                                           n   yo
              Los                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                          lis
                               os                                                                       Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A nt
                                                                                                                                                                                   co
                                           Rd                                                                                                                                  a   bu                                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                            Tr                                                                                                                         Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    es                                                                                                                    ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               or                                                                                                                              ee
        Santa                                                                                                  FOO                                                                                                           Fl                                                                                                          Bir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d Dr
                      Ma r g                                                                                      TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dh o llow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   las                    ida
                               arit                                                                                                                                                                                                    en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pkwy
                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Av
                                      a
                                                                                                                          LL                                                                             de                                                                                                                                          Dr
                                            Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pkwy
                                                 wy                                                                                                                                               da
                                                                                                                                                                                             ni                                              de l
                                                                                                                                                                                    Av
                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r   it a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                os Fund
                                                                                                                                        TR                                                                             ar
                                                                                                                                                AN                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                 SPO
                               Rd                                                                                                                                                        S ant                                             or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e   ad
                 da                                                                                                                                       IO
                                                                                                                                                       AT
            in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                     RT
        Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ov  e
                                                                         Sant                                                 wy                         N
                                                                                a                                             Pk
                                                                                             Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n              Dr
                                                                                                                        Av e ntura                              CO          Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                              m               de
                                                                                                                                                                                             Al
                                                                                                                                  Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                              ID O R                                                                                                                                         cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                                       wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sy
                                                                                                                                                           RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vi a
                                                                                                                                                                peranza
                                                                                                                                                             Es
                                           wy                                                                                                                                                ni
                                                                                                                                                                                         o
                                      Pk                                                                                                                                                to
                               cia                                       O'Neill                                                                                               An
                         Ali                                            Regional                                         ra
                                                                                                                              s          Em
                                                                                                                                                p re                                                                                       C ot o                                                              C any
                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                nd                     a
                                                                                                                                  st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P aj a ro
                                                                                                               Ba        Vi                      sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  on
                                                                                                          las                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                    yo                                                                                                                                                                                                  Country Club
                                                                                                     de         ro
        City of                                                                                                Ar                                                                                                                         de                                                                        Dr
     Mission Viejo                                                                                     nida
                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C aza
                                                                Vis
                               Rd                                   ta
                                                                                                  wy                                                                                                                                                      Vi s t a
                                                                                             Pk
                          Olympiad
                                                               r o yo
                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                      nio                       IDO                                                                                                                       Dr
                                                              Ar                                                                                                                                                                                            Sa   n
                                                                                                               RR                                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                    An t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            el
                                                                                                               CO                                                                                                                                                                        igu
                                                                                                     TATI
                                                                                                          ON
                                                                                                  TRA NSPOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Coto de Caza
                                 O'Neill                                                                                                                 Chiquita
                                Regional                                                                                                                 Canyon
                                  Park                                                                                                                 Conservation
                                                                                                                                                          Area
                                                                                                   ILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Legend
                                                                                                    F O OT H
                                                          y                                                                                                                                                                                                                Santa Margarita Water District
                                                     Pkw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Trabuco Canyon Water District
                                                  io
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Unincorporated Area
                                                An t on
                                                                                  Chiquita                                                                            Oso
                                                                                                                                                                            Pk
                                                                                  Canyon
                                                                                Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                                   wy                                                                                      City Boundary
                                                                                   Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sphere of Influence Boundary
                      Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Future Planned Community Boundary
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure COS-5
        Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001
        0               2,000                      4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Water District
 N          1,000                     3,000                   5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Service Areas
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                                                                                                                                                26                                                                                                                                                                      December 2002
                                                Conservation/Open Space Element
              majority of the City, while TCWD serves the eastern portion of the
              City and the Northeast Rancho Santa Margarita Planned Community.
              The following discussion focuses on the water supplies for the two
              districts and conservation measures currently used.
              Santa Margarita Water District (SMWD)
              Almost all of the SMWD drinking water is purchased from the
              Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD) and
              comes from the Colorado River Project and the State Water Project.
              Due to sparse rainfall and limited potential for groundwater
              development, reliance on imported water is a necessity. SMWD
              operates a dual water distribution system providing both domestic
              (potable) water and nondomestic (non-potable) water. The Chiquita
              Wastewater Reclamation System is a phased District project that will
              provide up to 16-18 million
              gallons per day of reclaimed
              irrigation water to its service
              area. The Chiquita System
              presently serves Rancho Santa
              Margarita, Coto de Caza, and
              portions of the Trabuco
              Canyon and Irvine Ranch
              Water Districts.
              Trabuco Canyon Water District (TCWD)
              Trabuco Canyon Water District has a variety of water sources,
              including ground water, imported water, local surface water, and
              recycled water. The local surface water is a small amount of urban
              runoff/return flow co-mingled with storm runoff captured in Dove
              Lake that the District has recently started pumping back to its
              reclaimed water seasonal storage reservoir for distribution to
              irrigation users. Wastewater is collected and reclaimed at the
              Robinson Ranch Wastewater Treatment Plant. All reclaimed water
              from the treatment plant is used for irrigation purposes. The Water,
              Wastewater, and Reclaimed Water Master Plan undertaken by the
              District stresses the need to implement significant recycled and
              reclaimed water programs to reduce reliance on imported domestic
              water.
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                  27                                             General Plan
Conservation/Open Space Element
                               Conservation in Rancho Santa Margarita
                               The supply of imported water is limited and conservation efforts are
                               needed to ensure adequate emergency storage and future supply. In
                               addition to the water conservation measures at the SMWD and
                               TCWD, water conservation will be encouraged by the City in the
                               following ways:
                               ?   Encouraging SMWD and TCWD to expand the production of
                                   reclaimed water and working with the districts to develop new
                                   uses for reclaimed water;
                               ?   Requiring new projects to install and maintain a dual system
                                   when reclaimed water is available;
                               ?   Requiring the use of drought resistant plant species (native
                                   species where possible) in landscaping for private and public
                                   areas, including parks;
                               ?   Coordinating with the water districts and major users to establish
                                   water conservation education programs; and
                               ?   Requiring the incorporation of water conservation devices,
                                   including low-flush toilets, flow restriction devices and water
                                   conserving appliances, in new development, public projects and
                                   rehabilitation projects.
                               The City will also continue to coordinate with SMWD and TCWD
                               for the construction of needed infrastructure improvements.
                               Both local and regional water sources are important to the City. The
                               surface water sources in the City are Lake Santa Margarita, the
                               Upper Oso Reservoir, Tijeras Canyon Creek and Trabuco Creek.
                               Several tributaries are also located in the City’s open space areas.
                               Figure COS-6 shows the location of these water sources.
          Water Quality        Two general planning issues are associated with hydrologic patterns:
                               water quality and flooding. The City’s water quality plan for surface
                               water is identified below while flood prevention is addressed in the
                               Safety Element. Surface water sources are subject to pollutants and
                               sediment carried in runoff. Pollutants such as heavy metals,
                               petroleum products, animal waste and trash can be carried through
                               the storm drain system into receiving waters, such as Trabuco and
                               Tijeras Canyon creek. These pollutants affect the beneficial uses of
                               these receiving waters including recreation, aesthetic enjoyment and
                               preservation of fish and wildlife habitat.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        28                                   December 2002

                                                                        k
                                                                  Cree
          City of                                          Ali s o
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                                                Live                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Trabuco Oaks
                                                          Rd
                                                To                                                                                                                                O ak                                                                                    C a n y on
                                                   ro
 Upper Oso                           El                                                                                                                                              Can y o                                                                                                                     Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                   O'Neill
  Reservoir                                                                       Regional
                                                                                    Park
                                                                                                                                                                                         n                                                                        R ose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tr a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                buc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                     Via               Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                               Lake Rancho                                                                                                                              Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                             Meli
                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                             Santa Margarita
                                                                                                                                                                                         yo
                                                                                                                                                                                            n                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Trabu c o
              Los                                                                                         da                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ca
                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd
                          lis
                               os                                                                                             Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                      co
                                           Rd                                                                                                                                                     a   bu                                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                               Tr                                                                                                                       Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  es                                                                                                                       ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             or                                                                                                                                 ee
        Santa                                                                                                                      FOO                                                                                                     Fl                                                                                                             Bir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d Dr
                      Ma r g                                                                                                          TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dh o llow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 las                    ida
                               arit                                                                                                                                                                                                                  en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pkwy
                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Av
                                      a
                                                                                                                                             LL                                                                             de                                                                                                                                        Dr
                                            Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pkwy
                                                 wy                                                                                                                                                                  da
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ni                                         de l
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r   it a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              os Fund
                                                                                                                                                           TR                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                                                                   AN                                                            M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                    SPO
                               Rd                                                                                                                                                                           S ant                                        or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e   ad
                 da                                                                                                                                                          IO
                                                                                                                                                                          AT
            in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                                        RT
        Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ov  e
                                                                                        nt
                                                                                       Sa                                                        wy                         N
                                                                                             a                                                   Pk
                                                                                                          Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n              Dr
                                                                                                                                           Av e ntura                              CO          Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                                                                                 m               de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Al
                                                                                                                                                     Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                                     RR               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sy
                                                                                                                                                                                  ID O R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Vi a
                                           wy                                                                                                                                        peranza                    ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                            o
                               cia
                                      Pk
                                                                                        O'Neill                                                                                   Es                       to
                         Ali                                                                                                                     s          Em                                    An
                                                                                       Regional                                             ra
                                                                                                                                                                   p re                                                                                  C ot o                                                                 C any
                                                                                         Park
                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                    nd                    a
                                                                                                                                                     st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P aj a ro
                                                                                                                                   Ba       Vi                      sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   on
                                                                                                                              las                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Country Club
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Portola
                                                                                                                                       yo
                                                                                                                        de          ro
        City of                                                                                                                    Ar                                                                                                                   de                                                                           Dr
     Mission Viejo                                                                                                      nida
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Reservoir
                                                           Tr abu c o Creek
                                                                                                                    Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C aza
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bel l Ca n y
                                                                              Vis
                               Rd                                                 ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vi s t a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                               wy                  n
                                                                                                          Pk                      yo
                          Olympiad
                                                                                                                              an
                                                                              r o yo
                                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                                                      sC            IDO
                                                                                                   nio                                                                                                                                                  Dr                Sa
                                                                    Ar                                          ra                                                                                                                                                             n                   M
                                                                                                 An t o   Ti                       RR
                                                                                                             je                                                                                                                                                                                           el
                                                                                                                                  CO                                                                                                                                                                   igu
                                                                                                                         TATI
                                                                                                                              ON
                                                                                                                   TRA NSPOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Coto de Caza
                                 O'Neill
                                Regional
                                  Park                                                                                                                                        Chiquita
                                                                                                                                                                              Canyon
                                                                                                                                                                            Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                               Area
                                                                                                                      ILL
                                                          y                                                            F O OT H
                                                     Pkw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Legend
                                                                                                      Chiquita
                                                                                                      Canyon
                                                  io                                                Conservation
                                                An t on
                                                                                                       Area
                                                                                                                q ui t a                                                                 Oso                                                                                             Water Features
                                                                                                                                                                                               Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                      wy
                                                                                                           C a n a da C h i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Streams
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City Boundary
                      Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sphere of Influence Boundary
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Future Planned Community Boundary
        Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001
        0               2,000                      4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure COS-6
 N          1,000                     3,000                       5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                                       Surface Water Sources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                                                                                                                                                            29                                                                                                                                                     General Plan
Conservation/Open Space Element
                                                To address the problem of urban runoff, the Clean
                                                Water Act was amended in 1987. One of the
                                                amendments included the National Pollutant
                                                Discharge Elimination Permit (NPDES).            This
                                                permit, implemented in south Orange County by the
                                                San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board
                                                (SDRWQCB), requires jurisdictions to enforce
                                                requirements reducing polluted urban runoff during
                                                all phases of development. Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                is a copermittee of the NPDES permit and will
                               continue to implement the most recent provisions adopted by the
                               SDRWQCB.
                               The City can also address surface water quality by coordinating with
                               homeowner associations, the owners/operator of the parks and open
                               space areas in the City. Working with these organizations helps to
                               ensure that proper methods to reduce urban runoff are in place.
                               Rancho Santa Margarita also supports and promotes safe water
                               supplies for the community through program coordination with the
                               Santa Margarita and Trabuco Canyon Water Districts and
                               responsible regional, state and federal agencies.
              Air Quality      The City of Rancho Santa Margarita is located within the South
                               Coast Air Basin, a non-attainment area for federal and state air
                               quality standards for ozone and state standards for particulate matter
                               less than ten microns in diameter (PM10). The City is split between
                               two South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)
                               Source Receptor Areas: #19 - Saddleback Valley Air Monitoring
                               Subregion and #21 Capistrano Valley Air Monitoring Subregion.
                               However, no active monitoring station is located in the Capistrano
                               Valley subregion.
                               Motor vehicles are the major source of regional emissions
                               throughout the air basin and within Rancho Santa Margarita. No
                               major point source emitters, such as heavy industrial uses, are
                               located within the City. The City will work with SCAQMD and the
                               most recent Air Quality Management Plan to improve the regional
                               transportation system and regional air quality.
                               Energy conservation is another strategy for improving air quality.
                               Pollutants are generated by the combustion of fossil fuels to produce
                               electricity, and by the combustion of natural gas. Reducing energy
                               usage decreases the amount of pollutants generated. The next
                               section in this Element, Energy Conservation, provides a discussion
                               of measures to address energy conservation.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        30                                   December 2002
                                                         Conservation/Open Space Element
 Energy Conservation  Energy requirements and pollutants associated with the generation of
                      energy can be reduced through innovative architectural design,
                      building construction, structural orientation, and landscaping. The
                      City will promote energy conservation by implementing State Title
                      24 energy performance requirements through building codes. In
                      addition, the relationship between project design and future energy
                      requirements will be considered when reviewing proposals for new
                      development. Promotion of utility company incentive programs to
                      retrofit existing development with energy efficient lighting, air
                      conditioning and heating systems can be beneficial. Energy will be
                      conserved in public buildings and the provision of electric charging
                      vehicle areas will be encouraged in new public and private
                      developments.
   Cultural Resources Rancho Santa Margarita contains many cultural and historic
                      resources within its boundaries. Many of the City’s most important
                      archaeological resources are located in O’Neill Park where they are
                      managed by the County. One of these resources includes the old
                      Trabuco Adobe site which regarded by many as the single most
                      important historical location within the City of Rancho Santa
                      Margarita. Other important cultural resources within the City
                      include prehistoric archaeological sites relating to aboriginal peoples
                      and Native American Indians, many of which appear to date from
                      6,000 B.C. to 500 A.D.
                      The City will review future development proposals to ensure that
                      cultural and historic resources are conserved in compliance with this
                      Element and the requirements of the California Environmental
                      Quality Act.
                                                                     City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                          31                                              General Plan

Conservation/Open Space Element
                               This page is left intentionally blank.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                      32                  December 2002
                                                                          Introduction
                      Although Rancho Santa Margarita is largely built out, with relatively
                      little vacant land available for new development, many opportunities
                      exist     for     expanding      the   existing       commercial         and
                      employment/technology base. As described in the Land Use
                      Element, private and public redevelopment efforts within focused
                      areas will allow new investment and new complementary uses to
                      meet local shopping, entertainment and dining demands, provide
                      expanded job opportunities, and build the City’s tax base. More
                      importantly, the City can effectively monitor the mix of new uses
                      that occupy existing commercial/industrial space as tenant turnover
                      occurs.
                      The City faces three major challenges from an economic perspective:
                      1) sustaining a sufficient base of revenues; 2) providing sufficient
                      employment opportunities for its residents; and 3) providing
                      sufficient local shopping, entertainment and dining opportunities.
                      The Economic Development Element addresses these challenges and
                      describes the City’s goals, policies, and strategies to guide and shape
                      important components of the local economy to overcome these
                      challenges.
      Purpose of the  The purpose of the Economic
            Economic  Development Element is to
                      improve the economic viability
        Development   of Rancho Santa Margarita by
              Element addressing: 1) the provision of
                      balanced employment            and
                      housing opportunities; 2) the
                      attraction and retention of
                      businesses;      and     3)    the
                      promotion of fiscal strength and
                      stability in the community. The
                      Element provides guidance to
                      meet the needs of the City’s
                      residents and workers and
                      enhance the quality of life in the
                      community.
                                                                      City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                           1                                              General Plan

Economic Development Element
 Scope and Content             The Economic Development Element is an optional element per
     of the Economic           Section 65303 of the Government Code; however, it is an important
                               component of the Rancho Santa Margarita General Plan. Three
          Development          sections comprise the Economic Development Element:                  1)
                 Element       Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals, and Policies; and 3) the Economic
                               Development Plan. In the Issues, Goals, and Policies section, major
                               issues related to the enhancement and preservation of the
                               community’s economic viability are identified and related goals and
                               policies are established to address these issues. The goals, which are
                               general statements of the community’s desires, comprise broad
                               statements of purpose and direction. The policies serve as guides for
                               achieving and maintaining economic strength and viability. The
                               Plan explains how the goals and policies will be achieved and
                               implemented.
  Related Plans and            This Element provides the overall framework for decision-making
              Programs         that affects economic development in the City. Existing plans and
                               programs specifically focused on economic development are as
                               follows:
                               South Orange County Regional Chamber of Commerce
                               The South Orange County Regional Chamber of Commerce
                               (SOCRCC) focuses on improving and promoting business
                               development opportunities for all Commerce members and South
                               County businesses. The SOCRCC provides important information
                               and assistance for members and South County businesses, including:
                               1) opportunities for funding and investment; 2) business support,
                               including up-to-date information on legislation, labor laws, and
                               business administration; 3) business advocacy; 4) networking; and 5)
                               training and education.
                               Orange County Business Council
                               The Orange County Business Council (OCBC) is a private-sector
                               alliance of companies and public sector partners that represents
                               hundreds of local enterprises from mall shops to giant multi-national
                               companies. OCBC provides a forum for businesses to join together,
                               often in conjunction with government and educational institutions, to
                               invest in the growth and prosperity of Orange County.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        2                                    December 2002

                                                Economic Development Element
              The OCBC Economic Development staff offers assistance to
              businesses in the region including site selection and assistance to
              local agencies to help retain businesses. OCBC administers the
              Workforce Development Initiative (WDI) within Orange County.
              The objective of WDI is to ensure that Orange County’s current and
              future workforce, as well as those considering moving to Orange
              County to work, understand and are prepared for the career
              opportunities.
              OCBC also provides extensive data resources to local and regional
              agencies and to businesses located within Orange County, as well as
              those considering (re)locating to Orange County. Comprehensive
              economic and demographic information, as well as information
              regarding utility services and rates, real estate, transportation,
              workforce and education is provided through the Economic
              Development staff of the OCBC.
              Orange County Community Indicators 2001 Project
              Sponsored by the County of Orange, the Orange County Business
              Council, and the Children and Families Commission of Orange
              County, the Orange County Indicators 2001 Project uses indicators
              grouped into seven categories (Economic and Business Climate;
              Technology and Innovation; Education; Health and Human Services;
              Public Safety; Environment; and Civic Engagement) to track broad
              countywide economic, social, and environmental trends that affect
              the County’s well-being. The Orange County Community Indicators
              2001 report identifies the factors that underlie and influence the
              County’s high quality of life that attracts businesses and people to
              move to the area. The report also identifies “red flags”, such as high
              housing costs and traffic congestion that may lead to economic
              stagnation or even decline in the County. This report is useful for
              agencies in identifying strategies to address their strengths and
              weaknesses in business attraction and retention, and also provides
              businesses useful information that may affect their decision to
              (re)locate or remain in Orange County.
              Orange County Projections 2000 (OCP 2000)
              The OCP 2000 provides useful information for local and regional
              agencies and businesses regarding population, housing, and
              employment trends and projections through 2025. The OCP 2000
              data is available by jurisdiction, regional statistical area (RSA),
              community analysis area (CAA), and census tract. This information
              is useful for communities and businesses in identifying and planning
              for potential employment growth and demand for goods and
              services.
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                  3                                             General Plan

Economic Development Element
       Relationship to         According to State planning law, the Economic Development
        Other General          Element must be consistent with the other General Plan elements.
                               While each of the elements is independent, the elements are also
        Plan Elements          interrelated to a degree. Certain goals and policies of each element
                               may also address issues that are primary subjects of other elements.
                               This integration of issues throughout the General Plan creates a
                               strong basis for the implementation of plans and programs and
                               achievement of community goals. The Economic Development
                               Element is most directly related to the Land Use, Circulation and
                               Housing Elements.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        4                                   December 2002
                                                            Economic Development Element
                                                  Issues, Goals, and Policies
                       The goals and policies of this Element address the broad range of
                       economic development opportunities within the community. The
                       goals and policies respond to the known challenges within the
                       community, addressing the need to: 1) provide a balance between
                       employment opportunities and housing; 2) attract and retain
                       businesses that are beneficial to the community; and 3) maintain
                       fiscal strength and stability.
              Balanced Balanced economic development requires that there are both
   Employment and      adequate employment opportunities and a local labor force to fill the
                       jobs. Imbalances between employment and housing can create
               Housing excessive commuting distances as workers from adjacent
                       communities fill local jobs or local workers commute to jobs outside
                       Rancho Santa Margarita. The City’s goal is to maintain a balance
                       between attracting and retaining employment generating uses and
                       maintaining suitable housing for the localized labor force.
                       Goal 1:         Encourage and maintain a balance between
                                       employment opportunities and housing.
                       Policy 1.1:     Develop and implement short- and long-range plans
                                       to stimulate jobs and economic growth that
                                       complement the City’s employment, entertainment
                                       and shopping needs.
                       Policy 1.2:     Attract and retain industry that complements Rancho
                                       Santa Margarita’s character and takes advantage of
                                       the City’s supply of quality housing and locational
                                       advantage for goods movement and corporate
                                       mobility.
                       Policy 1.3:     Promote the development and retention of retail uses
                                       (e.g., restaurants, specialty stores) that serve local
                                       needs, expand the selection of conveniently located
                                       goods and services, and help the City to compete for
                                       retail sales tax revenue within the region.
                                                                       City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                            5                                              General Plan

Economic Development Element
                Business       Rancho Santa Margarita has a number of favorable employment
        Attraction and         growth conditions, including demonstrated attractiveness to industry
                               and ideal locational advantages for company headquarters. The City
               Retention       wishes to focus future efforts on continuing to attract high quality,
                               clean industry and local serving retail and service uses. Promoting
                               business development and defining incentives for businesses to
                               locate in Rancho Santa Margarita can increase the opportunities to
                               expand and protect the economic base of the community.
                               Goal 2:        Attract and retain the types of businesses and
                                              employment generating uses that are beneficial to
                                              the community.
                               Policy 2.1:    Encourage the retention of existing industry and
                                              employment generators in the community by
                                              providing and maintaining high-quality services and
                                              facilities.
                               Policy 2.2:    Encourage the use of incentives, such as fast-tracking
                                              development permits and implementation of
                                              consistent and understandable City and master
                                              business park association development standards, to
                                              assist businesses that provide important benefits and
                                              contributions to the community.
                               Policy 2.3:    Promote economic development activities that
                                              encourage interaction and dialogue between business
                                              owners, leasing agents, and property managers for the
                                              purposes of improving business recruiting and
                                              retention.
                               Policy 2.4:    Cooperate with communications providers to ensure
                                              that state-of-the art communications facilities are
                                              available to the community.
                               Policy 2.5:    Promote a synergistic business        environment by
                                              encouraging businesses to locate      where they can
                                              benefit residents and adjacent         businesses and
                                              discouraging businesses that would    be detrimental to
                                              the local business environment.
                               Policy 2.6:    Collaborate with business organizations to attract and
                                              retain business and industry, and target areas where
                                              the City loses potential revenue to other jurisdictions.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        6                                     December 2002
                                                             Economic Development Element
                       Policy 2.7:      Ensure that new businesses and revitalization
                                        activities are compatible with existing development
                                        design and landscaping standards for the community.
                       Policy 2.8:      Encourage businesses and industry to create and
                                        maintain a quality environment designed to promote
                                        community character and encourage pedestrian
                                        activity.
     Fiscal Strength   Prior to incorporation, Rancho Santa Margarita experienced rapid
         and Stability growth under the jurisdiction of the County of Orange. With
                       incorporation and the ability to capture more local revenues, the City
                       is able to conduct fiscal planning in the context of economic
                       development. Since the City has a choice among alternative market
                       supportable uses, those uses that provide greater fiscal strength and
                       stability can be promoted. With economic development planning,
                       Rancho Santa Margarita has an even greater opportunity to influence
                       its fiscal base, resulting in long term fiscal stability.
                       Goal 3:          Maintain an economic base that provides for long-
                                        term fiscal viability.
                       Policy 3.1:      Encourage the growth, location and retention of
                                        industries that generate local tax and employment
                                        advantages.
                       Policy 3.2:      Maintain a pattern of development that balances
                                        revenue generating land uses in concert with other
                                        uses that generally have neutral or negative fiscal
                                        impacts.
                       Policy 3.3:      Strive to maintain a substantial fiscal surplus to
                                        ensure sufficient financial resources during slow
                                        economic periods when revenue generation may be
                                        low.
                       Policy 3.4:      Explore additional revenue sources beyond the sales
                                        tax (e.g., hotel occupancy tax) to promote fiscal
                                        viability.
                                                                         City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                             7                                               General Plan
Economic Development Element
 Related Goals and                  The goals and policies described in the Economic Development
                   Policie          Element are related to and support subjects included within other
                                    General Plan elements. In turn, many goals and policies from the
                           s        other elements directly or indirectly support the goals and policies of
                                    the Economic Development Element. These supporting goals and
                                    policies are identified in Table ED-1 below.
                                                    Table ED-1
                                    Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                                  Economic Development Element Issue Areas
 General Plan Element           Balanced Employment          Business Attraction and    Fiscal Strength and
                                      and Housing                    Retention                Stability
 Land Use                      1.3, 1.4                     1.1, 1.2                 2.4
 Housing                       1.1, 1.2
 Circulation                   1.1, 1.2, 3.3                1.1, 1.2, 3.3
 Economic Development
 Conservation/
                                                            2.1, 2.2
 Open Space
 Safety                                                     4.2
 Noise                         1.1
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                              8                                       December 2002
                                                           Economic Development Element
                                            Economic Development Plan
                      In all cities, interdependence exists between local economic issues
                      and the overall quality of life. Prior to incorporation, Rancho Santa
                      Margarita experienced rapid growth, particularly between 1985 and
                      2000. With a limited commercial and industrial base, Rancho Santa
                      Margarita is primarily a residential community. Little undeveloped
                      land is left in the community so economic development efforts must
                      focus on attracting and retaining businesses that: 1) complement
                      Rancho Santa Margarita’s character and take advantage of the City’s
                      supply of quality housing and locational benefits; 2) stimulate jobs,
                      economic growth, and fiscal stability; 3) serve local employment,
                      shopping, and entertainment needs; and 4) expand the selection of
                      conveniently located goods and services.                  The Economic
                      Development Strategy Plan presents a broad strategy to address the
                      economic challenges facing the community.
Existing Economic     This section of the Plan describes the City’s overall economic profile
              Profile in terms of standard economic indices: taxable retail sales, non-retail
                      sales, employment and salary trends, future employment growth, and
                      employment and wage growth trends.
                      Taxable Retail Sales
                      The ratio of taxable retail sales per capita is a reasonable gauge of
                      two major aspects of a community’s economic position: 1) fiscal
                      strength, and 2) local availability of retail goods and services. Table
                      ED-2 provides retail sales tax revenues and retail sales per capita for
                      the City of Rancho Santa Margarita and Orange County.
                      Although the City has realized significant growth in retail sales in
                      recent years, it still under-performs relative to surrounding
                      communities and the County. As shown in Table ED-3, Rancho
                      Santa Margarita had the lowest retail sales per capita among a group
                      of surrounding communities in
                      2001-02, indicating significant
                      “leakage” of resident retail
                      demand to other jurisdictions.
                      However, significant growth in
                      retail sales between 2000-01
                      and 2001-02 indicated that
                      positive       changes       were
                      occurring.
                                                                      City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                           9                                              General Plan

Economic Development Element
                                                                   Table ED-2
                                      Retail Sales Tax Revenues and Retail Sales Per Capita:
                                                    Fiscal Years 2000-01 and 2001-02
                                                        Rancho Santa Margarita                       Orange County
                                                    Fiscal Year ($000s)           %          Fiscal Year ($000s)        %
                                                    2000-01     2001-02 Increase            2000-01      2001-02     Increase
                               Retail Sales Tax      $2,765      $3,289         18.9%       $301,594     $305,986      1.5%
                               Revenue
                               Population            48,350      48,500          0.3%      2,880,161    2,939,547      2.1%
                               Retail Sales per       $5.72       $6.78         18.6%        $10.47       $10.41      -0.6%
                               Capita
                               Sources: Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc., The HdL Companies, 2002.
                                                                   Table ED-3
                                                  Comparative Retail Sales Per Capita:
                                                    Fiscal Years 2000-01 and 2001-02
                                                                         Retail Sales per Capita ($000s)
                                                  City                      Fiscal Year
                                                                                                  % Growth
                                                                       2000-01        2001-02
                                       San Juan Capistrano              $14.15         $16.31       15.2%
                                       Laguna Hills                     $15.95         $15.63       -2.0%
                                       Mission Viejo                    $11.27         $11.43        1.4%
                                       Laguna Niguel                    $10.39         $11.26        8.3%
                                       Lake Forest                       $8.66         $8.81         1.7%
                                       Dana Point                        $7.59         $8.17         7.6%
                                       Rancho               Santa        $5.72         $6.78        18.6%
                                       Margarita
                                       7-City Average                   $10.25         $10.81        5.5%
                                      Sources: Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc., The HdL Companies, 2002.
                               The City’s retail performance compared to the 7-City average varies
                               by retail sector, as illustrated in Figure ED-1. Specifically, the City
                               under performs in the General Merchandise and Restaurant/Hotel
                               categories. The City is about average in the local-serving Food and
                               Drug category, the Building and Construction category, and the Auto
                               and Transportation group.
                               Rancho Santa Margarita had a total of about 1.3 million square feet
                               of retail space in shopping centers greater than 50,000 square feet,
                               compared to over 3.4 million square feet in Mission Viejo and about
                               2.2 million square feet in Lake Forest in 2002. Although the City
                               comprised 23.7 percent of the population among these cities, it only
                               contained 18.7 percent of the total retail space. These two
                               neighboring cities had an average of about 37 retail square feet per
                               capita compared with about 28 retail square feet per capita for
                               Rancho Santa Margarita. The wider selection of retail tenants in
                               these communities allows the surrounding cities to capture a greater
                               portion of the regional retail demand.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                            10                                             December 2002

                                                             Economic Development Element
              Another measure of retail performance is the average retail sales per
              square foot, including taxable and non-taxable sales, compared
              against industry standards. The estimated average total retail sales
              per square foot was $250 for five selected centers in Rancho Santa
              Margarita in 2002. This was about 9 percent below the national
              average of $275 per square foot for community shopping centers in
              the western United States.1 Most of the City’s commercial centers
              perform above the average.
                                                     Figure ED-1
                       Comparative Retail Sales Per Capita by Category:
                                              Fiscal Year 2001-02
                  $5,000
                  $4,500        $4,399
                  $4,000
                  $3,500
                  $3,000
                  $2,500                                                              $2,457
                            $1,969                                                 $2,174
                  $2,000
                  $1,500                      $1,419
                                                                        $1,030
                  $1,000
                                          $670          $750 $810 $813                                $704
                                                                                                  $406
                    $500
                       $0
                               General   Rest aurant s & Food & Drug Building &      Aut os &     Fuel & Serv
                             Merchandise      Hot el                Const ruct ionTransport at ion St at ions
                              City of Rancho Santa Margarita                  7-City Average
              Sources: Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc., The HdL Companies, 2002.
              Although future development of retail space in the City is expected
              to be modest due to a lack of vacant land in the community, there are
              opportunities to improve the taxable sales ratio by: 1) completing
              the Plaza El Paseo center thereby broadening the selection of general
              merchandise establishments within the City, 2) expanding the City’s
              retail and entertainment tenant base, particularly at Santa Margarita
              Town Center, and 3) evaluating and enhancing the mix of tenants
              within the Town Center shopping center as new leasing opportunities
              arise.
              Non-Retail Sales
              Another common gauge of a community’s economic position is the
              amount of sales generated by manufacturing, leasing, wholesale and
              business firms within the City. These non-retail sales are linked to
              1 Dollars and Cents of Shopping Centers, Urban Land Institute (ULI), 2002.
                                                                           City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                     11                                                             General Plan

Economic Development Element
                               employment beyond the retail and service industries, and also tend to
                               be more stable across economic cycles.
                               Business and industry establishments generated approximately
                               $613,000 in non-retail sales tax revenues during fiscal year 2001-
                               2002 for the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. This represents about
                               15.7 percent of the total taxable sales in the City. In comparison, the
                               County of Orange derived 24.7 percent of its sales tax revenues from
                               non-retail sources, as shown in Table ED-4.
                                                                  Table ED-4
                                       Sales Tax Revenues and Non-Retail Sales Per Capita:
                                                             Fiscal Year 2001-02
                                                                    Rancho Santa                  Orange County
                                                                       Margarita
                                                                                   % of                        % of
                                                                 Amount          revenue        Amount       revenu
                                                                                                                 e
                               Non-Retail Sales                 $613,000          15.7%     $100,534,000      24.7%
                               Population                         48,500            --         2,939,547        --
                               Non-Retail Sales per Capita        $1,264            --           $3,420         --
                               Sources: Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc., The HdL Companies, 2002.
                               When non-retail sales are compared on a per capita basis, it becomes
                               evident that the City is under-performing. Although the City has
                               been able to increase its non-retail sales tax revenues in recent years,
                               the City’s non-retail sales per capita in fiscal year 2001-02 ($1,264)
                               was a little over one third of Orange County ($3,420).
                               The City should continue to attract businesses that generate non-
                               retail taxable sales in order to diversify its sales tax base.
                               Employment and Wage Growth Trends
                               Rancho Santa Margarita is primarily a residential community with a
                               limited commercial and industrial base. The residential components
                               of the various planned communities that make up the City were
                               completed and occupied at a rate faster than the commercial and
                               industrial components.
                               Table ED-5 illustrates that the City’s workforce is beginning to catch
                               up to its population base. According to the California Employment
                               Development Department (EDD), there were an estimated 9,112 net
                               jobs added in the City between 1992 and 2000. Consequently, the
                               jobs-households ratio improved from 0.75 in 1992 to 0.83 in 2000.
                               Although the City has been able to expand its workforce, there is still
                               a need to attract relatively higher-wage employees and firms in the
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                            12                                            December 2002

                                                                   Economic Development Element
engineering,                                              Table ED-5
management, finance                      Jobs – Households Ratio: 1992 to 2000
and         professional
sectors in order to                                            1992       2000
                                                                                     Change 1992
better     match     the                                                                to 2000
                                  Population*                 15,137     47,214          32,077
employment base to
                                  Employment                   4,453     13,565           9,112
the residential labor             Households*                  5,904     16,253          10,349
force.                            Jobs-Households Ratio         0.75      0.83             0.08
                                  * 1992 Population and Household estimates interpolated based on
                                  1990 and 2000 U.S. Census figures.
                                 Source: Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc., California Employment
                                 Development Department (EDD), 1990 and 2000 U.S. Census
                         The typical employee working in Rancho Santa Margarita earned
                         about 84 percent of the average employee salary in Orange County
                         in 2000. As shown in Table ED-6, the average employee in the City
                         earned $32,984 annually, while the average employee in Orange
                         County earned $39,190. However, the median household income in
                         the City in 2000 was $78,745 while the median household income in
                         the County was $58,820.
                                                          Table ED-6
                                                  Employment Profile: 2000
                                                                                            Average
                                               Industry                  Employees*
                                                                                             Salary
                               Agriculture & Mining                          1,044           $19,162
                               Construction                                   987            $31,582
                               Manufacturing                                 1,518           $53,940
                               Transportation, Communications &               874            $44,925
                               Utilities
                               Wholesale Trade                                439            $58,656
                               Retail Trade                                  2,928           $16,886
                               Finance, Insurance, & Real Estate              195            $54,536
                               Services                                      3,579           $34,445
                               Total – All Industries                       11,564           $32,984
                               Orange County Average Salary                                  $39,190
                               Rancho Santa Margarita as % of County Average                  84%
                                * Does not include Government and Self-Employment figures
                                Sources: Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc., California Employment
                                Development Department (EDD)
                         Also shown in Table ED-6, the majority of jobs in 2000 (56 percent)
                         were concentrated in the Services and Retail Trade sectors. Less
                         than 2 percent of the jobs are in the higher-paying Financial,
                         Insurance, and Real Estate sector.
                                                                                City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                               13                                                    General Plan

Economic Development Element
           Summary of          The City’s economic profile and the population and income
              Economic         characteristics in Rancho Santa Margarita’s market area suggest the
                               following economic development challenges face the City:
          Development
             Challenges                There are few vacant, developable parcels for office and
                                       retail space;
                                                  Population growth will be limited, with 687
                                                  housing units planned in the future, and a small
                                                  number of infill opportunities;
                                                  Competition       from    several    larger    retail
                                                  “destination” centers and office parks in nearby
                                                  cities is strong;
                                       The City is not centrally located, limiting the span of the
                                       market area;
                                   City economic development strategies should therefore focus on
                                   the following activities to improve retail and non-retail sales,
                                   enhance the fiscal stability of the City, and sustain a variety of
                                   higher wage employment opportunities for residents:
                                       Attracting and retaining businesses that support well-paying
                                       employment opportunities to improve the jobs/housing ratio
                                       in the community;
                                       Attracting and retaining businesses to capture the existing
                                       leakage and projected demand for shopper (e.g., general
                                       merchandise and specialty items), convenience (e.g., dining
                                       and entertainment establishments), and heavy commercial
                                       (e.g., automotive) goods; and
                                       Attracting and retaining sales tax intense businesses.
Actions to Meet the            Public and private efforts will be required to ensure the fiscal
              Economic         strength and stability of the City and that existing and future market
                               demand is met. The goals and policies of this Element address these
          Development          challenges. Additionally, the following programs are proposed:
             Challenges
                               Coordination with Regional Economic Development Agencies
                               The City will coordinate with the South Orange County Regional
                               Chambers of Commerce and the Orange County Business Council to
                               address the needs of existing and future businesses in the
                               community. The City will work with these agencies to obtain input
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                         14                                   December 2002

                                                 Economic Development Element
              from the business community as to the best means for assisting local
              businesses and maintaining a healthy business environment.
              Economic         Development
              Strategy Plan
              The City will develop an
              Economic         Development
              Strategy Plan to attract new
              businesses and retain existing
              businesses.        Based on
              research performed by the
              City and contained within the
              Rancho Santa Margarita General Plan Economic Analysis, the
              Economic Development Strategy Plan may contain the following
              components:
                     Focus on enhancing local serving and community retail sales
                     opportunities, such as the areas of general merchandise,
                     discount and specialty stores, restaurants and entertainment;
                     Use the preliminary retail analysis contained in the General
                     Plan Economic Analysis to identify opportunities missing in
                     the market area;
                     Evaluate retail center performance leading to center-specific
                     recommendations ranging from facility and accessibility
                     improvements to re-tenanting;
                     Coordinate with center owners and managers to facilitate
                     effective changes;
                     Consider the designation of person(s) at City Hall providing
                     economic development support services;
                     Provide funding and/or support for an advertising campaign
                     about the growing “diverse and vibrant” downtown of
                     Rancho Santa Margarita;
                     Prepare a business survey to identify a detailed profile of the
                     City’s economic base, its expansion or relocation possibilities
                     and potential economic development actions;
                     Look for ways to retain and attract businesses that generate
                     non-retail taxable sales;
                     Expand economic base through providing a suburban
                     business park niche and attracting businesses having a
                     relatively higher proportion of office and professional jobs
                     with higher average wages;
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                 15                                             General Plan

Economic Development Element
                               Explore ways to create expansion opportunities through
                               selected intensification of commercial office or retail sites;
                               and
                               Examine ways that the future completion of SR-241 offers
                               market opportunities, such as broadening market area reach
                               and visitor- and business-serving lodging.
                               Study and evaluate Citywide recreational destination events
                               to provide exposure for the City and stimulate growth
                               opportunities for businesses and services within the
                               community.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                16                                 December 2002
                 Economic Development Element
                         City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002 17                          General Plan
        City	of	
Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
     2013‐2021	
   Housing	Element	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
             	
      September	2013	


2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                      Contents	
Introduction	...................................................................................................................................................................	1	
          A.	     Purpose	of	the	Housing	Element	.............................................................................................	1	
          B.	     Scope	and	Content	of	the	Housing	Element	........................................................................	1	
          C.	     Public	Participation	.......................................................................................................................	2	
          D.	     Consistency	with	Other	Elements	of	the	General	Plan...................................................	3	
Housing	Needs	Assessment	....................................................................................................................................	4	
          A.	     Population	Characteristics	.........................................................................................................	4	
          B.	     Household	Characteristics	.........................................................................................................	6	
          C.	     Housing	Problems	..........................................................................................................................	9	
          D.	     Employment	..................................................................................................................................	13	
          E.	     Housing	Stock	Characteristics	...............................................................................................	16	
          F.	     Persons	with	Special	Needs	....................................................................................................	25	
          G.	     Assisted	Housing	at	Risk	of	Conversion	............................................................................	38	
Resources	and	Opportunities	..............................................................................................................................	40	
          A.	     Future	Housing	Needs	...............................................................................................................	40	
          B.	     Financial	and	Administrative	Resources	..........................................................................	42	
          C.	     Opportunities	for	Energy	Conservation	............................................................................	43	
Housing	Constraints	................................................................................................................................................	45	
          A.	     Governmental	Constraints	......................................................................................................	45	
          B.	     Environmental	and	Infrastructure	Constraints	.............................................................	62	
          C.	     Market	Constraints	.....................................................................................................................	64	
          D.	     Fair	Housing	..................................................................................................................................	67	
Housing	Action	Plan	................................................................................................................................................	69	
          A.	     Goals	and	Policies	........................................................................................................................	69	
          B.	     Housing	Programs	......................................................................................................................	72	
          C.	     Quantified	Objectives	................................................................................................................	78	
Appendix	A:	Evaluation	of	the	2008	Housing	Element	..........................................................................	A‐1	
          A.	     Program	Evaluation	.................................................................................................................	A‐1	
          B.	     Progress	in	Meeting	Quantified	Objectives	....................................................................	A‐1	
Appendix	B:	Public	Participation	Summary	................................................................................................	B‐1	
	
	
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                                     i	                                                                     September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                   List	of	Tables	
Table	H‐1:	Population	Trends	–	1990‐2010	....................................................................................................	5	
Table	H‐2:	Age	Distribution	‐	2010	......................................................................................................................	5	
Table	H‐3:	Race/Ethnicity	‐	2010	.........................................................................................................................	6	
Table	H‐4:	Household	Composition	‐	2010	......................................................................................................	7	
Table	H‐5:	Household	Tenure	‐	2010	.................................................................................................................	8	
Table	H‐6:	Median	Household	Income	...............................................................................................................	8	
Table	H‐7:	HUD	Income	Groups	............................................................................................................................	9	
Table	H‐8:	Overpayment	by	Income	Category	.............................................................................................	11	
Table	H‐9:	Overcrowding	......................................................................................................................................	12	
Table	H‐10:	Labor	Force	........................................................................................................................................	13	
Table	H‐11:	Employment	by	Occupation	.......................................................................................................	14	
Table	H‐12:	Projected	Job	Growth	by	Occupation	–	2008‐2018	..........................................................	15	
Table	H‐13:	Job	Location	for	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	Residents	.......................................................	16	
Table	H‐14:	Housing	by	Type	..............................................................................................................................	17	
Table	H‐15:	Age	of	Housing	Stock	by	Tenure	...............................................................................................	18	
Table	H‐16:	Kitchen	and	Plumbing	Facilities	by	Tenure	.........................................................................	19	
Table	H‐17:	Housing	Vacancy	.............................................................................................................................	20	
Table	H‐18:	Median	Home	Prices	‐	2011	.......................................................................................................	21	
Table	H‐19:	Median	and	Average	Rents	by	Number	of	Bedrooms	.....................................................	22	
Table	H‐20:	Housing	Affordability	Matrix	‐2012	........................................................................................	24	
Table	H‐21:	Special	Needs	Groups	in	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	............................................................	25	
Table	H‐22:	Persons	with	Disabilities	by	Age	..............................................................................................	26	
Table	H‐23:	Elderly	Households	by	Tenure	..................................................................................................	29	
Table	H‐24:	Household	Size	by	Tenure	...........................................................................................................	31	
Table	H‐25:	Household	Type	by	Tenure.........................................................................................................	32	
Table	H‐26:	Agricultural	Employment	............................................................................................................	34	
Table	H‐27:	Emergency	Shelters	Serving	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	....................................................	36	
Table	H‐28:	Transitional	Housing	Facilities	Serving	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	..............................	37	
Table	H‐29:	Inventory	of	Assisted	Affordable	Units	.................................................................................	39	
Table	H‐30:	Residential	Land	Use	Categories	..............................................................................................	45	
Table	H‐31:	Residential	Development	Standards	......................................................................................	47	
Table	H‐32:	Permitted	Residential	Development	by	Zoning	District	................................................	49	
Table	H‐33:	Residential	Parking	Requirements	..........................................................................................	55	
Table	H‐34:	Planning	and	Development	Fees	‐	2010	...............................................................................	60	
Table	H‐35:	Road	Improvement	Standards	..................................................................................................	61	
Table	H‐36:	Disposition	of	Loan	Applications	.............................................................................................	66	
Table	H‐37:	Related	Policies	and	Goals	in	General	Plan	Elements	.....................................................	72	
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                        ii	                                                                    September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                                   Introduction	
                                A. Purpose	of	the	Housing	Element	
                                The Housing Element is a guide for housing within Rancho Santa
                                Margarita. The Element provides an indication of the need for housing
                                in the community in terms of affordability, availability, adequacy, and
                                accessibility. The Element provides a strategy to address housing
                                needs and identifies a series of specific housing programs to meet
                                community needs.
                                The Housing Element is an official municipal response to a growing
                                awareness for the need to provide housing for all economic segments
                                of the community, as well as a legal requirement for all California
                                jurisdictions. It provides Rancho Santa Margarita with the opportunity
                                to plan for the existing and future housing needs in the community.
                                This Element has been prepared in compliance with the 2013-2021
                                planning cycle for cities within the Southern California Association of
                                Governments (SCAG) region. The Housing Element covers an eight-
                                year planning period from October 15, 2013 through October 15,
                                2021. It identifies strategies and programs that focus on: 1) providing
                                diverse housing sites and opportunities; 2) conserving and improving
                                the existing affordable housing stock; 3) removing governmental and
                                other constraints to housing development; and 4) promoting equal
                                housing opportunities.
                                B. Scope	and	Content	of	the	
                                    Housing	Element	
                                The State Legislature recognizes the
                                role of local general plans and
                                particularly the Housing Element in
                                implementing statewide housing goals
                                to provide decent and adequate housing
                                for all persons. Furthermore, the Legislature stresses continuing efforts
                                toward providing affordable housing for all income groups. The State
                                Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) also sets
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           1	                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                forth specific requirements regarding the scope and content of housing
                                elements prepared by cities and counties.
                                The Housing Element consists of the following major components:
                                       An analysis of the City’s demographic and housing
                                        characteristics and trends;
                                       An evaluation of land, financial, and administrative resources
                                        available to address the City’s housing goals; and
                                       A review of potential constraints, both governmental and non-
                                        governmental, to meeting Rancho Santa Margarita’s housing
                                        needs;
                                       The Housing Action Plan for addressing the City’s identified
                                        housing needs, including housing goals, policies and programs.
                                       An evaluation of the appropriateness and effectiveness of
                                        previous goals, policies and programs in achieving the City’s
                                        objectives (Appendix A).
                                C. Public	Participation	
                                Public participation is an important component of the planning
                                process, and this update to the Housing Element has provided residents
                                and other interested parties numerous opportunities for involvement.
                                Public notices of all meetings and hearings were published in the local
                                newspaper in advance of each meeting, as well as posted on the City’s
                                website. The Draft Housing Element was made available for review at
                                City Hall and posted on the City’s website. A notice of the availability
                                of the document was also circulated to housing advocates and
                                nonprofit organizations representing the interests of lower and
                                moderate income persons and special needs groups.
                                On April 3, 2013, the City conducted a study session before the
                                Planning Commission to review the Draft Housing Element and to
                                receive public input. A representative from the Regional Center of
                                Orange County (RCOC) attended this meeting and commented on the
                                importance of affordable housing to the community’s special needs
                                population, particularly those with developmental disabilities. In
                                addition, one written comment was submitted to the City via email.
                                This resident repeated the need for affordable housing and
                                transportation services in the community for the City’s disabled
                                population.
                                The provision of affordable housing is an important goal for the City
                                and the Housing Action Plan for the 2013-2021 Housing Element
                                contains a number of programs to assist persons with disabilities with
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           2	                                 September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                  finding and securing affordable housing, including the Housing Choice
                                  Vouchers program and OCHA Special Needs Groups Rental
                                  Assistance programs.
                                  Additional hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council
                                  will be conducted prior to adoption of the Housing Element.
                                  D. Consistency	with	Other	Elements	of	the	General	
                                        Plan	
                                  The Housing Element must be consistent with other elements of the
                                  General Plan, which was last comprehensively updated in 2002.1 The
                                  Housing Element has been prepared within the context of the other
                                  General Plan Elements and is consistent with the policies and
                                  proposals set forth in the Plan. The Housing Element is closely related
                                  to development policies contained in the Land Use Element, which
                                  establishes the location, type, intensity and distribution of land uses
                                  throughout the City. The Land Use Element determines the number
                                  and type of housing units that can be constructed in the various land
                                  use districts. Areas designated for commercial and industrial uses
                                  create employment opportunities, which in turn create demand for
                                  housing. The Circulation Element establishes the location and scale of
                                  streets, highways and other transportation routes that provide access to
                                  residential neighborhoods. As portions of the General Plan are
                                  amended in the future, the Plan (including the Housing Element) will
                                  be reviewed to ensure that internal consistency is maintained.
                                  Furthermore, the City understands that upon adoption of the Housing
                                  Element, the City will amend the Safety and Conservation Elements of
                                  the General Plan as nessary to address fire hazards, flood hazards, and
                                  flood management.
                                  SB 1087 of 2005 requires cities to provide a copy of their Housing
                                  Elements to local water and sewer providers, and also requires that
                                  these agencies provide priority hookups for developments with lower-
                                  income housing. The Housing Element will be provided to these
                                  agencies immediately upon adoption.
1
    Individual elements of the General Plan have been updated since 2002.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                   3	                            September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                     Housing	Needs	Assessment	
                                     Rancho Santa Margarita is a planned community that offers a range of
                                     lifestyle and housing opportunities. Much of Rancho Santa Margarita’s
                                     growth took place in the 1990s, prior to its incorporation in 2000.
                                     Since incorporation it has grown modestly from a population of
                                     approximately 47,200 to about 47,900 residents today. Rancho Santa
                                     Margarita is approximately 13.1 square miles in area and is bounded
                                     by the City of Mission Viejo to the west and unincorporated Orange
                                     County to the north, east and south. The population is relatively
                                     affluent, with an estimated median household income between 2007
                                     and 2011 of$104,167. The 2007-2011 American Community Survey
                                     (ACS)2 indicated Rancho Santa Margarita's median household income
                                     was 38 percent greater than that of Orange County ($75,762) and 69
                                     percent greater than California as a whole ($61,632).
                                     This chapter examines general population and household
                                     characteristics and trends, such as age, race and ethnicity,
                                     employment, household composition and size, household income, and
                                     special needs. Characteristics of the existing housing stock (e.g.,
                                     number of units and type, tenure, age and condition, costs) are also
                                     addressed. Finally, the City’s projected housing growth needs based on
                                     the 2014 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) are examined.
                                     The Housing Needs Assessment utilizes the most recent data from the
                                     2010 U.S. Census, American Community Survey (ACS), California
                                     Employment Development Department (EDD), Southern California
                                     Association of Governments (SCAG) and other relevant sources.
                                     Supplemental data was obtained through field surveys and from
                                     private vendors. In addition, the City’s 2011 – 2015 Consolidated Plan
                                     provides useful information for this update of the Housing Element.
                                     A. Population	Characteristics	
                                     1.       Population	Growth	Trends	
                                     Rancho Santa Margarita was incorporated January 1, 2000 with a
                                     population of 47,214. The future city was developed primarily
                                     between 1990 and 2000 as a master planned community. From 1990 to
                                     2000, the population of the unincorporated area grew by nearly 315
2
    The 2010 Census does not provide detailed demographic or housing characteristics through the “long form” as in previous
    censuses. A new process known as the American Community Survey (ACS) was instituted by the Census Bureau. The ACS
    is a series of sample surveys conducted for different variables at different schedules depending on the size of the community.
    Results are then averaged over a period of time. Multiple sets of ACS data must be used to compile the demographic and
    housing data as required by the State Housing Element law. Furthermore, due to the small sample sizes, the margins of error
    tend to be significant for small communities.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                     4	                                               September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                     percent, far eclipsing the county’s growth rate of 18 percent. Since that
                                     time, population growth in the City has stabilized. From 2000 to 2010,
                                     the newly incorporated City’s population grew by only about one
                                     percent to an estimated population of 47,853 (see Table H-1). The
                                     City’s 2010 population represents approximately 1.6 percent of the
                                     county’s total population of 3,010,232.
                                                              Table H-1
                                             Population Trends - 1990-2010
                                    Rancho Santa Margarita vs. Orange County
                                                                                                 Growth            Growth
                                          1990                 2000               2010
                                                                                                1990-2000         2000-2010
Rancho Santa Margarita                   11,390               47,214             47,853          314.50%            1.35%
Orange County                          2,410,556             2,846,289          3,010,232         18.10%            5.76%
Source: Bureau of the Census, 1990-2010.
                                     2.         Age	
                                     Housing needs are influenced by the age characteristics of the
                                     population. Different age groups require different accommodations
                                     based on lifestyle, family type, income level, and housing preference.
                                     Table H-2 provides a comparison of the City’s and county’s
                                     population by age group in 2010. The age distribution of the City’s
                                     population is similar to Orange County as a whole, though the
                                     proportion of older residents (persons aged 65 years or older) in the
                                     City is significantly less than for the county. Regardless, the median
                                     age of the City’s population (36.0) is nearly identical to that of the
                                     County (36.2).
                                                                                Table H-2
                                                                       Age Distribution - 2010
                                                                      Rancho Santa Margarita               Orange County
                                            Age Group
                                                                         Persons              %         Persons          %
                                       Under 18 Years                     13,879           29.00%       736,659       24.47%
                                       18 to 24 Years                      3,793            7.93%       305,286       10.14%
                                       25 to 44 Years                     13,706           28.64%       852,571       28.32%
                                       45 to 64 Years                     13,764           28.76%       766,039       25.45%
                                       65 to 74 Years                      1,520            3.18%       187,454        6.23%
                                       75 to 84 Years                       796             1.66%       112,703        3.74%
                                       85 Years and over                    395            0.83%         49,520        1.65%
                                       Total                             47,853           100.00%      3,010,232     100.00%
                                       Median Age                                  36.0                         36.2
                                       Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                         5	                                         September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                 3.         Race	and	Ethnicity	
                                 The racial and ethnic composition of the City differs from the county
                                 in that a larger proportion of City residents are White and non-
                                 Hispanic or Latino. Approximately 67 percent of City residents are
                                 non-Hispanic white. By comparison 44 percent of the county’s
                                 residents are non-Hispanic white. Hispanics comprise just 19 percent
                                 of Rancho Santa Margarita’s population, though Hispanics make up
                                 over one-third (34 percent) of those in the county. Asians, at nine
                                 percent of the City, represent the largest group that is neither Hispanic
                                 nor White (Table H-3).
                                                                 Table H-3
                                                            Race/Ethnicity - 2010
                                                                       Rancho Santa
                                                                                            Orange County
                                   Race/Ethnicity                        Margarita
                                                                  Persons          %    Persons          %
                       Not Hispanic or Latino                      38,951        81.4% 1,997,259       66.3%
                         White                                     32,054        67.0% 1,328,499       44.1%
                         Black or African American                   788         1.6%    44,000         1.5%
                         American Indian/Alaska Native                82          0.2%    6,216         0.2%
                         Asian                                      4,268        8.9%   532,477       17.7%
                         Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander             88          0.2%    8,357         0.3%
                         Other Races or 2+ Races                    1,671         3.5%  77,710         2.6%
                       Hispanic or Latino (Any Race)                8,902        18.6% 1,012,973       33.7%
                       Total                                       47,853       100.0% 3,010,232      100.0%
                       Sources: Bureau of the Census, 2010.
                                 B. Household	Characteristics	
                                 1.         Household	Composition	and	Size	
                                 Household characteristics are important indicators of the type and size
                                 of housing needed in a city. The Census defines a “household” as all
                                 persons occupying a housing unit, which may include single persons
                                 living alone, families related through marriage or blood, or unrelated
                                 persons sharing a single unit. Persons in group quarters such as
                                 dormitories, retirement or convalescent homes, or other group living
                                 situations are included in population totals but are not considered
                                 households.
                                 Table H-4 provides a comparison of households by type for the City
                                 and for Orange County as a whole, as reported in the 2010 Census.
                                 Generally, household composition in the City closely matches that of
                                 the county. Family households comprised approximately 75 percent of
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                 6	                                 September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                 all households in the City, which was only slightly higher than the
                                 county’s proportion of family households (71 percent). The only
                                 significant difference between the City and the county was in the
                                 proportion of family households with children under the age of 18
                                 years (44 percent City vs. 34 percent county). The City’s average
                                 household size of 2.87 is slightly lower than the size for Orange
                                 County as a whole (2.99).
                                                                 Table H-4
                                                        Household Composition - 2010
                                                                     Rancho Santa
                                                                                        Orange County
                                          Type                         Margarita
                                                                 Households       %   Households        %
                        Total Households                           16,665      100.0%  992,781       100.0%
                        Families                                   12,457       74.7%  708,491       71.4%
                        - With Children under 18                    7,360       44.2%  335,587       33.8%
                        Non-Family Households                       4,118       24.7%  284,290        28.6%
                        - Single Living Alone                       3,199       19.2%  207,849        20.9%
                        Average Household Size                            2.87                2.99
                        Sources: Bureau of the Census, 2010.
                                 2.         Housing	Tenure	
                                 Housing tenure is an important indicator of the housing market.
                                 Tenure refers to whether a unit is owned or rented by the occupants.
                                 Tenure is an important market characteristic because it is directly
                                 related to housing types and turnover rates. The tenure distribution of
                                 a community’s housing stock can be an indicator of several aspects of
                                 the housing market, including the affordability of units, household
                                 stability and residential mobility among others. In most communities,
                                 tenure distribution generally correlates with household income,
                                 composition and age of the householder. Communities need an
                                 adequate supply of units available both for rent and for sale in order to
                                 accommodate a range of households with varying income, family size
                                 and composition, and lifestyle. Table H-5 provides a comparison of the
                                 number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied units in the City in
                                 2010 as compared to the county as a whole. It reveals that the level of
                                 homeownership for the City (71 percent) is substantially higher than
                                 the level for the county (59 percent).
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                7	                                September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                      Table H-5
                                                               Household Tenure - 2010
                                                                       Santa Margarita        Orange County
                                             Tenure
                                                                      Units             %     Units         %
                                Owner Occupied                        11,906          71.4%  588,313      59.3%
                                Renter Occupied                        4,759          28.6%  404,468      40.7%
                                Total Occupied Units                  16,665            1    992,781        1
                                Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010.
                                3.        Household	Income	
                                Household income is a primary factor affecting what housing is
                                needed in a community. According to the 2007-2011 American
                                Community Survey (ACS), the median household income in Rancho
                                Santa Margarita was $104,167, approximately 36 percent higher than
                                the Orange County median income of $75,762 (Table H-6).
                                                                      Table H-6
                                                              Median Household Income
                                                               Orange County and Cities
                                                                      Median Household      % of County Median
                                           Jurisdiction
                                                                              Income              Income
                                 Rancho Santa Margarita                     $104,167               37.5%
                                 Dana Point                                  $83,306               10.0%
                                 Laguna Beach                                $99,190               30.9%
                                 Laguna Niguel                               $100,480              32.6%
                                 San Clemente                                 $89,289              17.9%
                                 Lake Forest                                  $94,632              24.9%
                                 Mission Viejo                                $96,420              27.3%
                                 San Juan Capistrano                          $73,806              -2.6%
                                 Orange County                                $75,762              0.0%
                                 California                                  $61,632              -18.7%
                                 Source: American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
                                The Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
                                developed the following income categories based on the Area Median
                                Income (AMI) of the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) established
                                by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD):
                                         Extremely Low Income - less than 30 percent of the AMI
                                         Very Low Income - between 31 and 50 percent of the AMI
                                         Low Income - between 51 and 80 percent of the AMI
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                   8	                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                         Moderate Income - between 81 and 120 percent of the AMI
                                         Above Moderate Income - greater than 120 percent of the AMI
                                Collectively, extremely low, very low, and low income households are
                                referred to as lower income households (up to 80 percent AMI).
                                The 2010 Census does not contain information on household income.
                                However, household income data were tabulated by the Southern
                                California Association of Governments (SCAG) using the 2005-2009
                                ACS (Table H-7). As shown, between 2005 and 2009, approximately
                                26 percent of the City’s households earned lower incomes, while
                                approximately 74 percent were either moderate income or above
                                moderate income households.
                                                                   Table H-7
                                                               HUD Income Groups
                                                                     Number of  Percent of  Orange County
                                           Income Group
                                                                     Households    Total       Percent
                                 Extremely Low (30% or less)           1,053       6.1%         11.9%
                                 Very Low (31 to 50%)                   923        5.3%         11.0%
                                 Low (51 to 80%)                       2,450      14.2%         16.8%
                                 Moderate (81 to 100%)                 3,090      17.9%         18.4%
                                 Above Moderate (over 100%)            9,789      56.6%         42.0%
                                 Total                                17,305     100.00%       100.0%
                                 Source: SCAG, 2005-2009 ACS
                                State law requires quantification and analysis of existing and projected
                                housing needs of extremely low-income (ELI) households. Extremely
                                low-income is defined as households with income of not more than 30
                                percent of area median income. According to the SCAG tabulation,
                                between 2005 and 2009, approximately 1,045 extremely low income
                                households resided in Rancho Santa Margarita, representing six
                                percent of the City’s total households (Table H-7). Households with
                                extremely low income have a variety of housing situations and needs.
                                C. Housing	Problems	
                                While the SCAG data provide estimates of the number of households
                                at each income level, they do not provide any detail on the specific
                                housing needs and problems of these households. The Comprehensive
                                Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) developed by the Census
                                Bureau for HUD, however, provides detailed information on housing
                                needs by income level for different types of households in Rancho
                                Santa Margarita. Detailed CHAS data based on the 2006-2008 ACS
                                data is displayed in Table H-8. Housing problems considered by
                                CHAS include:
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                               9	                              September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                      Units with physical defects (lacking complete kitchen or
                                       bathroom);
                                      Overcrowded conditions (housing units with more than one
                                       person per room);
                                      Housing cost burden (including utilities, exceeding 30 percent
                                       of gross income); or
                                      Severe housing cost burden (including utilities, exceeding 50
                                       percent of gross income).
                                Most lower and moderate income households cope with housing cost
                                issues either by assuming a cost burden, or by occupying a smaller
                                than needed or substandard unit. The types of problems vary
                                according to household income, type, and tenure. Some highlights
                                include:
                                      In general, renter-households had a higher level of housing
                                       problems (52 percent) compared to owner-households (49
                                       percent).
                                      Large renter-families and elderly owner households had the
                                       highest level of housing problems regardless of income level
                                       (72 percent for large renter households and 60 percent for
                                       elderly owner households).
                                      Very low income households had the highest incidence of
                                       housing problems (91 percent).
                                About 72 percent of all elderly renters suffered from a housing
                                problem, including 100 percent of both low and moderate income
                                housheholds, and 93 percent of extremely low income elderly renters.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                         10	                                September	2013	

   2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                                        Table H-8
                                                    Overpayment by Income Category – Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                                 Renters                                      Owners
                                                Elderly
                                                                                                                                                      Total
              Household by                       1&2
                                                                Small Related Large Related   All Other                       All Other  Total     Households
  Type, Income, & Housing Problem1             Member                                                   Total Renters Elderly
                                                                   (2 to 4)    (5 or more)   Households                       Owners    Owners
                                              Households
Extremely Low (0 to 30% MFI)                      205                 80            25           225        535        180       175      510         1,045
  % With Any Housing Problems                     93%              100%           100%          76%         87%        56%      91%      81%          84%
  % Cost Burden > 30%                             93%              100%           100%          76%         87%        53%      91%      80%          84%
  % Cost Burden > 50%                             93%              100%           100%          33%         69%        33%      91%      71%          70%
Very Low Income (31 to 50% MFI)                    90                265            --           170        525         75       135      485         1,010
  % With Any Housing Problems                     78%              100%             --          100%        96%        80%      85%      86%          91%
  % Cost Burden > 30%                             78%              100%             --          97%         95%        80%      85%      86%          91%
  % Cost Burden > 50%                             50%               87%             --          88%         81%        20%      85%      76%          79%
Low Income (51 to 80% MFI)                        105                275            --           360        740        335       185     1,470        2,210
  % With Any Housing Problems                    100%               87%             --          92%         91%        76%      92%      85%          87%
  % Cost Burden > 30%                            100%               87%             --          92%         91%        66%      92%      83%          86%
  % Cost Burden > 50%                             62%               24%             --          36%         35%        36%      73%      48%          44%
Moderate Income (81-95% MFI)                      105               1,190           55           940       2,290       465     1,205    10,040       12,330
  % With Any Housing Problems                      0%               32%            64%          23%         28%        46%      47%      40%          38%
  % Cost Burden > 30%                              0%               17%            27%          23%         19%        45%      47%      40%          36%
  % Cost Burden > 50%                              0%                0%            27%           9%          4%        20%      14%       7%           7%
Total Households                                  505               1,810           80          1,695      4,090      1,055    1,700    12,505       16,595
  % With Any Housing Problems                     72%               54%            75%          52%         56%        60%      59%      49%          50%
  % Cost Burden > 30%                             72%               44%            50%          52%         51%        55%      59%      48%          49%
  % Cost Burden > 50%                             59%               21%            50%          26%         28%        27%      34%      17%          20%
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2006-2008.
Housing Problem = cost burden, overcrowding, and/or physical inadequacy.
   City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
   General	Plan	                                                                            11	                                             September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                1.       Overcrowding	
                                Overcrowding is often closely related to household income and the
                                cost of housing. The U.S. Census Bureau considers a household to be
                                overcrowded when there is more than one person per room, excluding
                                bathrooms and kitchens, with severe overcrowding when there are
                                more than 1.5 occupants per room. Table H-9 summarizes
                                overcrowding for the City of Rancho Santa Margarita between 2007
                                and 2011.
                                                                      Table H-9
                                                                   Overcrowding
                                                               Rancho Santa Margarita        Orange County
                                     Household Type
                                                               Households         Percent Households    Percent
                                Owner-Occupied                     11,799           72.4%  585,483       59.2%
                                  Overcrowded                        141             1.2%   17,666        3.0%
                                  Severely Overcrowded               31              0.3%   6,392         1.1%
                                Renter-Occupied                     4,487           27.6%  402,871       40.8%
                                  Overcrowded                        268             6.0%   40,182       10.0%
                                  Severely Overcrowded               153             3.4%   30,732        7.6%
                                Source: American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
                                Between 2007 and 2011, overcrowding was more likely to affect the
                                City’s renters than its homeowners. Approximately six percent of the
                                City’s renter-occupied households were overcrowded compared to
                                only one percent of owner-occupied households. Overall, the City was
                                much less affected by overcrowding than the county as a whole,
                                regardless of tenure (three percent in the City versus six percent in the
                                county).
                                2.       Overpayment	
                                According to State housing policy, overpayment occurs when housing
                                costs exceed 30 percent of gross household income. A household that
                                spends more than it can afford for housing has less money available
                                for other necessities and emergency expenditures. Lower income
                                households overpaying for housing are more likely to be at risk of
                                becoming homeless than other income groups.
                                Detailed CHAS data based on the 2006-2008 ACS in Table H-8 shows
                                that 91 percent of all lower-income renter households and 83 percent
                                of all lower-income owner households in Rancho Santa Margarita
                                were overpaying for housing.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                               12	                                    September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                D. Employment	
                                Employment is an important factor affecting housing needs within a
                                community. The jobs available in each employment sector and the
                                incomes for these jobs affect the type and size of housing residents can
                                afford.
                                1.       Current	Employment	
                                Current employment and projected job growth have a significant
                                influence on housing needs. Table H-10 shows that the City had a
                                workforce of 26,360 persons, or 75 percent of the working-age
                                population, as reported in the 2010 Census. A high proportion of the
                                working-age population in the City is in its labor force (75 percent
                                versus only 67 percent for County). About seven percent of the City’s
                                employed residents worked at home.
                                                                     Table H-10
                                                                    Labor Force
                                              Rancho Santa Margarita vs. Orange County
                                                                       Rancho Santa
                                                                                              Orange County
                                                                          Margarita
                                                                    Persons           %    Persons        %
                                In Labor Force                      26,360          74.7% 1,574,209     67.2%
                                  -Work at Home                      1,798           7.4%   69,254       4.9%
                                  -Unemployed                        1,529           5.8%  130,659       8.3%
                                Not in Labor Force                   8,942          25.3%  769,559      32.8%
                                With Social Security Income          1,823          11.2%  231,466      23.4%
                                Total Population Age 16+            35,202                2,343,768
                                Source: American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
                                During 2007-2011, approximately 49 percent of the City’s employed
                                residents worked in management and professional occupations (Table
                                H-11). A significant percentage of workers (29 percent) were
                                employed in sales and office related occupations. A relatively low
                                percentage of workers (12 percent) were employed in service related
                                occupations, which include waiters, waitresses and beauticians. Blue
                                collar occupations such as machine operators, assemblers, farming,
                                transportation, handlers and laborers constituted just 10 percent of
                                theemployment.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                               13	                                    September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                      Table H-11
                                 Employment by Occupation – Rancho Santa Margarita Residents
                                                                                      Jobs      Percent
                                 Management, Professional and Related                12,123      48.8%
                                 Service                                              2,895      11.7%
                                 Sales and Office                                     7,285      29.4%
                                 Construction, Extraction, and Maintenance            1,081       4.4%
                                 Production, Transportation, and Material Moving      1,435      5.8%
                                 Source: American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
                                2.        Projected	Job	Growth	
                                Future housing needs are affected by the number and type of new jobs
                                created during this planning period. Table H-12 shows projected job
                                growth by occupation for the Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine MSA
                                (Orange County) along with median hourly wages for the period 2008-
                                2018. Total employment in Orange County is expected to grow by 8
                                percent between 2008 and 2018. The overall growth is expected to add
                                135,500 new jobs and bring the employment of Orange County to
                                almost 1,756,100 by 2018.
                                Generally, residents that are employed in well-paying occupations
                                have less difficulty obtaining adequate housing than residents in low
                                paying occupations. Table H-12 illustrates the growth trend in low-
                                wage service jobs such as health care support, food preparation and
                                serving, cleaning and maintenance, sales, and office/administrative
                                support, as well as some higher income occupations.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                               14	                             September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                          Table H-12
                             Projected Job Growth by Occupation, 2008-2018 –
                         Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine Metropolitan Statistical Area
                                                                  Annual Average        Employment        Median
                     Occupational Title                             Employment             Change          Hourly
                                                                  2008       2018   Numerical   Percent    Wage*
 Total, All Occupations                                        1,620,600  1,756,100  135,500      8.4%     $17.95
 Management Occupations                                         110,750    115,360     4,610      4.2%     $51.36
 Business and Financial Operations Occupations                   86,980     97,250   10,270      11.8%     $30.69
 Computer and Mathematical Occupations                           41,320     46,480    5,160      12.5%     $37.19
 Architecture and Engineering Occupations                        36,780     40,660    3,880      10.5%     $38.28
 Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations                 15,730     18,680     2,950      18.8%     $30.93
 Community and Social Services Occupations                       15,530     17,610    2,080      13.4%     $24.03
 Legal Occupations                                              14,350     16,390     2,040      14.2%     $43.44
 Education, Training, and Library Occupations                    79,280     87,170    7,890      10.0%     $26.76
 Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media
                                                                 36,740     38,810    2,070       5.6%     $22.24
 Occupations
 Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations              63,470     76,970   13,500      21.3%     $33.61
 Healthcare Support Occupations                                 34,180     43,240     9,060      26.5%     $13.66
 Protective Service Occupations                                 25,430      28,340    2,910      11.4%     $16.42
 Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations               134,660    150,210   15,550      11.5%      $9.42
 Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance
                                                                 62,850     68,310    5,460       8.7%     $11.01
 Occupations
 Personal Care and Service Occupations                           50,580     60,770   10,190      20.1%     $10.41
 Sales and Related Occupations                                  179,390    192,180   12,790       7.1%     $14.23
 Office and Administrative Support Occupations                  279,810    295,330   15,520       5.5%     $16.78
 Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Occupations                       4,710      4,840      130       2.8%      $9.40
 Construction and Extraction Occupations                         95,380    101,140    5,760       6.0%     $22.03
 Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations               50,510     53,930    3,420       6.8%     $21.70
 Production Occupations                                         115,810    114,300    -1,510     -1.3%     $13.43
 Transportation and Material Moving Occupations                  86,260     88,110    1,850       2.1%     $12.75
 Note: * = 2010 wages
 Source: California Employment Development Dept., March 2009 Benchmark.
                                   3.        Jobs‐Housing	Balance	
                                   A regional balance of jobs to housing helps to ensure that the demand
                                   for housing is reasonably related to supply. When the number of jobs
                                   significantly exceeds the housing supply, the rental and for-sale
                                   housing markets may become overheated, requiring households to pay
                                   a larger percentage of their income for housing. In addition, a tight
                                   housing market can result in overcrowding and longer commute times
                                   as workers seek more affordable housing in outlying areas. The current
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                     15	                                 September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                 jobs-housing objective within the SCAG region is one new housing
                                 unit for every 1.5 jobs.4
                                 According to the 2007-2011 ACS, 91 percent of employed Rancho
                                 Santa Margarita residents worked in Orange County, and
                                 approximately 21 percent of all workers were employed within City
                                 limits (Table H-13).
                                                                           Table H-13
                                            Job Location for Rancho Santa Margarita Residents
                                                                                       Persons    Percent
                                   Work in Orange County                               22,142      91.1%
                                     -Work in City of Residence                         5,085      20.9%
                                     -Work Outside City of Residence                   19,229      79.1%
                                   Work in Another California County                    2,029       8.3%
                                   Work Outside California                               143        0.6%
                                   Total Workers Age 16+                               24,314
                                   Source: American Community Survey (ACS), 2009-2011.
                                 E. Housing	Stock	Characteristics	
                                 This section presents an evaluation of the characteristics of the
                                 community’s housing stock and helps in identifying and prioritizing
                                 needs. The factors evaluated include the number and type of housing
                                 units, recent growth trends, age and condition, tenure, vacancy,
                                 housing costs, affordability, and assisted affordable units at-risk of loss
                                 due to conversion to market-rate. A housing unit is defined as a house,
                                 apartment, mobile home, or group of rooms, occupied as separate
                                 living quarters, or if vacant, intended for occupancy as separate living
                                 quarters.
                                 1.         Housing	Type	and	Growth	Trends	
                                 As of 2011, about three-quarters of the housing stock in Rancho Santa
                                 Margarita was comprised of single-family homes, both detached and
                                 attached (74 percent of all units). Multi-family units comprised about
                                 26 percent of the housing stock. The City has just 13 mobile home
                                 units, which make up less than one percent of all housing units. Table
                                 H-14 provides a breakdown of the housing stock by type along with
                                 growth trends for the City compared to the county as a whole.
4
     SCAG Regional Comprehensive Plan, Land Use & Housing Chapter, (2008).
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                  16	                             September	2013	

         2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                         Table H-14
                                                                      Housing by Type
                                                                  2000                                     2011                                  Growth
             Structure Type
                                                         Units                 %                 Units                  %               Units                  %
Rancho Santa Margarita
Single-Family Detached                                    9,044               54%                9,293                 55%                249                 3%
Single-Family Attached                                   3,918               24%                 3,307                 19%               -611                -16%
Multi-Family 2-4 Units                                     575                3%                  672                   4%                 97                17%
Multi-Family 5+ Units                                    3,102               19%                 3,700                 22%                598                19%
Mobile Homes                                                0                  0%                  13                   0%                 13                 0%
Total Units                                              16,639              100%               16,985                100%                346                 2%
Orange County
Single-Family Detached                                  490,141               51%              534,262                 51%              44121                 9%
Single-Family Attached                                  124,610               13%              127,332                 12%               2,722                2%
Multi-Family 2-4 Units                                   88,659               9%                91,142                  9%               2,483                3%
Multi-Family 5+ Units                                   233,615              24%               260,526                 25%              26,911               12%
Mobile Homes                                             32,459               3%                33,061                  3%                602                 2%
Total Units                                             969,484              100%             1,046,323               100%              76839                 8%
Notes: ACS data is based on a fairly small sample of the population. Responses are then extrapolated for the City as a whole and may result in a larger margin of error.
Sources:
1. Bureau of the Census, 2000.
2. American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
                                                 2.          Housing	Age	and	Conditions	
                                                 Housing age is sometimes an important indicator of housing condition.
                                                 Housing units built prior to 1978, when stringent limits on the amount
                                                 of lead in paint were imposed, may have interior or exterior building
                                                 components coated with lead-based paint. Housing units built before
                                                 1970 may be more likely to be in need of rehabilitation and contain
                                                 lead-based paint in deteriorated condition. Table H-15 shows the age
                                                 distribution of the housing stock in Rancho Santa Margarita compared
                                                 to Orange County as a whole.
         City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
         General	Plan	                                                            17	                                                    September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                              Table H-15
                                                          Age of Housing Stock by Tenure –
                                                  Rancho Santa Margarita vs. Orange County
                                                                                 Rancho Santa
                                                                                                                 Orange County
                                              Year Built                            Margarita
                                                                               Units             %             Units             %
                                  Owner Occupied                              11,799         100.0%           595,444         100.0%
                                  2000 or Later                                 493            4.2%            51,013           8.6%
                                  1980-99                                     11,017          93.4%            11,017           1.9%
                                  1970-79                                       108            0.9%           141643           23.8%
                                  1960-69                                        72            0.6%           125,689          21.1%
                                  1950-59                                        61            0.5%            87151           14.6%
                                  1940-49                                        21            0.2%            13,236           2.2%
                                  1939 or Earlier                                27            0.2%            13,023           2.2%
                                  Renter Occupied                              4,487         100.0%           391,720         100.0%
                                  2000 or Later                                 333            7.4%            34,723           8.9%
                                  1980-99                                      3,816          85.0%           105,136          26.8%
                                  1970-79                                       298            6.6%           107987           27.6%
                                  1960-69                                        40            0.9%            75,009          19.1%
                                  1950-59                                         0            0.0%            44,643          11.4%
                                  1940-49                                         0            0.0%            11,579           3.0%
                                  1939 or Earlier                                0             0.0%            12,643           3.2%
                                  Notes: ACS data is based on a fairly small sample of the population. Responses are then extrapolated
                                  for the City as a whole and may result in a larger margin of error. According to the 2000 Census, 350
                                  units in the City were built prior to 1980.
                                  Source: American Community Suvey (ACS), 2007-2011.
                                The City’s housing stock, like the City itself, is fairly new. Only about
                                two percent of the owner-occupied housing and less than one percent
                                of the occupied rental housing in Rancho Santa Margarita was
                                constructed prior to 1970. Because less than five percent of the City’s
                                housing stock was built before 1980, there is relatively little need for
                                housing rehabilitation activities in the City, especially compared to
                                most jurisdictions in Southern California.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                     18	                                                    September	2013	

         2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                         Table H-16
                                               Kitchen and Plumbing Facilities by Tenure –
                                               Rancho Santa Margarita vs. Orange County
                                                                               Rancho Santa Margarita                                Orange County
                                                                                Units                      %                     Units                     %
Kitchen Facilities
Owner Occupied                                                                  11,799                   72.5%                 595,444                   60.3%
   Complete Kitchen Facilities                                                  11,739                   99.5%                 593,481                   99.7%
   Lacking Complete Kitchen Facilities                                             60                     0.5%                   1,963                    0.3%
Renter Occupied                                                                  4,487                   27.6%                 391,720                   39.7%
   Complete Kitchen Facilities                                                   4,446                   99.1%                 382,919                   97.8%
   Lacking Complete Kitchen Facilities                                             41                     0.9%                   8,801                    2.2%
Plumbing Facilities
Owner Occupied                                                                  11,799                   72.5%                 595,444                   60.3%
   Complete Plumbing Facilities                                                 11,769                   99.7%                 593,872                   99.7%
   Lacking Complete Plumbing Facilities                                            30                     0.3%                   1,572                    0.3%
Renter Occupied                                                                  4,487                   27.6%                 391,720                   39.7%
   Complete Plumbing Facilities                                                  4,487                 100.0%                  389,748                   99.5%
   Lacking Complete Plumbing Facilities                                             0                     0.0%                   1,972                    0.5%
Notes: ACS data is based on a fairly small sample of the population. Responses are then extrapolated for the City as a whole and may result in a larger margin of error.
According to the 2000 Census, 32 housing units in the City lacked complete plumbing facilities and 41 units lacked complete kitchen facilities.
Source: American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
                                                 The lack of complete kitchen or plumbing facilities is often an
                                                 indicator of serious problems. Table H-16 identifies the number of
                                                 owner-occupied and renter-occupied housing units lacking complete
                                                 kitchen or plumbing facilities in the City and the county as a whole.
                                                 Less than one percent of both renter-occupied and owner-occupied
                                                 units lacked complete plumbing. Additionally, less than one percent
                                                 of both owner-occupied units and renter-occupied units lacked
                                                 complete kitchens.
                                                 Because nearly all of the City’s housing stock was built after 1980,
                                                 structural deterioration and maintenance problems are rare. The City
                                                 estimates that none of its housing units are in need of substantial
                                                 rehabilitation or replacement. However, the goal of the City’s Code
                                                 Enforcement program is to address housing concerns before they
                                                 become serious problems.
                                                 3.          Vacancy	
                                                 Housing vacancy rates in the City, as reported in the 2007-2011 ACS,
                                                 are shown in Table H-17. The table shows that vacancy rates in the
                                                 City were at a healthy level, with approximately five percent of rental
         City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
         General	Plan	                                                            19	                                                    September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                      units and less than three percent of for-sale units available for rent or
                                      sale, respectively. The rental vacancy rate for the county was the same,
                                      at five percent, while the vacancy rate for ownership housing was
                                      slightly lower, at one percent. Lower rental vacancy rates in the two
                                      percent range indicate nearly full occupancy, and contribute to upward
                                      pressures on rents.
                                                                                   Table H-17
                                                                              Housing Vacancy –
                                                         Rancho Santa Margarita vs. Orange County
                                                                                            Rancho Santa
                                                                                                                         Orange County
                                                                                               Margarita
                                                                                           Units            %            Units            %
                                     Total Housing Units                                  16,985         100.0%       1,046,323        100.0%
                                       Occupied Units                                     16,286          95.9%        987,164          94.3%
                                         -Owner Occupied                                  11,799          72.4%        595,444          60.3%
                                         -Renter Occupied                                  4,487          27.6%        391,720          39.7%
                                       Vacant Units                                         699            4.1%         59,159           5.7%
                                                       1
                                         -For Rent                                          217            4.6%         20,587           4.9%
                                                      2
                                         -For Sale                                          283            2.3%          8,500           1.4%
                                         -Rented/Sold, Not Occupied                          78           11.2%          6,330          10.7%
                                         -For Seasonal or Occasional Use                     25           3.6%          12,165          20.6%
                                         -For Migrant Workers                                 0            0.0%           89             0.2%
                                         -Other Vacant                                       96           13.7%         11,488          19.4%
                                     Notes:
                                           1.    Est. % of all rental units
                                           2.    Est. % of all for-sale units
                                           3.    ACS data is based on a fairly small sample of the population. Responses are then extrapolated
                                                 for the City as a whole and may result in a larger margin of error.
                                     Source: American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
                                      4.          Housing	Costs	and	Affordability	
                                      The cost of housing is directly related to the extent of housing
                                      problems in a community. If housing costs are relatively high in
                                      comparison to household income, there will be a correspondingly
                                      higher prevalence of housing cost burden and overcrowding. This
                                      section summarizes the cost and affordability of the housing stock to
                                      Rancho Santa Margarita residents.
                                      a. For‐Sale	Housing	
                                      According to DataQuick6, in 2011, the median sales price of homes in
                                      the City was $475,000, while the median price for condos was
6
    DataQuick specializes in the compilation of real estate data. Data collected by DataQuick is published weekly in the Los Angeles Times.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                             20	                                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                $250,000. Home prices in Rancho Santa Margarita are comparable to
                                prices in surrounding communities (Table H-18). Many communities
                                experienced decreases in home prices as a response to the “credit
                                crunch” in the real estate market and Rancho Santa Margarita is no
                                exception. Compared to one year earlier, home prices in Rancho Santa
                                Margarita during 2011 had decreased by about six percent.
                                                Table H-18
                                        Median Home Prices (2011)
                                                     Median Home Price          Median Condo Price
           Jurisdiction              ZIP Code                 Change from                 Change from
                                                    2011                       2011
                                                                  2010                         2010
Aliso Viejo                           92656       $527,000      -7.00%       $309,000        -10.8%
Laguna Hills                          92653       $530,000       -9.4%       $213,000        -14.7%
Laguna Niguel                         92677       $650,000       -1.7%       $261,000         -6.8%
Laguna Woods                          92637          n/a           n/a       $200,000          7.5%
Lake Forest                           92630       $455,000       -7.6%       $198,000        -15.6%
                                      92691       $460,000       -5.2%       $172,000        -20.0%
Mission Viejo
                                      92692       $520,000       -4.6%       $324,000        -11.8%
Rancho Santa Margarita                92688       $475,000       -6.2%       $250,000        -10.7%
                                      92672       $560,000      -11.4%       $325,000        -18.1%
San Clemente
                                      92673       $680,000       -6.2%       $367,000        -10.5%
Orange County                                     $479,000       -5.7%       $271,000         -8.4%
Source: www.DQNews.com, 2012.
                                b. Rental	Housing	
                                With renters comprising a significant portion (approximately 28
                                percent) of the City’s households, it is important to understand the
                                rental market in Rancho Santa Margarita. Available rent data for the
                                City was limited, but several of Rancho Santa Margarita’s larger
                                apartment communities did list their rents on popular websites,
                                including www.apartments.com and www.forrent.com. These rents,
                                along with data from a Craigslist rental survey, are summarized in
                                Table H-19. According to postings listed on Craigslist.org, rents in the
                                City range from $1,150 for a one-bedroom apartment to $3,600 for a
                                three-bedroom unit. The average rent for units in Rancho Santa
                                Margarita was approximately $1,900.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                          21	                                 September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                      Table H-19
                                         Median and Average Rents by Number of Bedrooms
                                                         (Novemeber to December 2012)
                                      Number of               Number       Median      Average
                                                                                                 Rent Range
                                       Bedrooms                Listed        Rent        Rent
                                 Craigslist
                                 Studio                            0          --          --          --
                                 1-Bedroom                        27        $1,399      $1,399  $1,150-$1,695
                                 2-Bedroom                        13        $1,680      $1,648  $1,395-$2,100
                                 3-Bedroom                        18        $2,348      $2,313  $1,280-$3,600
                                 4-Bedroom +                       8        $2,900      $2,956  $2,750-$3,200
                                 Totals                           66        $1,640      $1,886  $1,150-$3,600
                                 Villa La Paz
                                 Studio                           --          --          --    $1,065-$1,075
                                 1-Bedroom                        --          --          --    $1,155-$1,205
                                 2-Bedroom                        --          --          --    $1,440-$1,500
                                 Villas Antonio
                                 1-Bedroom                        --          --          --    $1,240-$1,325
                                 2-Bedroom                        --          --          --    $1,520-$1,740
                                 Villas Aviento
                                 Studio                           --          --          --    $1,090-$1,220
                                 1-Bedroom                        --          --          --    $1,195-$1,245
                                 2-Bedroom                        --          --          --    $1,400-$1,690
                                 Avila Apartment Homes
                                 1-Bedroom                        --          --          --    $1,290-$1,655
                                 2-Bedroom                        --          --          --    $1,580-$1,855
                                 Eaves Santa Margarita
                                 1-Bedroom                        --          --          --    $1,350-$1,495
                                 2-Bedroom                        --          --          --    $1,610-$1,780
                                Sources:
                                     1.  www.apartments.com, 2013.
                                     2.  www.forrent.com, 2013.
                                     3.  www.Craigslist.org, 2012.
                                c. Housing	Affordability	by	Household	Income	
                                Housing affordability is dependent upon income and housing costs.
                                Using set income guidelines, current housing affordability can be
                                estimated. According to the HCD income guidelines for 2012, the
                                Area Median Income (AMI) in Orange County was $85,300 (with
                                adjustments for household size).                 Assuming that the potential
                                homebuyer has sufficient credit and downpayment (10 percent) and
                                spends no greater than 30 to 35 percent of the household income on
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                 22	                                September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                housing expenses (i.e., mortgage, taxes and insurance), the maximum
                                affordable home price and rental price can be determined. The
                                maximum affordable home and rental prices for residents of Orange
                                County are shown in the following table. Households in the lower end
                                of each category can afford less by comparison than those at the upper
                                end.
                                When market rents (Table H-18) are compared to the amounts low-
                                income households can afford to pay, it is clear that very-low- and
                                extremely-low-income households have a difficult time finding
                                housing without overpaying. Based on the rental prices presented in
                                Table H-19 earlier, extremely low, very low, and low income
                                households are not able to afford rental housing or purchase a home in
                                Rancho Santa Margarita without incurring a cost burden. Moderate
                                income households may be able to afford the rents for some smaller
                                apartments and purchase small condominiums/townhomes. However,
                                single-family homes are beyond the financial means of even the
                                moderate income households.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                         23	                                  September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                Table H-20
                               Housing Affordability Matrix – Orange County 2012
                                                                                      Estimated
                                                     Affordable Costs
                                                                                Utility Allowance,
                                    Annual               (All Costs)                                    Affordable       Affordable
         Household                                                              Taxes & Insurance
                                    Income                                                                  Rent        Home Price
                                                  Rental      Ownership
                                                                                Renters       Owners
                                                   Costs           Costs
  Extremely Low Income (0-30% AMI)
  1-Person                          $20,250         $506           $506           $76             $92       $430           $72,846
  2-Person                          $23,150         $579           $579           $96            $112       $483           $81,690
  3-Person                          $26,050         $651           $651          $114            $130       $537           $90,999
  4-Person                          $28,900         $723           $723          $153            $169       $570           $95,188
  5-Person                          $31,250         $781           $781          $170            $186       $611          $102,171
  Very Low Income (31-50% AMI)
  1-Person                          $33,750         $844           $844           $76             $92       $768          $135,684
  2-Person                          $38,550         $964           $964           $96            $112       $868          $153,372
  3-Person                          $43,350        $1,084         $1,084         $114            $130       $970          $171,525
  4-Person                          $48,150        $1,204         $1,204         $153            $169      $1,051         $184,791
  5-Person                          $52,050        $1,301         $1,301         $170            $186      $1,131         $198,988
  Low Income (50-80% AMI)
  1-Person                          $53,950        $1,349         $1,349          $76             $92      $1,273         $229,709
  2-Person                          $61,650        $1,541         $1,541          $96            $112      $1,445         $260,896
  3-Person                          $69,350        $1,734         $1,734         $114            $130      $1,620         $292,548
  4-Person                          $77,050        $1,926         $1,926         $153            $169      $1,773         $319,312
  5-Person                          $83,250        $2,081         $2,081         $170            $186      $1,911         $344,215
  Median Income (80-100% AMI)
  1-Person                          $59,700        $1,493         $1,741          $76             $92      $1,417         $302,788
  2-Person                          $68,250        $1,706         $1,991          $96            $112      $1,610         $344,564
  3-Person                          $76,750        $1,919         $2,239         $114            $130      $1,805         $386,534
  4-Person                          $85,300        $2,133         $2,488         $153            $169      $1,980         $423,887
  5-Person                          $92,100        $2,303         $2,686         $170            $186      $2,133         $456,858
  Moderate Income (100-120%)
  1-Person                          $71,650        $1,791         $2,090          $76             $92      $1,715         $367,682
  2-Person                          $81,900        $2,048         $2,389          $96            $112      $1,952         $418,690
  3-Person                          $92,100        $2,303         $2,686         $114            $130      $2,189         $469,891
  4-Person                         $102,350        $2,559         $2,985         $153            $169      $2,406         $516,477
  5-Person                         $110,550        $2,764         $3,224         $170            $186      $2,594         $557,051
Assumptions:
1. California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) income limits, 2012.
2. Health and Safety code definitions of affordable housing costs (between 30 and 35 percent of household income depending on tenure and
    income level).
3. Orange County Housing Authority utility allowances, 2011.
4. 20 percent of monthly affordable cost for taxes and insurance.
5. 10 percent down payment.
6. Four percent interest rate for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage loan.
7. Taxes and insurance apply to owner costs only; renters do not usually pay taxes or insurance.
Source: HCD Income Limits, 2012
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                           24	                                            September	2013	

 2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                       F. Persons	with	Special	Needs	
                                       Some residents have greater difficulty in finding decent, affordable
                                       housing due to special circumstances. Such circumstances may be
                                       related to one’s employment and income, family characteristics,
                                       disability, or other conditions. As a result, some people in Rancho
                                       Santa Margarita may experience a higher prevalence of overpayment,
                                       overcrowding, or other housing problems.
                                       “Special needs” groups in Rancho Santa Margarita include the
                                       following: persons with disabilities, seniors, large households, single-
                                       parent households, farmworkers, and those who are even temporarily
                                       homeless. This section contains a discussion of the housing needs
                                       facing each of these groups.
                                                               Table H-21
                                 Special Needs Groups in Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                         Renters                        Owners            % of Total
                                         # of Persons or
    Special Needs Group                                                                                                  Households
                                           Households            Number          Percent        Number         Percent    or Persons
Persons with Disabilities1                      1,868                 --             --             --             --        3.9%
Households with Seniors                         2,128                 --             --             --             --       12.8%
Senior Headed Households                        1,643               595           36.2%           1,048          63.8%       9.9%
Seniors Living Alone                              761               423           55.6%            338           44.4%       4.6%
Large Households                                2,100               533           25.4%           1,567          74.6%      12.6%
Single Parent Households                        1,400                 --             --             --             --        8.4%
Female Headed Households
                                                1,024                 --             --             --             --        6.1%
w/ Children
People Living in Poverty2                       1,477                 --             --             --             --        3.1%
Farmworkers2                                       92                 --             --             --             --        0.4%
Homeless3                                           0                 --             --             --             --          --
Notes:
1. 2010 Census data not available. Estimate is from the ACS, 2009-2011.
2. 2010 Census data not available. Estimate is from the ACS, 2007-2011.
3. 2010 Census data not available. Estimate is from City of Rancho Santa Margarita Consolidated Plan, 2011-2015.
Sources:
1. Bureau of the Census, 2010.
2. American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
3. American Community Survey (ACS), 2009-2011.
4. City of Rancho Santa Margarita Consolidated Plan, 2011-2015
                                       1.           Persons	with	Disabilities	
                                       Disability is a physical or mental condition that substantially limits one
                                       or more major life activity. Physical, mental, and/or developmental
                                       disabilities may prevent a person from working, restrict one’s
                                       mobility, or make it difficult to care for oneself. Thus, persons with
                                       disabilities often have special housing needs related to limited earning
                                       capacity, a lack of accessible and affordable housing, and higher health
 City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
 General	Plan	                                                          25	                                            September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                costs associated with a disability. Some residents suffer from
                                disabilities that require living in a supportive or institutional setting.
                                The 3-year ACS estimates that about four percent of Rancho Santa
                                Margarita residents, over five years of age, had a disability between
                                2009 and 2011. The types of disabilities afflicting residents varied
                                depending on age. Among disabled persons between the ages of 18 to
                                64, cognitive disabilities were most frequent (34 percent); ambulatory
                                difficulties were also fairly common (26 percent) (Table H-22).
                                Ambulatory difficulties were the most widely reported disability
                                among the City’s older population. Approximately 67 percent of
                                disabled persons ages 65 and over reported suffering from an
                                ambulatory difficulty.
                                                                           Table H-22
                                                         Persons with Disabilities by Age –
                                                                Rancho Santa Margarita
                                            Age Group and Disability                             # Tallied                % Tallied
                                 Total Disabled Persons: 5 to 17 Years                                236                    2.1%
                                        With a Hearing Difficulty                                      24                   10.2%
                                        With a Vision Difficulty                                       89                   37.7%
                                        With a Cognitive Difficulty                                   106                   44.9%
                                        With an Ambulatory Difficulty                                  88                   37.3%
                                        With a Self-Care Difficulty                                    68                   28.8%
                                 Total Disabled Persons: 18 to 64 years                              1,017                   3.3%
                                        With a Hearing Difficulty                                     214                   21.0%
                                        With a Vision Difficulty                                      244                   24.0%
                                        With a Cognitive Difficulty                                   343                   33.7%
                                        With an Ambulatory Difficulty                                 268                   26.4%
                                        With a Self-Care Difficulty                                   174                   17.1%
                                        With an Independent Living Difficulty                         227                   22.3%
                                 Total Disabled Persons: 65 years and over                            615                   22.6%
                                        With a Hearing Difficulty                                     311                   50.6%
                                        With a Vision Difficulty                                      158                   25.7%
                                        With a Cognitive Difficulty                                   182                   29.6%
                                        With an Ambulatory Difficulty                                 413                   67.2%
                                        With a Self-Care Difficulty                                   132                   21.5%
                                        With an Independent Living Difficulty                         331                   53.8%
                                               Total Disabled Persons                                1,868                   3.9%
                                 Note: A person can report more than one disability and therefore, the total number of disabilities tallied
                                 far exceeds the number of disabled persons.
                                 Source: American Community Survey (ACS), 2009-2011.
                                Several factors limit the supply of housing for persons with
                                disabilities, including affordability, accessibility, location, and
                                discrimination. The most obvious housing need for persons with
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                   26	                                                     September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                disabilities is housing that is adapted to their needs. Most single-
                                family homes are inaccessible to people with mobility and sensory
                                limitations. Housing may not be adaptable to widened doorways and
                                hallways, access ramps, larger bathrooms, lowered countertops and
                                other features necessary for accessibility. The cost of retrofitting a
                                home often prohibits homeownership, even for individuals or families
                                who could otherwise afford a home. Furthermore, some providers of
                                basic home buying services do not have offices or materials that are
                                accessible to people with mobility, visual or hearing impairments.
                                Location of housing is also an important factor for many persons with
                                disabilities, especially those who often rely upon public transportation.
                                a. Developmental	Disabilities	
                                A recent change in state law requires that the Housing Element discuss
                                the housing needs of persons with developmental disabilities. As
                                defined by federal law, “developmental disability” means a severe,
                                chronic disability of an individual that:
                                       Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or
                                        combination of mental and physical impairments;
                                       Is manifested before the individual attains age 22;
                                       Is likely to continue indefinitely;
                                       Results in substantial functional limitations in three or more of
                                        the following areas of major life activity: a) self-care; b)
                                        receptive and expressive language; c) learning; d) mobility; e)
                                        self-direction; f) capacity for independent living; or g)
                                        economic self- sufficiency; and
                                       Reflects the individual’s need for a combination and sequence
                                        of special, interdisciplinary, or generic services, individualized
                                        supports, or other forms of assistance that are of lifelong or
                                        extended duration and are individually planned and
                                        coordinated.
                                The Census does not record developmental disabilities. According to
                                the U.S. Administration on Developmental Disabilities, an accepted
                                estimate of the percentage of the population that can be defined as
                                developmentally disabled is 1.5 percent. This equates to 718 persons in
                                the City of Rancho Santa Margarita with developmental disabilities,
                                based on the 2010 Census population.
                                According to the State’s Department of Developmental Services,
                                approximately 215 Rancho Santa Margarita residents with
                                developmental disabilities sought services at the Regional Center of
                                Orange County. Most of these individuals reside in a private home
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           27	                                   September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                with a parent or guardian and 126 of these persons with developmental
                                disabilities were under the age of 18.
                                Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work
                                independently within a conventional housing environment. More
                                severely disabled individuals require a group living environment
                                where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals
                                may require an institutional environment where medical attention and
                                physical therapy are provided. Because developmental disabilities
                                exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the
                                developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living
                                situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
                                b. Resources	
                                Various residential facilities in Rancho Santa Margarita serve those
                                with disabilities. As of December 2012, one residential care facility
                                for the elderly, with a total capacity of 230 beds, was located in
                                Rancho Santa Margarita.
                                The Regional Center of Orange County offers services and support for
                                persons with developmental disabilities by referring consumers to
                                specific programs that meet their respective housing, work,
                                educational, and leisure needs. In an effort to further assist persons
                                with developmental disabilities, the City allocates part of its CDBG
                                funding to the non-profit Vocational Visions organization, which
                                offers vocational training and support services for consumers through
                                community supported employment. Residents with disabilities can
                                also benefit from services offered by the Dayle McIntosh Center for
                                the Disabled – South County Branch in neighboring Laguna Niguel.
                                The center offers disabled persons a variety of services including peer
                                support and advocacy, along with housing referral, and rental and
                                hotel/motel assistance if needed.
                                Housing opportunities for the handicapped can be maximized through
                                housing assistance programs and providing universal design features
                                such as widened doorways, ramps, lowered countertops, single-level
                                units and ground floor units. The City adopted a formal Reasonable
                                Accommodations procedure in 2011. Requests are reviewed and
                                approved by the Development Services Director.
                                2.      Elderly	
                                Elderly households can have special needs resulting from four main
                                concerns: limited and often fixed income; poor health and associated
                                high health care costs; mobility limitation and transit dependency; and
                                high costs of housing.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           28	                                 September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                In 2010, seniors (persons ages 65 or older) comprised six percent of
                                Rancho Santa Margarita’s total population. About ten percent of the
                                City’s households were also headed by seniors (Table H-23). Of these
                                senior headed households, approximately 64 percent owned their
                                homes, while 36 percent rented their homes.7 Housing cost burden
                                was the most common housing problem for elderly households, with
                                about 87 percent of all elderly renter households affected by housing
                                overpayment, according to 2006-2008 CHAS data. Housing cost
                                burden was less prevalent among elderly owner households, but it still
                                affected approximately 55 percent of these households.
                                Many elderly persons are dependent on fixed incomes or have
                                disabilities. Elderly homeowners may be physically unable to maintain
                                their homes or cope with living alone. The housing needs of this group
                                can be addressed through smaller units, second units on lots with
                                existing homes, shared living arrangements, congregate housing and
                                housing assistance programs.
                                                                         Table H-23
                                                          Elderly Households by Tenure –
                                                                 Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                          Owners               Renters
                                    Householder Age
                                                                 Households        %    Households       %
                                  Under 65 years                    10,858       91.2%    4,164        87.5%
                                  65 to 74 years                      703         5.9%     204          4.3%
                                  75 to 84 years                      268         2.3%     191          4.0%
                                  85 and over                         77          0.6%     200          4.2%
                                  Total households                  11,906       100.0%   4,759        100.0%
                                  Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010.
                                a. Resources	
                                The special needs of seniors can be met through a range of services,
                                including congregate care, rent subsides, shared housing, and housing
                                rehabilitation assistance. For the frail or disabled elderly, housing can
                                be modified with features that help ensure continued independent
                                living arrangements. For elderly residents that require assisted care,
                                there is one residential care facility (as of December 2012) in the City,
                                with a capacity of 230 beds. Housing Choice Voucher (Section 8)
                                assistance is also available for senior households. As of February
                                2013, the Orange County Housing Authority provides Housing Choice
                                Voucher assistance to 115 households; of these, 58 were utilized by
                                seniors.
                                Additonal support for senior residents is provided by the City-
                                operated Bell Tower Regional Community Center, which serves as the
    Data from the 2010 Census.
7
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                   29	                               September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                primary site for senior services programs offered by the City and
                                nonprofits. Some of the programs and services provided at the Center
                                include, health screening, legal assistance, and tax preparation
                                services. Through a special partnership with the Santiago Seniors
                                Club, the City provides free space for the club at the Bell Tower
                                Center along with financial support, so that the club can offer daily
                                programs, meals and entertainement for senior residents. The City
                                also partners and funds the non-profit Age Well Senior Services
                                organization to provide meal programs and case management services
                                for homebound seniors. For senior homeowners who need assistance
                                with minor, but necessary, home improvements the “Brush of
                                Kindness” program offered by Habitat for Humanity is available.
                                The City encourages affordable and accessible housing options for
                                seniors through a variety of activities, including participation in the
                                County’s Section 8 program and development incentives. In 2006, the
                                development of a 115-unit senior apartment project (Buena Vida) was
                                facilitated by the City using a density bonus.
                                3.       Large	Households	
                                Household size can be an indicator of the need for large housing units
                                in a community. Large households are defined as those with five or
                                more members. In Rancho Santa Margarita, approximately 42 percent
                                of owner households and 58 percent of renter households have only
                                one or two members. About 11 percent of renter households and13
                                percent of owner households in the City were considered large
                                households (Table H-24). Because large households make up a
                                relatively small proportion of the City’s households, the need for large
                                units (with four or more bedrooms) in the City is not significant.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           30	                                 September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                          Table H-24
                                                              Household Size by Tenure –
                                                                  Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                            Owners                  Renters
                                        Household Size
                                                                     Households       %      Households       %
                                   1 person                            1,723        14.5%      1,476        31.0%
                                   2 persons                           3,217        27.0%      1,302        27.4%
                                   3 persons                           2,482        20.8%       800         16.8%
                                   4 persons                           2,917        24.5%       648         13.6%
                                   5 persons                           1,117        9.4%        312         6.6%
                                   6 persons                            331         2.8%        136         2.9%
                                   7+ persons                           119         1.0%         85         1.8%
                                   Total households                    11,906      100.0%      4,759       100.0%
                                   Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010.
                                 a. Resources	
                                 The City responds to the needs of large households through
                                 participation in the County Section 8 program and through zoning for
                                 higher-density attached housing, which is inherently less expensive
                                 than single-family detached units. Nearly one-fifth (19 percent) of the
                                 City’s housing stock is attached housing.
                                 4.         Single‐Parent	Households	
                                 Single-parent families, particularly female-headed families with
                                 children, often require special consideration and assistance because of
                                 their greater need for affordable housing and accessible day care,
                                 health care, and other supportive services. Female-headed families
                                 with children are a particularly vulnerable group because they must
                                 balance the needs of their children with work responsibilities, often
                                 while earning limited incomes.
                                 In 2010, 1,400 single parent families with their own children under 18
                                 years of age resided in the City and made up eight percent of all
                                 Rancho Santa Margarita households.                       Of these single parent
                                 households in the City, approximately 73 percent, or 1,024
                                 households, were headed by a female (). While female-headed
                                 households with children represent a small portion of total households
                                 (six percent), 12 percent of these households were below the poverty
                                 level.9
9
    American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                    31	                                  September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                     Table H-25
                                            Household Type by Tenure –
                                               Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                  Owners                      Renters
                    Household Type
                                                        Households          %        Households         %
Married Couple Family                                       8,397          71%          1,747          37%
Male Householder, No Wife Present                            370            3%           330            7%
Female Householder, No Husband Present                       943           8%            760           16%
Non-Family Households                                      2,196           18%          1,922          40%
Total Households                                           11,906         100%          4,759         100%
Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010.
                                    a. Resources	
                                    The City responds to the needs of female-headed households through
                                    participation in the CDBG program, the County Section 8 program,
                                    and through zoning for higher-density attached housing, which is
                                    inherently less expensive than single-family detached units. Nearly
                                    one-fifth (19 percent) of the City’s housing stock is attached housing.
                                    Single-parent households benefit from the City’s participation in the
                                    Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program. Various child care
                                    facilities in Rancho Santa Margarita also serve young persons with
                                    disabilities. As of December 2012, 13 child care centers, 10 family
                                    child care homes (large only), four infant centers, and three school age
                                    child care centers, with a combined capacity to serve 1,635 youth,
                                    were accessible to City residents. The Saddleback Valley Unified
                                    School District and the YMCA both offer reduced-rate childcare
                                    services to such low and moderate income households in an effort to
                                    better serve low and moderate income families with childcare needs.
                                    In addition, a number of programs and resources are available to help
                                    single parents with children improve the quality of life for themselves
                                    and their families. The City coordinates with several service providers
                                    to offer programs targeted at the communinty’s youth. A variety of
                                    sports and recreational activities for youth are offered at various
                                    facilities throughout the City, including: AYSO soccer, Little League
                                    Baseball, and Pop Warner football. Organizations including Families
                                    Forward and South County Outreach are funded by the City with
                                    CDBG resources to provide food, commodities and financial
                                    assistance to individuals and families in need. Another organization
                                    funded by the City, Laura’s House, specifically aids victims of
                                    domestic violence in seeking referral, counseling, and emergency
                                    housing.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                              32	                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                5.       Residents	Living	Below	the	Poverty	Level	
                                Families with incomes below the poverty level, typically those
                                households with extremely low and very low incomes, are at greatest
                                risk of becoming homeless. These households may also require special
                                programs to assist them in meeting their rent and mortgage obligations
                                so as to not become homeless. The 2007-2011 ACS found that about
                                three percent of all Rancho Santa Margarita residents have incomes
                                below the poverty level. These households need assistance with
                                housing subsidies, utility and other living expense subsidies, as well as
                                other supportive services.
                                a. Resources	
                                Households living in poverty can benefit from single room occupancy
                                units (SROs). Rancho Santa Margarita amended its Zoning Ordinance
                                in 2011 to define SROs as a building with a common entrance
                                containing a cluster of rental units which provide sleeping and living
                                facilities where kitchen and/or bathroom facilities may be shared. The
                                City now permits SROs in the RH zone, subject to development and
                                management standards, as allowed by SB 2. Development standards
                                for these uses are no more restrictive than for other uses allowed in the
                                RH districts.
                                6.       Farmworkers	
                                Farm workers are traditionally defined as persons whose primary
                                income is earned through permanent or seasonal agricultural labor.
                                Permanent farm laborers work in the fields, processing plants, or
                                support activities on a generally year-round basis. When workload
                                increases during harvest periods, the labor force is supplemented by
                                seasonal labor, often supplied by a labor contractor. For some crops,
                                farms may employ migrant workers, defined as those whose travel
                                distance to work prevents them from returning to their primary
                                residence every evening. Historically, Orange County’s economy was
                                linked to agriculture. Today, Orange County is a mostly developed
                                urban/suburban region, with a strong local economy that is not tied to
                                an agricultural base. While there are still significant active farming
                                areas on the Irvine Ranch and in some other cities, shifts in the
                                county’s economy to manufacturing, technology and service-oriented
                                sectors have significantly curtailed agricultural production.
                                The 2007-2011 ACS reported 7,541 persons employed in agricultural
                                occupations in Orange County. Approximately one percent of the
                                county’s workers in agricultural occupations live in Rancho Santa
                                Margarita (Table H-26).
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                          33	                                   September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                       Table H-26
                                                           Agricultural Employment –
                                                Rancho Santa Margarita vs. Orange County
                                                                 Rancho Santa         % of County    Orange
                                                                   Margarita             Total       County
                                  Workers                              92                1.2%         7,541
                                  Source: American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
                                Persons in the farming industry tend to earn lower income compared to
                                those employed in other industries. Based on the California Economic
                                Development Department research, persons employed in farming,
                                forestry, and fishing occupations in Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine
                                Metropolitan Statistical Area earned approximately $19,549 in 2011,
                                compared to the countywide median annual wage of $37,327. Due to
                                the high cost of housing and low wages, a significant number of
                                migrant farm workers have difficulty finding affordable, safe and
                                sanitary housing. This limited income is exacerbated by their tenuous
                                and/or seasonal employment status.
                                There is no agriculturally zoned land in the City, though there is
                                currently one nursery operating in the City’s northern sphere of
                                influence. The northern sphere of influence is located on
                                unincorporated county land and is currently being used for agricultural
                                purposes. However, according to the County’s General Plan, this land
                                is designated for residential uses. The zoning for this land falls under
                                the Foothill Trabuco Specific Plan area.
                                a. Resources	
                                To address farmworker housing needs, the City permits farmworker
                                housing in the Agricultural zone. However, because there is no
                                agriculturally zoned land within Rancho Santa Margarita, there is not a
                                significant need for permanent on-site farmworker housing.
                                Furthermore, since workers in agriculture make up such a small
                                percentage of the City’s population, no specific programs are
                                necessary for farmworkers specifically. In general, housing assistance
                                such as rent subsidies would benefit farmworker families.
                                7.         Homeless	Persons	
                                State law (Section 65583(1) (6)) mandates that municipalities address
                                the special needs of homeless persons within their jurisdictional
                                boundaries. “Homelessness” as defined by the U.S. Department of
                                Housing and Urban Development (HUD), describes an individual (not
                                imprisoned or otherwise detained) who:
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                34	                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                       Lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence; and
                                       Has a primary nighttime residence that is:
                                       A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to
                                        provide temporary living accommodations (including welfare
                                        hotels, congregate shelters, and transitional housing for the
                                        mentally ill);
                                       An institution that provides a temporary residence for
                                        individuals intended to be institutionalized; or
                                       A public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used
                                        as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings.
                                This definition does not include persons living in substandard housing,
                                (unless it has been officially condemned); persons living in
                                overcrowded housing (for example, doubled up with others); persons
                                being discharged from mental health facilities (unless the person was
                                homeless when entering and is considered to be homeless at
                                discharge), or persons who may be at risk of homelessness (for
                                example, living temporarily with family or friends.)
                                To estimate the number of homeless persons in the City, an analysis of
                                existing studies and estimates was utilized. The main source for data
                                regarding the number of homeless in Orange County is the 2011 Point-
                                In-Time Homeless Count and Survey (PITS). However, based on the
                                2011 PITS data, no homeless persons identified Rancho Santa
                                Margarita as the city in which they resided before becoming homeless.
                                This finding is consistent with input provided by the Orange County
                                Sheriff’s Department, which indicates that there are few (if any)
                                homeless in the City. Transients and victims of domestic violence
                                make up the bulk of the Sheriff’s service calls related to homelessness.
                                According to the City’s Consolidated Plan, homelessness is not a
                                significant issue in the City, but services and shelter for victims of
                                domestic violence and assistance to prevent homelessness were
                                identified as needs. The City continues to utilize a portion of its CDBG
                                public service grant resources to support local agencies that address
                                these needs. About five individuals annually receive emergency shelter
                                assistance from the City and various service providers.
                                a. Resources	
                                The following is an inventory of facilities that are available to serve
                                the community’s homeless.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           35	                                  September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                      Emergency Shelters
                                      Emergency shelters are generally geared toward providing immediate
                                      housing to persons without shelter. Stays in emergency shelters are
                                      typically limited to a short period of time (1 to 90 days). Several
                                      service agencies located near Rancho Santa Margarita provide
                                      emergency shelter and services for the homeless in south Orange
                                      County. These shelters and services are identified in Table H-27 The
                                      number of beds listed represents total shelter capacity – none of the
                                      shelter beds are restricted for Rancho Santa Margarita’s homeless.
                                      Based on this data, there are approximately 130 emergency shelter
                                      beds available to serve the City.
                                                          Table H-27
                             Emergency Shelters Serving Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                                                 % of Beds/Services
                                                   No. of
      Shelter Name                 Location                                 Services                for Chronic
                                                   Beds
                                                                                                     Homeless
                                                                Emergency housing, support &
  CSP Youth Shelter             Laguna Beach         6                                                  0%
                                                                  family reunification services
  Cold Weather Shelter                                        Emergency housing during winter
  1                             Laguna Beach        40                                                 100%
                                                                             months
                                                               Emergency housing and support
  Friendship Shelter            Laguna Beach         3                                                 100%
                                                                             services
                                                             Emergency housing and supportive
  Gilchrist House               San Clemente        10                                                  20%
                                                               services for women and children
                                                               Emergency housing and support
  Human Options                      Irvine         40          services for victims of domestic        15%
                                                                            violence
                                                               Emergency housing and support
  Laura’s House                 San Clemente        30          services for victims of domestic        15%
                                                                            violence
  Note: 1.Beds only available during winter months
  Source: County of Orange Housing and Community Services Department
                                      Transitional and Supportive Housing
                                      Transitional housing is an important component for assisting homeless
                                      individuals and families, or those at risk of homelessness, to become
                                      self-sufficient. As with emergency shelter facilities, all transitional
                                      housing programs that serve Rancho Santa Margarita’s homeless are
                                      located in neighboring communities. Transitional housing facilities
                                      that serve Rancho Santa Margarita’s homeless are identified in Table
                                      H-28. The number of beds listed represents total shelter capacity; none
                                      of the shelter beds are restricted for Rancho Santa Margarita’s
                                      homeless. Based on this data, there are approximately 180 transitional
                                      housing beds available to serve residents of Rancho Santa Margarita.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                     36	                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                          Table H-28
                    Transitional Housing Facilities Serving Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                                                   % of Beds/Services
                                                   No. of
    Shelter Name                Location                                      Services                for Chronic
                                                    Beds
                                                                                                       Homeless
                                                                      Transitional housing and
 Families Forward                 Irvine             13                                                   10%
                                                                 supportive services for families
                                                                      Transitional housing and
 Friendship Shelter          Laguna Beach            26            supportive services for single         30%
                                                                               adults
                                                                  Transitional housing for single
 Henderson House             San Clemente            24         adults recovering from substance          30%
                                                                              addiction
                                                                      Transitional housing and
 Hope’s House                  Aliso Viejo           10           supportive services for women           30%
                                                                            with infants
                                                                      Transitional housing and
 Gilchrist House             San Clemente            16        supportive services for women and          25%
                                                                              children
                                                                 Transitional housing & support
                                San Juan
 Kathy’s House                                       12          services for victims of domestic         25%
                               Capistrano
                                                                              violence
                                                                Transitional housing and support
 Laura’s House               San Clemente             8          services for victims of domestic         15%
                                                                              violence
                                                                 Transitional housing & support
 South County               Laguna Hills &
                                                     56          services for families (5 units in        25%
 Outreach                    Mission Viejo
                                                                          Mission Viejo)
                                                                Transitional housing for pregnant
                           Capistrano Beach
 Toby’s House                                        15        women and women with infants (8             0%
                            & Mission Viejo
                                                                       beds in Mission Viejo
 Source: County of Orange Housing and Community Services Department
                                    A key component of the City’s Continuum of Care strategy is to
                                    prevent individuals and families from falling into homelessness. HUD
                                    defines a Continuum of Care strategy as a community plan to organize
                                    and deliver housing and services to meet the specific needs of people
                                    who are homeless as they move to stable housing and maximize self-
                                    sufficiency. Several nonprofit service providers located in the region
                                    are available to help the City’s at-risk population, including the City
                                    CDBG- funded South County Outreach and Families Forward
                                    organizations. These service providers are responsible for assisting
                                    City residents through the provision of one-time rent/mortgage
                                    assistance to prevent eviction, utility shut-off prevention assistance,
                                    and/or emergency food. Other efforts undertaken by the City include
                                    its use of CDBG resources to fund Laura’s House as to provide
                                    emergency shelter for victims of domestic violence.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                     37	                                     September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                In addition to the resources discussed above, Senate Bill (SB) 2 of
                                2007 strengthened the planning requirements for emergency shelters
                                and transitional housing. Unless adequate capacity is available to serve
                                the existing emergency shelter need, SB 2 requires that shelters be
                                allowed “by-right” (i.e., without a conditional use permit or other
                                discretionary approval) in at least one zoning district. As an
                                alternative, the requirements may be satisfied through a multi-
                                jurisdictional agreement.
                                In accordance with SB 2, the City defines “emergency shelter” as a
                                facility that provides shelter and services to homeless families and/or
                                homeless individuals on a limited short-term basis. In 2011, the City
                                amended its Zoning Code to permit emergency shelters in the PQ
                                zone. The amendment also outlined development and management
                                standards for these shelters, as allowed by SB 2. Development
                                standards for these uses are no more restrictive than for other uses
                                allowed in these districts, although conditions may be required to
                                mitigate potential impacts to nearby uses.
                                SB 2 also requires that transitional and supportive housing be treated
                                as a residential use subject to only those requirements that apply to
                                other residential uses in the same zone. Currently, the Zoning
                                Ordinance defines transitional housing as a type of supportive housing
                                used to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals and families to
                                permanent housing. Rancho Santa Margarita permits transitional and
                                supportive housing in all residential zones and conditionally permits
                                this type of housing in the PQ zone, consistent with SB 2.
                                G. Assisted	Housing	at	Risk	of	Conversion	
                                State law requires the City to identify, analyze, and propose programs
                                to preserve existing multi-family rental units that are currently
                                restricted to low income housing use and that will become unrestricted
                                and possibly be lost as low income housing (i.e., “units at risk” or “at-
                                risk units”). State law requires the following:
                                        An inventory of restricted low income housing projects in the
                                         City and their potential for conversion;
                                        An analysis of the costs of preserving and/or replacing the units
                                         at risk and a comparison of these costs;
                                        An analysis of the organizational and financial resources
                                         available for preserving and/or replacing the units “at risk”;
                                         and
                                        Programs for preserving the at-risk units.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                            38	                                 September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                       The following discussion satisfies the first three requirements of State
                                       law listed above pertaining to the potential conversion of assisted
                                       housing units into market rate housing between October 15, 2013 and
                                       Ocober 15, 2023. The Housing Plan section includes a program for
                                       preserving the at-risk units, which meets the final requirement of State
                                       law.
                                       1.        Inventory	of	Assisted	Units	
                                       Affordable housing projects with covenants are listed in Table H-29.
                                       None of these units are at risk of conversion during this planning
                                       period.
                                                               Table H-29
                                         Inventory of Assisted Affordable Units
                                                                                                        Type And
                                                                                        Affordable                  Expiration
     Project Name              Type of Public Assistance             Total Units                         Income
                                                                                           Units                       Date
                                                                                                         Target
   FountainGlen
                            Mortgage Revenue Bond                         166                 34        Senior 55+     2028
   Senior Apartments
   Villa La Paz             Mortgage Revenue Bond                         500                100         Families      2028
   Villa Aliento            Mortgage Revenue Bond                         225                 23         Families      2028
   Trabuco Highlands Mortgage Revenue Bond                                184                 37         Families      2029
                            Habitat for Humanity - Sweat
   Carina Vista                                                            48                48          Families  In Perpetuity
                            Equity
   Source: OC Community Services Dept and City of Rancho Santa Margarita Community Development Dept.
                                       2.        Units	at	Risk		
                                       As noted in Table H-29, none of the assisted units in the City are at
                                       risk. This information is consistent with the California Housing
                                       Partnership database.11
11
      Elyse Perry, Preservation Program Coordinator, California Housing Partnership Corporation, 7/9/07
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                         39	                                          September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                      Resources and Opportunities
                                A variety of resources are available for the development,
                                rehabilitation, and preservation of housing in the City of Rancho Santa
                                Margarita. This chapter provides a description of the land resources
                                and adequate sites to address the City’s regional housing need
                                allocation, and describes the financial and administrative resources
                                available to support the provision of affordable housing. Additionally,
                                the chapter discusses opportunities for energy conservation that can
                                lower utility costs and increase housing affordability.
                                A. Future	Housing	Needs	
                                1.       Regional	Housing	Needs	Allocation	(RHNA)	
                                This fifth update of the City’s Housing Element covers the planning
                                period of October 15, 2013 through October 15, 2021. However, the
                                City’s projected housing needs – Regional Housing Needs Allocation
                                (RHNA) developed and adopted by the Southern California
                                Association of Governments (SCAG) – covers a slightly shorter
                                growth projection and planning period (January 1, 2014 through
                                September 30, 2021). The RHNA assigns a housing production to
                                each jurisdiction in the region. Rancho Santa Margarita’s share of the
                                regional housing need for the 2014-2021 RHNA period is allocated by
                                SCAG based on factors such as recent growth trends, income
                                distribution, and capacity for future growth. Rancho Santa Margarita
                                must identify adequate land with appropriate zoning and development
                                standards to accommodate its allocation of the regional housing need.
                                According to the RHNA, Rancho Santa Margarita’s share of regional
                                future housing needs is two units. The City’s RHNA is distributed
                                into two income categories – one unit in the very low income category
                                and one unit at the low income category.
                                2.       Opportunities	for	Additional	Units	
                                The City’s RHNA of two units reflects the City’s history and character
                                as a master planned community. The City was virtually built out prior
                                to its incorporation as a City. Residential construction occurred
                                primarily during the 1980s and 1990s, and the City’s housing stock is
                                still fairly new and in sound condition; opportunities for additional
                                housing in the City are extremely limited.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                          40	                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                a. Second	Units		
                                There is virtually no vacant land remaining in the City. Opportunities
                                for additional housing in the community are likely to occur as second
                                unit construction. By 2005, the City had permitted one 370-square-
                                foot second unit. Based on the small size, this unit would be
                                affordable to very low and low income persons.
                                In order to facilitate second unit construction, the City adopted the
                                Second Unit Ordinance in 2007, which allows a second unit to be
                                detached, attached, or fully integrated into the principal unit in RLM-
                                4000D and RM-3000D zones. This flexibility of allowing different
                                configurations is intended to encourage second unit construction and
                                offers opportunity for moderating the cost of construction. However,
                                due to the housing market crash in 2008 and subsequent economic
                                recession, no second units have been constructed.
                                Along with the gradual recovery of the economy, the City is beginning
                                to receive inquiries about second units. Rancho Santa Margarita will
                                promote second unit opportunities in the City and based on past trends,
                                anticipates at least two second units could be constructed between
                                2014 and 2021, fulfilling the City’s RHNA of two units.
                                b. Park	Terrace		
                                Park Terrace is a senior independent living and assisted living
                                community with studios, one-, and two-bedroom apartments.
                                Currently, this facility has 139 units occupying a 3.3 acre site.
                                KISCO, owner of Park Terrace, has plans to provide additional units at
                                Park Terrace. Discussions with KISCO indicate that plans for 12
                                additional units will likely be submitted to the City in 2013. Based on
                                the unit size, rent level would be about $3,200 (inclusive of a $570
                                meal plan and additional costs for a standard service plan). These
                                units will provide housing opportunities for above moderate income
                                seniors.
                                c. Availability	of	Infrastructure	and	Services	
                                The City’s RHNA is only two units, which can be fully accommodated
                                with second unit construction. Existing infrastructure and services
                                serving the primary residences should be available to serve the second
                                units. Similarly, additional units at Park Terrace would not require
                                significant imfrastructure improvements.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           41	                                 September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                B. Financial	and	Administrative	Resources	
                                1.     State	and	Federal	Resources	
                                a. Community	Development	Block	Grant	Program	(CDBG)	
                                As an Entitlement City, Rancho Santa Margarita participates in the
                                Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program administered
                                by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
                                CDBG funds are used by the City to fund a variety of community
                                services available to assist low and moderate income residents and
                                those with special housing needs. Targeted assistance includes owner-
                                occupied home repair for the elderly or others with disabilities,
                                homeless assistance and prevention, and emergency shelter for victims
                                of domestic violence.
                                The Community Development Block Grant Allocation for the 2012-
                                2013 program year was $198,842. This allocation is one of the
                                smallest in the nation and reflects a continuous decrease in federal
                                appropriations for the CDBG program. Activities that have been
                                funded with CDBG funds in the past include:
                                      Minor home repairs for seniors (through volunteer efforts
                                       coordinated by Bell Tower Foundation)
                                      Case management and in-home support services for seniors
                                      Fair Housing services
                                      Homeless prevention programs
                                      Emergency shelter and crisis intervention
                                      Employment training for persons with disabilities
                                b. Housing	Choice	Voucher	(Section	8)	Assistance	
                                The City of Rancho Santa Margarita cooperates with the Orange
                                County Housing Authority (OCHA), which administers the Housing
                                Choice Voucher (Section 8) Program. The program assists very low
                                income, elderly and disabled households by paying the difference
                                between 30 percent of an eligible household's income and the actual
                                cost of renting a unit. According to the Orange County Housing
                                Authority (OCHA), a total of 115 tenant-based Housing Choice
                                vouchers are used in the City. Of these 115 households, there are 54
                                disabled households and 58 elderly households.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                         42	                                 September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                The City facilitates use of the Housing Choice Voucher program
                                within its jurisdiction by advertising OCHA programs including: a) the
                                Family Unification Program; b) Aftercare Program for Disabled; c)
                                Shelter Plus Care Program; and d) Hope for Elderly Independence.
                                OCHA Section 8 contact information is available on the City’s website
                                and newsletters.
                                2.      Local	Resources	
                                a. Residential	Mortgage	Revenue	Bonds		
                                The City participates in the Residential Mortgage Revenue Bonds
                                Program administered by the Southern California Home Financing
                                Authority (SCHFA). Under the program tax-exempt bonds are issued
                                to provide funds for mortgage loans at below market interest rates. To
                                be eligible for the program, the buyer must be a first-time homebuyer
                                whose income does not exceed 120 percent of the Orange County
                                median income. The City cooperates with lenders and the County in
                                advertising the availability of the SCHFA program.
                                b. Non‐Profit	Organizations	
                                The City would actively support local non-profit groups to facilitate
                                the development and improvement of both senior citizen and low-cost
                                housing in Rancho Santa Margarita. Such support would include
                                technical assistance for development review process, assistance
                                locating and acquiring financing, and coordinating discussions
                                between property owner, non-profit developer, and various
                                governmental agencies. However, due to the lack of vacant land in the
                                City, no opportunities for new affordable housing are anticipated
                                during this planning period unless property within the Sphere of
                                Influence is annexed.
                                C. Opportunities	for	Energy	Conservation		
                                As residential energy costs rise, the subsequent increasing utility costs
                                reduce the affordability of housing. Although the City is fully
                                developed, new infill development and rehabilitation activities could
                                occur, allowing the City to directly affect energy use within its
                                jurisdiction.
                                State of California Energy Efficiency Standards for Residential and
                                Nonresidential Buildings were established in 1978 in response to a
                                legislative mandate to reduce California's energy consumption. The
                                standards are codified in Title 24 of the California Code of
                                Regulations and are updated periodically to allow consideration and
                                possible incorporation of new energy efficiency technologies and
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           43	                                September	2013

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                methods. California's building efficiency standards (along with those
                                for energy efficient appliances) have saved more than $56 billion in
                                electricity and natural gas costs since 1978. It is estimated the
                                standards will save an additional $23 billion by 201312.
                                Title 24 sets forth mandatory energy standards and requires the
                                adoption of an “energy budget” for all new residential buildings and
                                additions to residential buildings. Separate requirements are adopted
                                for “low-rise” residential construction (i.e., no more than 3 stories) and
                                non-residential buildings, which includes hotels, motels, and multi-
                                family residential buildings with four or more habitable stories. The
                                standards specify energy saving design for lighting, walls, ceilings and
                                floor installations, as well as heating and cooling equipment and
                                systems, gas cooling devices, conservation standards and the use of
                                nondepleting energy sources, such as solar energy or wind power. The
                                home building industry must comply with these standards while
                                localities are responsible for enforcing the energy conservation
                                regulations through the plan check and building inspection processes.
                                In addition to the requirements of Title 24, the City encourages energy
                                conservation through its land use planning policies. Rancho Santa
                                Margarita was conceived as a balanced community with a mix of
                                housing, employment, commercial, recreation, educational and other
                                community facilities. The City’s General Plan and zoning provide a
                                blueprint for compact development with higher-density attached
                                housing located along major transportation routes and near the Town
                                Center where commercial facilities are concentrated.
12
    California Energy Commission (http://www.energy.ca.gov/title24)
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                44	                             September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                                   Housing Constraints
                                      A. Governmental	Constraints	
                                      1.          Land	Use	Plans	and	Regulations	
                                      a. General	Plan	
                                      Each City and county in California must prepare a comprehensive,
                                      long-term General Plan to guide its future. The land use element of the
                                      General Plan establishes the basic land uses and density of
                                      development within the various areas of the City. Under state law, the
                                      General Plan elements must be internally consistent and the City’s
                                      zoning must be consistent with the General Plan. Thus, the land use
                                      plan must provide suitable locations and densities to implement the
                                      policies of the Housing Element.
                                      The Rancho Santa Margarita General Plan Land Use Element provides
                                      for four residential land use designations, as shown in Table H-30.
                                                            Table H-30
              Residential Land Use Categories – Rancho Santa Margarita General Plan
                                              Maximum
             Designation                                                               Description
                                               Density*
Low Density Residential (LDR)                       7.0      Single family detached units on moderate to large lots.
Low Medium Density                                           Small-lot single-family detached homes, and some single-family
                                                   11.0
Residential (LMDR)                                           town homes and duplexes.
Medium Density Residential                                   Duplexes, townhomes, row houses, and multiple-family units
                                                   18.0
(MDR)                                                        (apartments and condominiums).
                                                             Apartments, condominiums, senior housing, and multi-family
High Density Residential (HDR)                     25.0
                                                             clusters.
Note: * Density expressed in dwelling units per net acre.
Source: City of Rancho Santa Margarita General Plan Land Use Element, 2002.
                                      Even though Rancho Santa Margarita is a newly formed City, the
                                      majority of the land area within the City is developed or is designated
                                      for parkland, open space, and regional open space (O’Neil Regional
                                      Park). The Land Use Element of the Rancho Santa Margarita General
                                      Plan designates approximately 1,770 net acres (24 percent) of the
                                      City’s total land inventory for residential uses, providing for a range of
                                      residential types and densities throughout the City.
                                      The maximum residential density permitted in Rancho Santa Margarita
                                      is 25 dwelling units per acre, excluding any allowable density bonus.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                      45	                                         September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                The City’s approach to accommodating affordable housing has not
                                solely been dependent on achieving high densities, but also on
                                maintenance of a higher than average number of multi-family units as
                                a proportion of total units, and upon successful leverage of state and
                                federal subsidies for affordable housing.
                                The City of Rancho Santa Margarita General Plan is not considered to
                                be a constraint to the goals and policies of the Housing Element as the
                                City’s zoning is consistent with the General Plan and adequate sites
                                with appropriate densities have been identified to permit the
                                construction of the City’s fair share of new housing units for the 2013-
                                2021 planning period.
                                b. Planned	Communities	
                                Due to the City’s built-out status, there is virtually no remaining
                                vacant land for new residential development within existing City
                                limits. Rancho Santa Margarita is based on the land use plans
                                developed for each of the planned communities that form the City,
                                including Rancho Santa Margarita, Rancho Trabuco, Robinson Ranch,
                                and Dove Canyon. Several of these planned communities are also the
                                subject of development agreements, which identify the levels of
                                development allowed, and important public facilities that will
                                accompany development.
                                The nursery properties and Porter Ranch area located northeast of the
                                City are designated Future Planned Community (FPC) on the Land
                                Use Policy Map. The General Plan does not determine the actual
                                configuration of land uses within the 261-acre FPC. Rather it
                                establishes a policy that the development of the area will be subject to
                                a Specific Plan that reflects the following allowable land use mix
                                guidelines: 20 percent Low-Density Residential (not to exceed 4.0
                                du/acre), 17 percent Low-Density Residential (not to exceed 7.0
                                du/acre), eight percent Medium-Density Residential, and 55 percent
                                Community Facility, Park and Open Space uses. The guidelines
                                establish a total dwelling unit cap of 612 units. Annexation of any
                                portion of the Northeast Future Planned Community area is contingent
                                upon the completion of a Specific Plan for the entire area.
                                c. Zoning	Designations	and	Development	Standards	
                                The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential
                                development through the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map. Zoning
                                regulations serve to implement the General Plan and are designed to
                                protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of
                                residents. The Zoning Ordinance also helps to preserve the character
                                and integrity of existing neighborhoods. The Zoning Ordinance and
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                          46	                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                Zoning Map set forth residential development standards for each
                                zoning district.
                                The four zoning districts that allow residential units as a permitted use
                                are as follows:
                                          RL              Low Density Residential District
                                          RLM             Low-Medium Density Residential District
                                          RM              Medium Density Residential District
                                          RH              High Density District
                                A summary of the development standards for the four major zoning
                                districts permitting residential development is provided in Table H-31.
                                These development standards, adopted in 2006, are reasonably
                                necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and maintain
                                the quality of life, and are not considered to be constraints to the
                                development of housing.
                                                                           Table H-31
                                                          Residential Development Standards
                                                                                       Zoning District Designations
                                    Development Standard1                          2
                                                                               RL               RLM       RM3           RH
                                 Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)                   5,000             4,000     2,000        7,500
                                                                                                              b
                                 Minimum Front Yard (ft.)                       15                15       15            20
                                 Minimum Side Yard (ft.)                        5a                5         5b           20
                                                                                                              b
                                 Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)                        10                10       10            20
                                 Maximum Lot Coverage (%)                       60                60       65c           65
                                 Maximum Building Height (ft.)                  35               35        35            35
                                 Notes:
                                 1. Development standards in the planned communities are governed by development agreements and
                                      may vary from current zoning.
                                 2. Includes RL-6,000 with 6,000 sf minimum lot and RL-5000 with 5,000 sf minimum lot.
                                 3. Includes RM-3,000-D with 3,000 sf minimum lot and RM-2,000-A with 2,000 sf minimum lot.
                                     a. An aggregate total of 15 feet for both side yards is required.
                                     b. Minimum setback in RM-2,000-A District is 10 feet.
                                     c. Maximum lot coverage in RM-3,000-D District is 60%.
                                 Source: Rancho Santa Margarita Zoning Ordinance, 2012
                                Densities range from about 7 units per acre in the RL District to a
                                maximum of 25 units per net acre in the RH District. These densities
                                are typical for many communities in southern Orange County. Aside
                                from density, minimum lot size has the most significant impact on
                                housing affordability. The minimum residential lot sizes in the Rancho
                                Santa Margarita zoning ordinance (2,000 sf to 5,000 sf) are among the
                                smallest in Southern Orange County and contribute to housing
                                affordability for single-family homes in a high market demand area.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                  47	                                               September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                d. Provisions	for	a	Variety	of	Housing	Types	
                                In a span of just 20 years, Rancho Santa Margarita has gone from open
                                ranchland to a City of approximately 48,000 people and is now nearly
                                built out. Nearly half of the City’s housing stock is higher-density
                                attached housing (Table H-14). In recent years, the pace of
                                development has slowed considerably; the City’s supply of vacant land
                                is now exhausted. Only four new residential developments, with a total
                                capacity of 154 units, have been built since the City’s incorporation in
                                2000; three-quarters of these units are high-density (37 units/acre)
                                apartments. The development history in Rancho Santa Margarita
                                confirms that the City’s zoning, development standards and procedures
                                encourage and facilitate a variety of housing for all economic
                                segments.
                                State law requires each jurisdiction to identify adequate sites and
                                provide the appropriate zoning to accommodate housing for all
                                segments of the population, including multi-family rental housing,
                                factory-built housing, mobile homes, emergency shelters, transitional
                                housing, supportive housing, and farmworker housing. A summary of
                                the types of residential development permitted by the City’s Zoning
                                Ordinance is provided in (Table H-32).
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                          48	                                  September	2013	

  2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                Table H-32
                                    Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District
         Housing Type Permitted                         RL        RLM          RM           RH           CG        CN           BP          CF
Residential Uses
Single-Family Detached                                   P          P            P
Single-Family Attached                                              P            P           P
Multi-Family                                                                     P           P
Manufactured Housing                                     P          P            P           P
Mobile Home                                              P          P            P           P
Second Units                                             P          P2           P3
Special Needs Housing
Emergency Shelters                                       C          C            C           C            C         C            C           P
Transitional/Supportive Housing                          P          P            P           P                                               C
Residential Care Facilities
                                                         P          P            P           P            C         C                        C
(6 or fewer persons)
Residential Care Facilities
                                                         C          C            C           C            C         C                        C
(7 or more persons)
Convalescent Home                                        C          C            C           C
                                                          4           4            4
Senior Housing                                           P          P            P           P4
Single Room Occupancy                                                                        P
Notes:
1. A site development permit is required for all development, unless another discretionary permit is required.
2. Only permitted in the RLM-4,000-D zoning district.
3. Only permitted in the RM-3,000-D zoning district.
4. Use is permitted by right, provided all zoning requirements are met. A conditional use permit may be required where a deviation from the zoning
     requirements is necessary.
Source: Rancho Santa Margarita Zoning Ordinance, 2012.
P = Permitted C = Conditional Use Permit
                                        Single-Family
                                        Single-family residences are permitted in all of the City’s residential
                                        zones.
                                        Multi-Family
                                        Multi-family housing is permitted in the City’s RM and RH zones. A
                                        Site Development Permit is required for any project.
                                        Manufactured Housing
                                        There is often an economy of scale in manufacturing homes in a plant
                                        rather than on site, thereby reducing cost. State law precludes local
                                        governments from prohibiting the installation of mobile homes on
                                        permanent foundations on single-family lots. It also declares a mobile
  City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
  General	Plan	                                                          49	                                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                home park to be a permitted land use on any land planned and zoned
                                for residential use, and prohibits requiring the average density in a new
                                mobile home park to be less than that permitted by the Municipal
                                Code.
                                In the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, manufactured housing and
                                mobile homes are allowed in all residential zones as a permitted use
                                provided the installation complies with the site development standards
                                for the applicable zoning district. Mobile home parks are allowed as
                                conditional use within the Robinson Ranch and Rancho Santa
                                Margarita Planned Communities, subject to approval of an Area Plan
                                and Site Plan. The City of Rancho Santa Margarita currently has no
                                mobilehome parks.
                                Second Units
                                In response to state-mandated requirements and local needs, the City
                                of Rancho Santa Margarita allows for the development second
                                dwelling units by right (i.e., no discretionary approval required) in the
                                RL, RLM 4,000-D, and RM 3,000-D Districts. Second units must be
                                consistent with the General Plan, on lots already containing a legally-
                                created single-family detached unit in a residential district and must
                                meet the following requirements:
                                       Second units may be detached from, attached to, or integrated
                                        within the principal dwelling;
                                       Second units shall conform to the development standards for
                                        the zoning district in which they are located, including but not
                                        limited to, setbacks, height and parking;
                                       Second units must conform to the most recent building,
                                        engineering, and fire codes, including, but not limited to the
                                        Mechanical Code, National Electrical Code, and Uniform
                                        Plumbing Code;
                                       Second units shall be no more than 1,000 square feet in gross
                                        floor area, provided the cumulative building square footage for
                                        the property does not exceed the maximum site coverage for
                                        the applicable district;One off-street covered parking space
                                        shall be provided, in accordance with the standards set forth in
                                        Chapter 9.6 Parking (of the Zoning Code), for each secondary
                                        unit in addition to those required for the principal unit. Parking
                                        spaces for secondary dwelling units shall be independently
                                        usable, and the use of one space shall not interfere with access
                                        to any other space;
                                       The design, materials, and oveall appearance of the secondary
                                        dwelling unit shall be generally consistent with the principal
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           50	                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                         unit;Secondary units shall remain under the same ownership as
                                         that of the principal dwelling and shall not be sold or owned
                                         separately from the principal dwelling.
                                Second units serve to augment resources for senior housing or other
                                low and moderate income segments of the population. The
                                development standards are reasonable to ensure neighborhood
                                compatibility and do not present an unreasonable constraint to
                                development.
                                Emergency Shelters
                                The City defines “emergency shelter” as a facility that provides shelter
                                and services to homeless families and/or homeless individuals on a
                                limited short-term basis. In 2011, the City amended its Zoning Code to
                                permit emergency shelters in the PQ zone. The amendment also
                                outlined development and management standards for these shelters, as
                                allowed by SB 2. Development standards for these uses are no more
                                restrictive than for other uses allowed in these districts, although
                                conditions may be required to mitigate potential impacts to nearby
                                uses.
                                Transitional and Supportive Housing
                                Currently, the Zoning Ordinance defines transitional housing as a type
                                of supportive housing used to facilitate the movement of homeless
                                individuals and families to permanent housing. Rancho Santa
                                Margarita permits transitional and supportive housing in all residential
                                zones and conditionally permits this type of housing in the CF zone,
                                consistent with SB 2.
                                Residential Care Facilities
                                The Zoning Ordinance defines Residential Care Facilities as any
                                family home, group care facility, or similar facility (as determined by
                                the State) licensed by the State to provide 24-hour non-medical care of
                                persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance
                                essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the
                                protection of the individual, provided by the California Community
                                Care Facilities Act. In 2011, the City amended the Zoning Code to
                                permit small residential care facilities (serving six or fewer persons) in
                                all of the City’s residential zones. Large residential care facilities
                                (serving seven or more persons) are conditionally permitted in all of
                                the City’s residential zones.
                                Single Room Occupany (SRO) Housing
                                Rancho Santa Margarita amended its Zoning Ordinance in 2011 to
                                define SROs as a building with a common entrance containing a
                                cluster of rental units which provide sleeping and living facilities
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           51	                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                persons where kitchen and/or bathroom facilities may be shared. The
                                City now permits SROs in the RH zone, subject to development and
                                management standards, as allowed by SB 2. Development standards
                                for these uses are no more restrictive than for other uses allowed in the
                                RH districts.
                                e. Housing	for	Persons	with	Disabilities	
                                Housing options for persons with disabilities are often limited. The
                                Americans with Disability Act (ADA) came into effect in 1990.
                                Multi-family housing built prior to 1990 does not typically include
                                accessible units on the ground floor. The City’s housing stock is fairly
                                new, and most of the multi-family housing units in Rancho Santa
                                Margarita are accessible. ADA, however, does not cover single-family
                                homes. Rehabilitation to accommodate the accessibility needs of
                                disabled residents may be necessary for some of the City’s older
                                single-family housing stock. Therefore, it is important that the City’s
                                codes, policies, and regulations are free of constraints to encourage
                                rehabilitation of the existing housing stock and to comply with ADA
                                requirements.
                                Land Use Controls
                                The City amended its Zoning Ordinance in 2011 to comply with the
                                Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act with regard to
                                licensing for residential care facilities for the disabled. Small
                                residential care facilities (serving six or fewer persons) are now
                                permitted in all of the City’s residential zones. Large residential care
                                facilities (serving seven or more persons) are conditionally permitted
                                in all of the City’s residential zones. According to the State
                                Department of Social Services, one residential care facility for the
                                elderly with a capacity of 230 beds is located in the City of Rancho
                                Santa Margarita.
                                 The City requires residential care facilities to provide one off-street
                                parking space for every three beds based on the facility’s maximum
                                occupancy. However, the Development Services Director may allow
                                for a different parking standard if credible evidence is provided that a
                                different parking ratio is appropriate based on demonstrated need.
                                These parking requirements are comparable to those for regular
                                residential uses.
                                The City has not established any distance requirements for residential
                                care facilities. The 300-foot distance established by the Lanterman
                                Developmental Disabilities Services Act governs the minimum
                                distance between two facilities.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                          52	                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                    Definition of Family
                                    Local governments may restrict access to housing for households
                                    failing to qualify as a “family” by the definition specified in the zoning
                                    ordinance. Specifically, a restrictive definition of “family” is one that
                                    limits the number of persons in what is considered a “family” and
                                    differentiates between related and unrelated individuals living
                                    together. Restrictive definitions of “family” may illegally limit the
                                    development and siting of group homes for persons with disabilities
                                    but not for housing families that are similarly sized or situated.15 The
                                    City of Rancho Santa Margarita Zoning Ordinance does not contain a
                                    definition of family.
                                    Reasonable Accommodation Procedures
                                    Both the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair
                                    Employment and Housing Act direct local governments to make
                                    reasonable accommodations (i.e., modifications or exceptions) in their
                                    zoning laws and other land use regulations when such
                                    accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled persons an equal
                                    opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. For example, it may be a
                                    reasonable accommodation to waive a setback requirement so that a
                                    paved path of travel can be provided to residents who have mobility
                                    impairments. Another example would be to waive the maximum lot
                                    coverage requirement as a reasonable accommodation to allow a
                                    disabled person to create a bedroom on the ground floor.
                                    The City adopted a formal Reasonable Accommodations procedure in
                                    2011. Requests are reviewed and approved by the Development
                                    Services Director. The determination of approval or disapproval is
                                    based on the following factors:
                                             Whether the housing that is the subject of the request will be
                                              used by an individual with a disability;
                                             Whether the request is necessary to make specific housing
                                              available to an individual with a disability;
                                             Whether the request would impose an undue financial or
                                              administrative burden on the City;
                                             Whether the request would require a fundamental alteration in
                                              the nature of a City program or law;
15
     California court cases (City of Santa Barbara v. Adamson, 1980 and City of Chula Vista v. Pagard, 1981, etc.) have ruled an
     ordinance as invalid if it defines a “family” as (a) an individual; (b) two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or
     adoption; or (c) a group of not more than a specific number of unrelated persons as a single housekeeping unit. These cases
     have explained that defining a family in a manner that distinguishes between blood-related and non-blood related individuals
     does not serve any legitimate or useful objective or purpose recognized under the zoning and land use planning powers of a
     municipality, and therefore violates rights of privacy under the California Constitution.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                     53	                                           September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                       Whether the request will have potentially adverse impact on
                                        surrounding uses;
                                       Whether the physical attributes of the property and structures
                                        justify the requested reasonable accommodation;
                                       Whether the request will provide an equivalent level of benefit
                                        as the neighbors.
                                In granting the request for reasonable accommodation, the
                                Development Services Director may impose any additional conditions
                                deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable
                                accommodation would comply with the findings required above.
                                Building Codes
                                The City enforces Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations that
                                regulates the access and adaptability of buildings to accommodate
                                persons with disabilities. No unique restrictions are in place that
                                would constrain the development of housing for persons with
                                disabilities. Compliance with provisions of the Code of Regulations,
                                and California Building Standards Code is reviewed and enforced by
                                the Building Division of the Community Development Department as
                                a part of the building permit submittal.
                                f.  Off‐Street	Parking	Requirements	
                                The City’s parking requirements for residential uses, updated most
                                recently in 2011, vary by residential type. Single-family dwellings
                                require 2 covered parking spaces per unit. Multi-family dwellings
                                require 1 parking space per studio unit, 2 spaces per 1- and 2-bedroom
                                units, and 3 spaces for 3 or more bedroom units. The parking
                                requirements for the City are summarized in Table H-33. The City
                                amended the Zoning Code in 2011 to offer reduced parking standards
                                for affordable housing projects as well as outline the parking
                                requirements for special needs housing.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           54	                                September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                               Table H-33
                                            Residential Parking Requirements
                         Type of Unit                                               Minimum Parking Space Required
                                                                   2 off-street parking spaces per dwelling (in a garage)
Single Family Dwellings (attached or detached),                    +
Duplexes and Townhomes sharing a common wall.                      For single-family dwellings - 1 on-street parking space within
                                                                   100 feet of subject dwellings
Multi-family Dwellings
                                                                   1.0 covered off-street parking space per dwelling unit
    Studio
                                                                   +0.5 visitor parking spaces per unit
                                                                   2.0 off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit
    1 Bedroom Units                                                (1.0 space must be in garage or covered)
                                                                   +0.5 visitor parking space per unit
                                                                   2.0 off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit
    2 Bedroom Units                                                (1.0 space must be in garage or covered)
                                                                   +1.0 visitor parking spaces per unit
                                                                   3.0 off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit
    3 or More Bedroom Units                                        (1.0 space must be in garage or covered)
                                                                   +1.5 visitor parking spaces per unit
Affordable Housing
0-1 Bedrooms                                                       1 off-street parking space
2-3 Bedrooms                                                       2 off-street parking spaces
4 or more Bedrooms                                                 2.5 off-street parking spaces
Residential Care Facilities, Emergency Shelters,                   1 off-street parking space per 3 beds (based on maximum
Transitional Housing                                               occupancy)1
                                                                   0.5 off-street spaces per guest unit plus 1 off-street parking
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Units
                                                                   space for each employee
Senior Apartments                                                  Determined through Conditional Use Permit Process
Note:
1.    Development Services Director may allow for a different parking standard if credible evidence is provided that a different parking ratio is
      appropriate based on demonstrated need
Source: Rancho Santa Margarita Zoning Ordinance, 2012.
                                      The required parking is typical for most cities in Orange County and is
                                      not considered to be a constraint on the production of affordable
                                      housing. This is especially true for Rancho Santa Margarita, which is
                                      essentially built-out with all of the required parking in place. While the
                                      City requires an additional off-street parking space for 3-bedroom
                                      units, this is warranted because larger units generally have more
                                      occupants with more vehicles. In higher-density communities with
                                      limited on-street parking, smaller lots and shorter driveways, adequate
                                      parking is a serious concern. Enclosed garages are sometimes used for
                                      storage, resulting in a shortage of parking. The Planning Commission
                                      has the ability to grant reduced parking for senior housing and other
                                      affordable housing projects through the conditional use permit process.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                          55	                                                      September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                g. Density	Bonus	
                                The City has adopted a density bonus ordinance that complies with the
                                provisions of Government Code §65915 et seq., (Density Bonus and
                                Other Incentives). Under the City’s ordinance, a density increase of up
                                to 35 percent over the otherwise maximum allowable residential
                                density under the Municipal Code is available to developers who agree
                                to construct housing developments with units affordable to low- or
                                moderate-income households. A senior housing development is
                                eligible for a 20 percent density bonus if it includes at least 35
                                dwelling units, and the applicant seeks a density bonus.
                                h. Condominium	Conversions	
                                In order to reduce the impacts of condominium conversions on
                                residents of rental housing, some of which provides housing for low-
                                and moderate-income persons, the City’s Municipal Code provides for
                                the following:
                                    1. Application for a Site Development Permit to be submitted to
                                        the Development Services Director;
                                    2. Submission of an engineering report on the general condition
                                        of al structural, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical elements
                                        of the existing development;
                                    3. Submission of a housing program which includes:
                                           The means by which the provision of housing affordable to
                                            lower and moderate income households will be achieved
                                           A housing report addressing the balance of housing in the
                                            community, including vacancy rates and other available
                                            housing of similar type and rent
                                           A survey of existing tenants as to their length of
                                            occupancy, and the number of those projected to purchase
                                            one of the units
                                           A relocation plan that identifies the steps that will be taken
                                            to ensure the successful relocation of each tenant in the
                                            event the conversion take places
                                    4. A requirement that the property owner provide tenants a ninety
                                        (90) day preemptive right to purchase units or a right of
                                        exclusive occupancy upon more favorable terms and conditions
                                        than those on which the units will be initially offered to the
                                        public.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           56	                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                When a condo conversion is permitted, the increase in the supply of
                                less expensive for-sale units helps to compensate for the loss of rental
                                units. The ordinance to regulate condominium conversions is reasonable
                                to preserve rental housing opportunities, and does not present an
                                unreasonable constraint on the production of ownership housing.
                                i. Building	Codes	
                                State law prohibits the imposition of building standards that are not
                                necessitated by local geographic, climatic or topographic conditions
                                and requires that local governments making changes or modifications
                                in building standards must report such changes to the Department of
                                Housing and Community Development and file an expressed finding
                                that the change is needed.
                                The City adopted and enforces the 2010 California Building Code,
                                based on the 2009 International Building Code as published by the
                                International Code Council. These codes are considered to be the
                                minimum necessary to protect the public's health, safety and welfare.
                                No additional regulations have been imposed by the City that would
                                unnecessarily add to housing costs.
                                2.      Development	Processing	Procedures	
                                a. Residential	Permit	Processing	
                                State Planning and Zoning Law provides permit processing
                                requirements for residential development. Within the framework of
                                state requirements, the City has structured its development review
                                process in order to minimize the time required to obtain permits while
                                ensuring that projects receive careful review.
                                All residential development is reviewed by City staff for zoning,
                                building and fire code compliance prior to issuance of building
                                permits.
                                For all residential projects (except projects within an approved specific
                                plan – see discussion below), a Site Development Permit must be
                                approved by the Planning Commission. The purpose of the site
                                development permit is to provide for the effective and efficient review
                                of development proposals to ensure compatible and enhanced site and
                                building design throughout the community. It also ensures that the site
                                complies with all City site development standards, including height
                                limit, minimum lot size, maximum lot coverage, setbacks, parking and
                                garage/carport placement, landscaping and screening. Finally, this
                                gives the City the ability to require the developer to provide for park
                                land, public improvements or other applicable items.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           57	                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                Specific Plans
                                Residential and mixed-use projects within an approved Specific Plan
                                are permitted by-right, which would include administrative design
                                review as defined in California Government Code Sec. 65583.2(i).
                                Processing times vary and depend on the size and complexity of the
                                project. Projects reviewed by the Planning Commission, including
                                Conditional Use Permits and Site Development Permits, typically
                                require between two to three months to process. Tentative parcel maps
                                and tentative tract maps typically require three to six months to
                                process. Projects reviewed by the City Council, such as General plan
                                and zoning amendments, typically require between six to eight months
                                to process.
                                Certain steps of the development process are required by state rather
                                than local laws. The State has defined processing deadlines to limit the
                                amount of time needed for review of required reports and projects. In
                                an effort to provide an efficient permit processing system, the City has
                                implemented the following time and cost saving developmental
                                processes:
                                       Prepared permit processing guidelines to assist residential
                                        builders in applying for development permits for single-family
                                        residences, multifamily residential developments and
                                        subdivisions;
                                       Located all City divisions involved in the permitting process in
                                        one central location;
                                       Developed “early consultation” pre-application process to
                                        identify issues as soon as possible and reduce processing time;
                                       Allow processing fees to be reduced, postponed or
                                        supplemented with housing funds for affordable projects
                                        meeting City priorities;
                                       Encourage concurrent processing of applications;
                                       Provided a GIS application on the City’s website with land use
                                        information and hyperlinks to important information, such as
                                        General Plan and Zoning Code documents;
                                       Expedited plan check process allows for applicants to process
                                        permits faster in order to save time. This process involves
                                        assigning the application to a specific planner, who is dedicated
                                        to process the application as quickly as possible.
                                These processes help to ensure that the development review process
                                does not act as a constraint to housing development.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           58	                                 September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                  b. Environmental	Review	
                                  Environmental review is required for all development projects under
                                  the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). An Environmental
                                  Impact Report (EIR) is required of all developments that have the
                                  potential of creating significant impacts that cannot be mitigated. All
                                  of the planned communities which make up the City of Rancho Santa
                                  Margarita required the preparation of EIRs. The only significant area
                                  left to develop is the Future Planned Area located northeast of the
                                  City. This project will require a Specific Plan and EIR. Most infill
                                  residential projects in Rancho Santa Margarita are either Categorically
                                  Exempt or require only an Initial Study and Negative Declaration. The
                                  Negative Declaration process typically takes two to three weeks to
                                  prepare, plus the mandated public review period. Categorically
                                  Exempt developments such as second residential units require a
                                  minimal amount of time. As a result, state-mandated environmental
                                  review does not pose a significant constraint to housing development.
                                  3.        Development	Fees	and	Improvement	
                                            Requirements	
                                  State law limits fees charged for development permit processing to the
                                  reasonable cost of providing the service for which the fee is charged.
                                  Various fees and assessments are charged by the City and other public
                                  agencies to cover the costs of processing permit applications and
                                  providing services and facilities such as schools, parks and
                                  infrastructure. Almost all of these fees are assessed through a pro rata
                                  share system, based on the magnitude of the project's impact or on the
                                  extent of the benefit that will be derived.
                                  Table H-34 provides a listing of fees the City charges for new,
                                  standard residential development. The rates charged by the City are
                                  inclusive and based on standardized unit sizes. Planning and
                                  development fees (including building permit fees) will vary from
                                  project to project but are currently estimated to be approximately
                                  $3,500 per unit for single-family units and $12,500 per unit for multi-
                                  family apartments.16
                                  The City does not have any development impact fees. However, other
                                  agencies, such as utility companies and service providers may have
                                  their own development impact fees. For example, the City is the
                                  collection agency for three road fee programs for the Transportation
                                  Corridor Agency (TCA) and the County of Orange. The City also
                                  ensures ample park land is provided for all residents to enjoy. To
                                  achieve this goal the City requires a certain amount of land to be set
16
    These estimates are based on recently approved projects in the City. Single-family fee estimates were based on the Highland
    Estates Homes development and multi-family fee estimates were based on the Tesoro Trails development.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                   59	                                             September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                aside from every residential development. However, in-lieu of
                                providing actual land the City can also collect fees for the
                                establishment of parks at the choice of the developer.
                                                                           Table H-34
                                                        Planning and Development Fees – 2010
                                                     Fee Category                                  Fee or Deposit Amount1
                                   Planning and Application Fees
                                        Parcel Map Filing (except single
                                                                                                          $5,850 deposit
                                        family)
                                        Tentative Tract Map Filing                                        $7,500 deposit
                                        Site Plan/Site Development Permit                                $7,300 deposit
                                        Conditional Use Permit - Minor                                    $3,650 deposit
                                        Conditional Use Permit – Major                                   $7,300 deposit
                                        Specific Plan                                                    $10,000 deposit
                                        General Plan Amendment                                            $6,700 deposit
                                        Development Agreement                                            $12,300 deposit
                                        Zone Change                                                       $8,800 deposit
                                        Variance                                                          $8,800 deposit
                                   Environmental
                                        Environmental Impact Report (review)                             $10,000 deposit
                                   Engineering and Public Works
                                        Curb and Gutter                                             $250 + $0.35/linear foot
                                        Sidewalks                                                   $250 + $0.35/linear foot
                                        Parkway Culverts                                                       $345
                                   Note: Items with deposits are based on actual processing costs which may exceed initial deposit
                                        amount.
                                   Sources:
                                        1. City of Rancho Santa Margarita Fee Schedules, 2010.
                                        2. City of Rancho Santa Margarita Community Development Department , 2012.
                                The City’s road standards vary by roadway designation as provided in
                                Table H-35. However, the City is a master planned community and
                                primarily built out; the need for improvements to the roadway system
                                to support additional residential development is limited.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                   60	                                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                          Table H-35
                                                             Road Improvement Standards
                                                                           Number of             Right-of-Way       Curb-to
                                     Roadway Designation
                                                                               Lanes                 Width        Curb Width
                                Major Highway                                     6                   120’            102’
                                Primary Highway                                   4                   100’             84’
                                Secondary Highway                                 4                    80’             64’
                                Collector Street                                  2                    70’             54’
                                Local Street                                      2                    56’            40’
                                Cul-De-Sac Street                                 2                    56’            40’
                                Source: City of Rancho Santa Margarita General Plan - Circulation Element, 2002.
                                 A local residential street requires a 56-foot right-of-way, with two 20-
                                 foot travel lanes. The City’s road standards are typical for cities in
                                 Orange County and do not act as a constraint to housing development.
                                 After the passage of Proposition 13 and its limitation on local
                                 governments’ property tax revenues, cities and counties have faced
                                 increasing difficulty in providing public services and facilities to serve
                                 their residents. One of the main consequences of Proposition 13 has
                                 been the shift in funding of new infrastructure from general tax
                                 revenues to development impact fees and improvement requirements
                                 on land developers. The City requires developers to provide on-site
                                 and off-site improvements necessary to serve their projects. Such
                                 improvements may include water, sewer and other utility extensions,
                                 street construction and traffic control device installation that are
                                 reasonably related to the project. Dedication of land or in-lieu fees
                                 may also be required of a project for rights-of-way, transit facilities,
                                 recreational facilities and school sites, consistent with the Subdivision
                                 Map Act.
                                 The City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP) contains a schedule of
                                 public improvements including streets, bridges, overpasses and other
                                 public works projects to facilitate the continued build-out of the City’s
                                 General Plan. The CIP helps to ensure that construction of public
                                 improvements is coordinated with private development.
                                 Although development fees and improvement requirements increase
                                 the cost of housing, cities have little choice in establishing such
                                 requirements due to the limitations on property taxes and other
                                 revenue sources needed to fund public services and improvements.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                   61	                                              September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                4.       Article	34	of	the	California	Constitution	
                                Article 34 was enacted in 1950. It requires that low-rent housing
                                projects developed, constructed, or acquired in any manner by any
                                State or public agency, including cities, receive voter approval through
                                the referendum process. While California Health and Safety Code
                                further clarifies the scope and applicability of Article 34 to exclude
                                housing projects that have deed-restriction on less than 49% of the
                                units or rehabilitation/ reconstruction of housing projects that are
                                currently deed-restricted or occupied by lower-income persons, Article
                                34 still constitutes an obstacle for local governments to be directly
                                involved in production of long-term affordable housing. However,
                                since Rancho Santa Margarita is a built-out community, this is not
                                considered to be a constraint.
                                B. Environmental	and	Infrastructure	Constraints	
                                1.       Environmental	Constraints	
                                Environmental constraints include physical features such as steep
                                slopes, fault zones, floodplains, sensitive biological habitat, and
                                agricultural lands. In many cases, development of these areas is
                                constrained by state and federal laws (e.g., FEMA floodplain
                                regulations, the Clean Water Act and the Endangered Species Act, and
                                the state Fish and Game Code and Alquist-Priolo Act). Because
                                Rancho Santa Margarita is fully developed, these issues do not pose a
                                significant constraint to new development within City limits. The
                                City’s land use plans have been designed to protect sensitive areas
                                from development, and to protect public safety by avoiding
                                development in hazardous areas. While these policies constrain
                                residential development to some extent, they are necessary to support
                                other public policies.
                                2.       Infrastructure	Constraints	
                                As the City has been developed primarily within the last 25 years,
                                infrastructure, including water, sewer, and sidewalks are readily
                                available and adequate within the City limits. Prior to approval of
                                development within the Future Planned Area, an annexation plan will
                                be required. The annexation plan requires the preparation of an urban
                                services plan that outlines how adequate levels of public services and
                                facilities will be provided to serve the new development, without
                                reducing the level of services to the City.
                                As discussed under Development Fees and Improvement
                                Requirements, the City requires developers to provide on-site and off-
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                          62	                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                site improvements necessary to serve their projects. Dedication of land
                                or in-lieu fees may also be required of a project for rights-of-way,
                                transit facilities, recreational facilities and school sites, consistent with
                                the Subdivision Map Act.
                                Additionally, the City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP) contains
                                a schedule of public improvements including streets, bridges,
                                overpasses and other public works projects to facilitate the continued
                                build-out of the City’s General Plan. The CIP helps to ensure that
                                construction of public improvements is coordinated with private
                                development. As a result of these policies, any infrastructure
                                constraints which currently exist must be fully mitigated and financed
                                as growth occurs.
                                a. Wastewater	
                                Sewage collection and treatment in Rancho Santa Margarita is
                                provided by the Santa Margarita Water District (SMWD) and the
                                Trabuco Canyon Water District (TCWD). The SMWD owns and
                                operates the Oso Creek Wastewater Reclamation System. The
                                reclaimed water is used to irrigate golf course, greenbelts, parks, and
                                school grounds. In addition, SMWD owns 2.25 million gallons per day
                                (MGD) of treatment capacity as a member agency in the South East
                                Regional Reclamation Authority (SERRA). SERRA operates a
                                wastewater treatment facility in Dana Point. This plant serves the
                                communities of Rancho Santa Margarita, Coto de Caza, and portions
                                of the Trabuco Canyon and Irvine Ranch Water Districts. The TCWD
                                collects wastewater and reclaims it at the Robinson Ranch Wastewater
                                Treatment Plant. All of the reclaimed water is used for irrigation
                                purchases. TCWD is planning additional treatment facilities, reclaimed
                                water storage and domestic water sources to ensure its ability to meet
                                service area needs through 2030. Sewage treatment capacity is
                                available to service the Northeast FTC and does not constrain
                                development in this area or elsewhere in Rancho Santa Margarita.
                                b. Water	
                                Water for City residents is supplied by the SMWD and the TCWD.
                                The SMWD provides water to the Rancho Santa Margarita and
                                Rancho Trabuco communities. The TCWD provides water to the
                                Robinson Ranch, Dove Canyon, Walden and Rancho Cielo areas. The
                                SMWD and the TCWD are members of the Municipal Water District
                                of Orange County (MWDOC) which in turn is a member of the
                                Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD). Almost
                                all of the water supply is purchased from MWD, which imports water
                                from the Colorado River Aqueduct. A small portion comes from
                                Northern California through the State Water Project. Domestic water
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                            63	                                    September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                supply is not expected to limit development during the planning
                                period.
                                c. Stormwater	Drainage	
                                Rancho Santa Margarita includes three natural creeks and their
                                tributaries. Flood control systems have been constructed to direct
                                runoff away from developed areas and prevent flooding associated
                                with heavy rains. The Orange County Flood Control District (OCFCD)
                                is responsible for regional flood control facilities. The City manages
                                local facilities. The City works closely with OCFCD to determine
                                needs for flood control improvements and to identify improvements
                                needed to accommodate proposed development projects. Development
                                proposals and amendments within planned communities are reviewed
                                for consistency with flood control improvements required in approved
                                development plans and agreements. Development proposals outside of
                                Planned Communities are assessed for drainage impacts and required
                                facilities. With these existing facilities and review procedures in place,
                                the City’s flood control system is not expected to limit development
                                during the planning period.
                                C. Market	Constraints	
                                1.       Land	Costs	
                                Land represents one of the most significant components of the cost of
                                new housing. Land values fluctuate with market conditions, and have
                                been steadily increasing since 2000. The recent downturn in the
                                housing market affected land values negatively however.
                                After a period of rapid residential growth in the 1990s, Rancho Santa
                                Margarita has reached build-out, with the focus of future growth on the
                                261-acre area located to the northeast of the City. The land and
                                holding costs for this area will undoubtedly affect housing prices. Per-
                                unit land cost is directly affected by density – higher density allows the
                                cost to be spread across more units, reducing the total price. Ultimate
                                densities for the site will be determined by a Specific Plan. The current
                                General Plan land use guidelines for the site would accommodate
                                between 220-360 multifamily units and 252-392 single-family units
                                with a total cap of 612 units.
                                2.       Construction	Costs	
                                Construction cost is affected by the price of materials, labor,
                                development standards and general market conditions. The City has no
                                influence over materials and labor costs, and the building codes and
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           64	                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                development standards in Rancho Santa Margarita are not substantially
                                different than most other cities in Orange County. Construction costs
                                for materials and labor have increased at a slightly higher pace than the
                                general rate of inflation according to the Construction Industry
                                Research Board.
                                3.      Cost	and	Availability	of	Financing	
                                The availability of financing affects a person’s ability to purchase or
                                improve a home. Under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA),
                                lending institutions are required to disclose information on the
                                disposition of loan applications and the income, gender, and race of
                                loan applicants. The primary concern in a review of lending activity is
                                to determine whether home financing is available to a city’s residents.
                                The Annual HMDA report for 2011 (the most recent available at the
                                writing of this report) was reviewed to evaluate the availability of
                                residential financing within the City. The data presented in this
                                section include the disposition of loan applications submitted to
                                financial institutions for home purchase, home improvement, and
                                refinance loans in Rancho Santa Margarita.
                                In 2011, a total of 961 households applied for conventional mortgage
                                loans in Rancho Santa Margarita. As shown in Table H-36, 77 percent
                                of the conventional mortgage applications were approved, ten percent
                                were denied, and 13 percent were withdrawn or closed for
                                incompleteness.
                                Fewer Rancho Santa Margarita households applied for government-
                                backed loans in 2011 than conventional purchase loans. This may be
                                due to the relatively small proportion of lower income households in
                                the City. Of the 479 applications for government-backed loans, 77
                                percent were approved, 11 percent were denied, and 12 were
                                withdrawn or closed.
                                Another 112 Rancho Santa Margarita households applied for home
                                improvement loans in 2011; of these, only 57 percent were approved
                                and 30 percent were denied. In general, home improvement financing
                                is less accessible during market downturns, compared to home
                                purchase financing. High debt-to-income ratios coupled with lower
                                property appraisals can make it more difficult to qualify for additional
                                financing.
                                Applications to refinance existing mortgages were the most common
                                in the City—a total of 4,136 applications were filed in Rancho Santa
                                Margarita. The approval rate for refinance loans (73 percent) was
                                slightly lower than the approval rates for conventional and
                                government-backed home purchase loans (both 77 percent).
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                          65	                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                       Approval rates in the City did vary noticeably by the income level of
                                       the applicant. More than 63 percent of loan applicants in Rancho Santa
                                       Margarita had incomes that exceeded 120 percent of the AMI.
                                       Approximately 76 percent of applications filed by these upper income
                                       households were approved, while 12 percent were denied. Lower
                                       income households, particularly very low income households had the
                                       lowest loan approval rates and highest denial rates. Only 46 percent of
                                       very low income and 69 percent of low income applicants were
                                       approved.
                                                               Table H-36
                                               Disposition of Loan Applications
                                                                                          Percent        Percent
                    Applications                                   Total                                          Percent Other
                                                                                        Approved         Denied
By Loan Type
Conventional                                                                  916              77.0%        10.0%          13.0%
Government Backed                                                             479              76.6%        11.3%          12.1%
Home Improvement                                                              112              57.1%        29.5%          13.4%
Refinancing                                                                4,136               72.5%        14.6%          12.8%
By Income
Very Low (<50% AMI)                                                           163              46.0%        36.8%          17.2%
Low Income (51-80% AMI)                                                       499              68.7%        18.0%          13.2%
Moderate Income (81-120% AMI)                                              1,138               72.5%        14.4%          13.1%
Above Moderate (>120% AMI)                                                 3,559               75.7%        12.0%          12.3%
Not Available                                                                 284              69.7%        15.5%          14.8%
Total                                                                      5,643               73.3%        13.9%          12.8%
Notes:
1. “Approved” includes loans approved by the lenders whether or not they are accepted by the applicants.
2. “Other” includes loan applications that were either withdrawn or closed for incomplete information.
Source: HMDA data, 2011.
                                       Given the high rates of approval, refinancing and home purchase loans
                                       are generally available and not considered to be a significant constraint
                                       in Rancho Santa Margarita.
                                       With limited public resources, the City is not in a position to
                                       substantially subsidize a rental or ownership housing development.
                                       Nonetheless, the City will continue to provide referrals to the County’s
                                       Housing Authority and/or local nonprofit agencies that provide
                                       homebuyer assistance.
                                       a. Foreclosures	
                                       Between 2000 and 2005, with low interest rates, “creative” financing
                                       (e.g., zero down, interest only, adjustable loans), and predatory lending
                                       practices (e.g., aggressive marketing, hidden fees, negative
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                           66	                                       September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                  amortization), many households purchased homes that were beyond
                                  their financial means. Under the false assumptions that refinancing to
                                  lower interest rates would always be an option and home prices would
                                  continue to rise at double-digit rates, many households were (and still
                                  are) unprepared for the hikes in interest rates, expiration of short-term
                                  fixed rates, and decline in sales prices that were set off in 2006.
                                  Suddenly faced with significantly inflated mortgage payments and
                                  loans that were larger than the value of their homes, many households
                                  had their homes foreclosed.
                                  While foreclosures remain an issue, particularly for the region, the
                                  situation has improved dramatically in recent years. In Orange County,
                                  3,255 Notices of Default (NODs) were recorded in the third quarter of
                                  2012, compared to 4,817 NODs filed during the same period in the
                                  previous year (for a 32 percent decrease).18 Three and a half years
                                  after the foreclosure crisis hit its peak, the number of California homes
                                  entering the foreclosure process fell to the lowest level since the first-
                                  quarter of 2007. On average, homes foreclosed on in the third quarter
                                  of 2012 took eight months to wind their way through the formal
                                  foreclosure process.
                                  In November 2012, 170 homes in Rancho Santa Margarita were listed
                                  as foreclosures for sale.19 These homes are listed at various stages of
                                  foreclosure (from pre-foreclosures to auctions) and range in price from
                                  under $100,000 to $650,000. The range in prices of these homes
                                  facing foreclosure indicates that the impact of foreclosure extends to
                                  households with higher incomes as well as lower income households.
                                  D. Fair	Housing	
                                  State law also prohibits discrimination in the development process or
                                  in real property transactions, and it is the City’s policy to uphold the
                                  law in this regard. As a recipient of CDBG funds, the City of Rancho
                                  Santa Margarita participated in the preparation of a regional Analysis
                                  of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice (AI), which was most recently
                                  updated in 2010. The City also works in partnership with the Fair
                                  Housing Council of Orange County and the U.S. Department of
                                  Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to ensure unimpeded access
                                  to fair housing opportunities.
                                  The Fair Housing Council is a private non-profit organization formed
                                  in 1965 in the wake of the civil rights movement that resulted in the
                                  Civil Rights Act of 1964. The Council incorporated in 1968, the same
                                  year that Congress extended civil rights protections to cover housing
18
   http://www.dqnews.com/Articles/2012/News/California/CA-Foreclosures/RRFor121017.aspx, accessed December 6, 2012.
19
   http://www.homes.com, accessed December 6, 2012.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                               67	                                           September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                with the adoption of the Fair Housing Act. The agency works to fulfill
                                a mission of protecting the quality of life in Orange County by
                                ensuring equal access to housing opportunities, fostering diversity and
                                preserving dignity and human rights. Contracting to serve all of
                                Orange County's local governments for provision of fair housing
                                services for their residents, the Fair Housing Council handles more
                                than 250 cases of alleged housing discrimination in the County each
                                year.
                                Services offered by the Fair Housing Council include counseling and
                                landlord/tenant problems, special assistance for ethnic minority and
                                single-parent households, bilingual housing literature and videotape
                                presentations, and housing assistance counseling.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                          68	                                 September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                      Housing Action Plan
                                A. Goals	and	Policies	
                                Earlier sections of the Housing Element evaluate the City’s housing
                                needs, opportunities and constraints, while Appendix A presents a
                                review of the previous Housing Element (2008-2014). This Action
                                Plan reflects the City’s experience during the past eight years and sets
                                forth the goals, policies, and programs to address the identified
                                housing needs and issues for the 2013–2021 planning period.
                                Quantified Objectives for new construction, rehabilitation and
                                conservation are also identified for this planning period.
                                The goals and policies that guide the City’s housing programs and
                                activities are as follows:
                                1.       Housing	Diversity	and	Opportunities	
                                Persons and households of different ages, types, income levels and
                                lifestyles have different housing needs and preferences that change
                                over time. Maintaining diversity in types of housing allows all persons,
                                regardless of family type or income, to have the opportunity to find
                                housing suitable to their needs.
                                Goal 1:          Maintain a range of housing opportunities to
                                                 adequately meet the existing and projected needs of
                                                 the entire community
                                Policy 1.1:      Maintain a variety of housing types and prices
                                                 throughout the City to increase housing choice and
                                                 ensure that households of all types and income levels
                                                 have the opportunity to find suitable housing.
                                Policy 1.2:      Identify adequate sites (e.g., annexation areas within the
                                                 Sphere of Influence, infill sites) with appropriate zoning
                                                 and development standards to facilitate and encourage
                                                 housing production commensurate with the projected
                                                 housing needs of the City.
                                Policy 1.3:      Maintain a geographic dispersal of units affordable to
                                                 all income levels throughout the City.
                                Policy 1.4:      Ensure that new residential development and
                                                 modifications to existing development are compatible
                                                 with surrounding neighborhoods.
                                Policy 1.5:      Reduce actual and potential governmental constraints to
                                                 the development, maintenance, and improvement of
                                                 housing.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                            69	                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                Policy 1.6:      Support the concept of “aging in place” by maintaining
                                                 a range of housing that allows people to remain in the
                                                 community as their housing needs change.
                                Policy 1.7:      Ensure that new housing developments provide their
                                                 share of adequate parks and recreational facilities to
                                                 meet community needs.
                                2.      Maintenance	and	Preservation	of	Housing	and	
                                        Neighborhoods		
                                Housing and neighborhood condition is an important indicator of the
                                quality of life in a community. As the community ages, Rancho Santa
                                Margarita may be confronted with issues of deteriorating housing,
                                public improvements and community facilities. The existing high-
                                quality, well-planned development and neighborhoods need to be
                                maintained and preserved. Multi-faceted strategies will be used to
                                address the needs of the community as it ages.
                                Goal 2:          Maintain and improve existing neighborhoods and
                                                 housing stock
                                Policy 2.1:      Work with Homeowner Associations and community
                                                 foundations to promote the maintenance of the local
                                                 housing stock to enhance the quality of life in
                                                 established neighborhoods and promote community
                                                 identity and pride.
                                Policy 2.2:      Maintain the quality of ownership and rental housing by
                                                 enforcing compliance with housing and property
                                                 maintenance standards.
                                Policy 2.3:      Through public-private partnerships and collaborative
                                                 efforts, rehabilitate substandard housing where needed.
                                Policy 2.4:      Ensure that units produced for very-low, low- and
                                                 moderate-income households are made available to
                                                 those groups and maintained as affordable units.
                                Policy 2.5:      Support public education programs that promote
                                                 property maintenance.
                                3.      Housing	Assistance	
                                Certain segments of the population may have more difficulty in
                                finding decent, affordable housing due to special circumstances. These
                                “special needs” groups include lower-income households, the elderly,
                                disabled persons, large families, single-parent households, and the
                                homeless. To ensure the housing needs of these groups are met, the
                                City will continue to further fair housing choices through actively
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                            70	                                 September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                expanding housing opportunities and removing impediments to fair
                                housing.
                                Goal 3:       Use public-private partnerships and collaborative
                                              efforts to ensure that all segments of the community
                                              have access to safe and decent housing that meets
                                              their special needs.
                                Policy 3.1:   Participate in programs assisting in the production and
                                              conservation of decent, safe, and attractive housing
                                              affordable to very-low-, low- and moderate-income
                                              households and other special needs groups.
                                Policy 3.2:   Encourage the provision of housing for homeless
                                              persons through the use of state and federal programs
                                              and     through      public-private     partnerships    and
                                              collaborative efforts.
                                Policy 3.3:   Work to ensure that individuals and families seeking
                                              housing in Rancho Santa Margarita are not
                                              discriminated against on the basis of race, religion, sex,
                                              marital and familial status, ancestry, national origin,
                                              color, disability, or other arbitrary factors.
                                Policy 3.4:   Facilitate the maintenance of affordable housing
                                              through inclusionary housing requirements and
                                              financial assistance.
                                Policy 3.5:   Support collaborative partnerships of nonprofit
                                              organizations, affordable housing developers, major
                                              employers, and for profit developers to conserve
                                              affordable housing.
                                4.     Related	Goals	and	Policies	
                                The goals and policies described in the Housing Element are related to
                                and support subjects included in other General Plan elements. In turn,
                                many goals and policies from other elements directly or indirectly
                                support the goals, and policies of the Housing Element. These
                                supporting goals and policies are identified in the following table.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                         71	                                    September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                  Table H-37
                         Related Goals and Policies in General Plan Elements
                                                        Housing Element Issue Areas
         General Plan Element                                       Maintenance and
                                    Housing Diversity and                                      Housing
                                                             Preservation of Housing and
                                         Opportunities                                        Assistance
                                                                     Neighborhoods
      Land Use                      1.4, 2.2                2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7
      Circulation                                           1.4, 3.4
      Economic Development          1.1, 1.2
      Conservation/Open Space                               1.4, 2.2
      Safety                                                1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.6
      Noise                                                 1.2, 1.3
                                B. Housing	Programs	
                                Rancho Santa Margarita offers a variety of housing opportunities to
                                meet the needs of the community. This section of the Housing Action
                                Plan addresses the issues identified in the previous sections of the
                                Element and provides a strategy to achieve the City’s housing goals.
                                The housing programs are discussed in detail below.
                                1.       Provide	Adequate	Housing	Sites	
                                A key element in satisfying the housing needs of all segments of the
                                community is the provision of adequate sites for housing. This is an
                                important function of both the General Plan and zoning.
                                1.1: Regional Housing Needs Allocation: Planning and regulatory
                                actions to provide adequate housing sites are achieved through the
                                Land Use Element and Zoning Code. The Land Use Element provides
                                for a variety of residential types, ranging from lower-density single-
                                family homes to higher-density apartments and condominiums,
                                transitional housing and second units. Pre-incorporation development
                                agreements apply to a number of the planned communities in Rancho
                                Santa Margarita and identify permitted levels of development based on
                                the provision of public facilities and infrastructure. The use
                                designations identified in the Land Use Element are consistent with the
                                development densities identified in the development agreements.
                                The City is primarily built out and therefore SCAG has identified a
                                2014-2021 future housing need for Rancho Santa Margarita of only
                                two new units -- one very low income unit and one low income unit.
                                Second unit construction is likely the primary source of new housing
                                units in the future.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           72	                                     September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                Program Objectives and Timeframe:
                                       As part of the annual General Plan Implementation Report, the
                                        City will monitor and report on progress made toward meeting
                                        the 2013-2021 RHNA allocation.
                                       Monitor the development of second units in the City to
                                        determine if the current development standards in place are
                                        adequate to facilitate the construction of second units, given
                                        current market conditions. Develop incentives or modify
                                        development standards as necessary and appropriate.
                                       Continue to pursue annexation of the Future Planned Area.
                                        Pursue developers for these sites and the annexation area in
                                        order to provide future rental and ownership opportunities for a
                                        range of income groups and household types.
                                       Support applications by qualified housing developers to pursue
                                        local, state and federal funds for the rehabilitation and/or
                                        construction of housing targeted for persons with disabilities,
                                        including persons with developmental disabilities, provided the
                                        proposed project is consistent with the City’s General Plan.
                                Responsible Agency: Development Services Department
                                Funding Source: Departmental budget
                                2.2: Homeless Services: The main source for data regarding the
                                number of homeless in Orange County is the 2011 Point-In-Time
                                Homeless Count and Survey (PITS). However, based on the 2011
                                PITS data, no homeless person identified Rancho Santa Margarita as
                                the city in which they resided before becoming homeless. This finding
                                is consistent with input provided by the Orange County Sheriff’s
                                Department, which indicates that there are few (if any) homeless in the
                                City. Transients and victims of domestic violence make up the bulk of
                                the Sheriff’s service calls related to homelessness.
                                According to the City’s Consolidated Plan, homelessness is not a
                                significant issue in the City, but services and shelter for victims of
                                domestic violence and assistance to prevent homelessness were
                                identified as needs. The City continues to utilize a portion of its CDBG
                                public service grant resources to support local agencies that address
                                these needs. About five individuals annually receive emergency shelter
                                assistance from the City and various service providers.
                                Program Objectives and Timeframe:
                                       Continue to coordinate with the County of Orange and
                                        homeless service providers to ensure that homeless persons and
                                        persons threatened with homelessness are referred to shelters
                                        and appropriate social service agencies.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                          73	                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                Responsible Agency: Development Services Department
                                Funding Source: CDBG funds
                                2.      Provide,	Maintain,	and	Improve	Affordable	
                                        Housing		
                                Programs to achieve this goal address two issue areas: 1) provision and
                                conservation of affordable housing for all economic segments of the
                                community and special needs groups; and 2) maintenance and
                                preservation of the City’s housing stock and neighborhoods.
                                2.1: Housing Choice Voucher (Section 8) Assistance: The City of
                                Rancho Santa Margarita cooperates with the Orange County Housing
                                Authority (OCHA), which administers the Section 8 Voucher Program.
                                The Housing Assistance Payments Program assists low income, elderly
                                and disabled households by paying the difference between 30% of an
                                eligible household's income and the actual rent. This program addresses
                                the needs of overpayment and overcrowding of very-low- and extremely-
                                low-income households through the provision of adequately-sized
                                apartments at affordable rents. According to the Orange County Housing
                                Authority, a total of 115 tenant-based Section 8 vouchers are used in the
                                City. Of these 115 households, there are 93 extremely-low, 16 very-low,
                                and six low-income households. Additionaly, there are 54 disabled
                                households and 58 elderly households.
                                The City facilitates use of the Section 8 program within its jurisdiction
                                by advertising OCHA Section 8 programs on the City’s website and
                                newsletters.
                                Program Objectives and Timeframe:
                                       The City will cooperate with OCHA to continue to assist 115
                                        households annually, and if possible, expand assistance to an
                                        increased number of households, particularly families with
                                        children.
                                Responsible Agency: Development Services Department and OCHA
                                Funding Source: Section 8 funds
                                2.2: OCHA Special Needs Groups Rental Assistance Programs: The
                                County administers rental assistance programs targeting special needs
                                groups, including families whose children are at risk of being placed in
                                out-of-home care, disabled persons, homeless and veterans. These
                                programs serve extremely-low-income persons and include the
                                following:
                                       Family Unification Program which provides Section 8
                                        assistance to families whose children are at risk of being placed
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           74	                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                        in out-of-home care or delayed in returning from care because
                                        of the families’ inadequate housing.
                                       Shelter Plus Care Program which provides rent subsidies to
                                        homeless persons with disabilities.
                                       Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (VASH) Program
                                        which provides permanent housing subsidies and case
                                        management services to homeless veterans with mental and
                                        addictive disorders.
                                       Rental Assistance for Non-Elderly Persons with Disabilities
                                        Program which provides incremental Section 8 Housing
                                        Choice Vouchers for non-elderly disabled families.
                                Program Objectives and Timeframe:
                                       The City will continue to facilitate the use of the Section 8 and
                                        other Housing Authority programs in its jurisdiction by
                                        advertising programs on the City’s website and in its
                                        newsletter.
                                Responsible Agency: Development Services Department
                                Funding Source: Departmental budget
                                2.3: Code Enforcement: The Code Enforcement Program is operated
                                through the City’s Planning Department. Code Enforcement staff
                                cooperates with the various Homeowner Associations in the City to
                                respond to complaints related to substandard housing, property
                                maintenance, overgrown vegetation, trash and debris, improper
                                occupancy, and other nuisance and zoning complaints.
                                Program Objectives and Timeframe:
                                       The City’s Code Enforcement staff will continue to work with
                                        Homeowner Associations to enforce the City’s property
                                        maintenance standards and the City’s building and zoning
                                        codes.
                                Responsible Agency: Development Services Department
                                Funding Source: Departmental budget
                                2.4: First Time Homebuyer Assistance: With limited public
                                resources, the City is not in a position to substantially subsidize a
                                rental or ownership housing development. Nonetheless, the City will
                                continue to provide referrals to the County’s Housing Authority and/or
                                local nonprofit agencies that provide homebuyer assistance.
                                In addition, the Southern California Home Financing Authority
                                (SCHFA) offers a mortgage revenue bond program that issues 30-year
                                mortgage revenue funds at below-market interest rates. To be eligible
                                for the program, the buyer must be a first-time homebuyer whose
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                          75	                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                income may not exceed 120 percent of the Orange County median
                                income. The City will continue to participate in the mortgage revenue
                                bond program, providing information regarding the program on the
                                City’s website and at the public counter, library, post office, and other
                                community locations.
                                Program Objectives and Timeframe:
                                       Continue to provide referrals to the County’s Housing
                                        Authority and/or local nonprofit agencies that provide
                                        homebuyer assistance.
                                       Continue to participate in the mortgage revenue bond program,
                                        providing information regarding the program to interested
                                        residents.
                                Responsible Agency: Development Services Department
                                Funding Source: Departmental budget
                                2.5: Second Units: The City plans to meet its 2014-2021 RHNA
                                through the provision of second units. In order to facilitate second unit
                                construction, the City adopted the Second Unit Ordinance in 2007,
                                which allows a second unit to be detached, attached, or fully integrated
                                into the principal unit. This flexibility is intended to encourage second
                                unit construction and offers opportunity for moderating the cost of
                                construction. However, due to the housing market crash in 2008 and
                                subsequent economic recession, no second units have been
                                constructed.
                                Along with the gradual recovery of the economy, the City is beginning
                                to receive inquiries about second units. The City will promote second
                                unit opportunities and, based on past trends, anticipates at least two
                                second units could be constructed between 2014 and 2021, fulfilling
                                the City’s RHNA of two units.
                                Program Objectives and Timeframe:
                                       Promote second unit opportunities to interested residents.
                                       Monitor the development of second units in the City to
                                        determine if the current development standards in place are
                                        adequate to facilitate the construction of second units, given
                                        current market conditions. Develop incentives or modify
                                        development standards as necessary and appropriate.
                                Responsible Agency: Development Services Department
                                Funding Source: Departmental budget
                                 2.6: Energy Conservation: The uniqueness of Rancho Santa
                                Margarita is due, in large part, to its many natural and open space
                                resources. The City has taken strong efforts to create policies to
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           76	                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                protect and maintain natural resources such as water, soils, wildlife,
                                and minerals, and prevent wasteful resource exploitation and
                                destruction. The Conservation/Open Space Element of the City's
                                General Plan specifically addresses the City's goals, policies and
                                objectives to protect environmental resources and open space.
                                Program Objectives and Timeframe:
                                       Continue to explore ways to promote energy conservation and
                                        sustainability.
                                Responsible Agency: Development Services Department
                                Funding Source: Departmental budget
                                3.      Remove	Governmental	Constraints	
                                State law requires the Housing Element to address, where appropriate
                                and legally possible, removal of governmental constraints affecting the
                                maintenance, improvement, and development of housing.
                                Implementation of the following programs will help lessen
                                governmental constraints on housing development.
                                3.1: Expedited Project Review: The City’s evaluation and review
                                process for housing projects contributes to the cost of housing because
                                holding costs incurred by developers are ultimately reflected in the
                                unit’s selling price. To minimize holding costs incurred by developers,
                                Rancho Santa Margarita will prioritize any project with an affordable
                                housing component. The City recently expedited the approval of 66
                                housing units on the former Morasha Jewish Day School site.
                                Program Objectives and Timeframe:
                                       Continue to implement procedures for priority processing of
                                        affordable housing projects in order to reduce the time and cost
                                        associated with the development process.
                                       Expedite permit processing for projects targeted for persons
                                        with disabilities, including persons with developmental
                                        disabilities.
                                Responsible Agency: Development Services Department
                                Funding Source: Departmental budget
                                4.      Promote	Equal	Housing	Opportunities	
                                In order to make adequate provision for the housing needs of all
                                segments of the community, the housing program must include actions
                                that promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race,
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           77	                                  September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                 religion, sex, family size, marital status, ancestry, national origin,
                                 color, or disability.
                                 4.1: Fair Housing Council of Orange County: Currently, Rancho
                                 Santa Margarita contracts with the Fair Housing Council of Orange
                                 County (FHCOC) to provide fair housing services. Services offered
                                 include counseling and landlord/tenant problems, special assistance for
                                 ethnic minority and single-parent households, bilingual housing
                                 literature and videotape presentations, and housing assistance
                                 counseling.
                                 Program Objectives and Timeframe:
                                        Continue to contract with a qualified provider to provide fair
                                         housing services to City residents.
                                        Advertise fair housing services in the City newsletter and in
                                         local periodicals and place posters and brochures advertising
                                         fair housing services in both English and Spanish at the public
                                         counter, library, post office, and other community locations.
                                 Responsible Agency: Development Services Department
                                 Funding Source: CDBG funds
                                 C. Quantified	Objectives	
                                 The City’s quantified objectives for new construction, rehabilitation
                                 and conservation are presented in . While the new construction
                                 objectives include two lower-income units, it must be recognized that
                                 the City has no redevelopment agency and other local resources for
                                 affordable housing subsidies are severely limited. No rehabilitation
                                 objective is established since the City’s housing stock is relatively new
                                 and there are no units in need of substantial repair. The conservation
                                 objective represents Housing Choice Vouchers, as no units are at risk
                                 during this planning period.
                                      Quantified Objectives – 2013-2021
             Program                                      Income Category
             Category           Ex. Low      V. Low       Low          Mod        Upper      Totals
         New Construction           0           1           1            0          0          2
         Rehabilitation             0           0           0            0          0          0
         Conservation              93          16           6            0          0         115
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                           78	                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
Appendix A: Evaluation of the 2008 Housing Element
Section 65588(a) of the Government Code requires that jurisdictions evaluate the effectiveness
of the existing Housing Element, the appropriateness of goals, objectives and policies, and the
progress in implementing programs for the previous planning period. This appendix contains a
review the housing goals, policies, and programs of the previous housing element and evaluates
the degree to which these programs have been implemented during the previous planning period,
2008 through 2014. This analysis also includes an assessment of the appropriateness of goals,
objectives and policies. The findings from this evaluation have been instrumental in determining
the City’s 2013-2021 Housing Implementation Program.
A.        Program	Evaluation	
Table A-1 summarizes the programs contained in the previous Housing Element along with the
source of funding, program objectives, accomplishments, and implications for future policies and
actions.
B.        Progress	in	Meeting	Quantified	Objectives	
Table A-2 presents the City’s progress in meeting the quantified objectives from the previous
Housing Element.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                   A‐1	                                 September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                                         Table A-1
                                                        Housing Element Program Evaluation
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                                        2008 – 2014
                                       Responsible                                                                                              Future Policies and
           Program                                       Funding Source          Program Objectives                  Accomplishments
                                         Agency                                                                                                        Actions
Provide Adequate Housing Sites
1.   Land Use Element: Plan for    Planning Department General Fund        Designate the Morasha school       A Specific Plan was prepared    This program continues
     adequate housing sites in the                                         site “Specific Plan”, which        that allowed 66 units of multi- to be appropriate and is
     community in the Land Use                                             allows at least 28 units of multi- family residential              included in the 2013-
     Element.                                                              family residential development     development by right.           2021 Housing Element.
                                                                           by-right.
                                                                                                              The City began meeting with
                                                                           Convene a meeting with the         the developers in 2009 to
                                                                           property owner and prospective     discuss the development
                                                                           developers by December 2009.       requirements. The applicant
                                                                                                              submitted an application in
                                                                           Monitor and report on progress     August 2009 to propose a
                                                                           toward the City’s objective of 28 General Plan Amendment and
                                                                           multi-family units on the          Zoning Code Amendment to
                                                                           Morasha site, and if a             designate the site as High
                                                                           development proposal has not       Density Residential. The
                                                                           been submitted by June 2011,       application also included a
                                                                           the City Council will consider     proposed Specific Plan to
                                                                           alternate sites.                   allow for the development of
                                                                                                              66 units of multi-family
                                                                           Pursue annexation of the           residential development by
                                                                           Northeast Future Planned           right.
                                                                           Community area.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                                A‐2	                                                                     September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                       Responsible                                                                                           Future Policies and
             Program                                       Funding Source       Program Objectives               Accomplishments
                                          Agency                                                                                                    Actions
2.   Zoning Code: Plan for         Planning Department   General Fund     Continue to implement the        In 2011, the City amended the   No additional constraints
     adequate housing sites in the                                        Zoning Code consistent with the  Zoning Code to comply with      are identified. This
     community in the Zoning                                              Land Use Element.                the Lanterman Developmental     program is not included
     Code.                                                                                                 Disabilities Services Act with  in the 2013-2021
                                                                          Amend the Municipal Code         regard to licensing for         Housing Element.
                                                                          within one year of Housing       residential care facilities for
                                                                          Element adoption to bring        the disabled. Small residential
                                                                          provisions regarding family care care facilities (serving six or
                                                                          facilities into conformance with fewer persons) are now
                                                                          state law.                       permitted in all of the City’s
                                                                                                           residential zones. Large
                                                                          Amend the Municipal Code         residential care facilities
                                                                          within one year of Housing       (serving seven or more
                                                                          Element adoption to include a    persons) are conditionally
                                                                          definition, development          permitted in all of the City’s
                                                                          standards and procedures for     residential zones.
                                                                          SRO facilities.
                                                                                                           In 2011, the City amended its
                                                                          Monitor and report annually on   Zoning Ordinance to define
                                                                          second unit production, and      SROs and permit them in the
                                                                          revise development standards if  RH zone.
                                                                          appropriate.
3.   Sites for Homeless Shelters,  Planning Department, General Fund      Amend the Municipal Code         In 2011, the City amended its   The City will continue to
     Transitional and Supportive   Police Services                        within one year of Housing       Zoning Code to permit           provide assistance to the
     Housing: Amend the            Division of O.C.                       Element adoption in compliance   emergency shelters in the CF    homeless. This program
     Municipal Code in             Sherriff’s Department                  with SB 2.                       zone. The amendment also        is modified and included
     compliance with SB 2 and                                                                              outlined development and        in the 2013-2021
     assist homeless persons and                                          Continue to coordinate with the  management standards for        Housing Element.
     those threatened with                                                County of Orange and homeless    these shelters, as allowed by
     homelessness.                                                        service providers to ensure that SB 2.
                                                                          homeless persons and persons
                                                                          threatened with homelessness     The City continues to utilize a
                                                                          are referred to shelters and     portion of its CDBG public
                                                                          appropriate social service       service grant resources to
                                                                          agencies.                        support local agencies that
                                                                                                           addressed the needs of the
                                                                                                           homeless. These agencies
                                                                                                           provide a variety of services
                                                                                                           including counseling and
                                                                                                           referrals, access to food
                                                                                                           pantries, life skills training,
                                                                                                           and employment counseling.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                               A‐3	                                                                          April	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                      Responsible                                                                                         Future Policies and
            Program                                     Funding Source       Program Objectives               Accomplishments
                                        Agency                                                                                                   Actions
Provide, Maintain, and Improve Affordable Housing
4.   a) Section 8 rental          OCHA, Planning      Section 8        Cooperate with OCHA to            The City continues to          This program continues
     Assistance: Cooperate with   Department. City                     continue to assist no less than  cooperate with the Orange       to be appropriate and
     the Orange County Housing    Manager’s Office                     106 households, and if possible, County Housing Authority        will be included in the
     Authority (OCHA) to                                               expand assistance to an          (OCHA) to provide Section 8     2013-2021 Housing
     provide Section 8 rental                                          increased number of households,  rental assistance to residents. Element.
     assistance.                                                       particularly families with       As of 2012, 115 households in
                                                                       children.                        Rancho Santa Margarita are
                                                                                                        receiving Section 8 vouchers.
                                                                                                        Of these 115 households,
                                                                                                        there are 93 extremely-low, 16
                                                                                                        very-low, and six low-income
                                                                                                        households. Additionaly,
                                                                                                        there are 54 disabled
                                                                                                        households and 58 elderly
                                                                                                        households.
4.   b) OCHA Special Needs        OCHA, Planning      General Fund     Advertise OCHA Section 8         The City continues to           This program continues
     Groups Rental Assistance     Department. City                     programs and OCH Section 8       advertise OCHA Section 8        to be appropriate and
     Programs: Cooperate with     Manager’s Office                     contact information on City      programs and contact            will be included in the
     OCHA to provide rental                                            website and in City newsletters. information on the City         2013-2021 Housing
     assistance targeting special                                                                       website.                        Element.
     needs groups.
5.   Code Enforcement: Preserve   Planning Department General Fund     Continue to enforce the City’s   The City continues to provide   This program continues
     the community’s housing                                           Building and Zoning Codes.       code enforcement activities.    to be appropriate and
     stock and neighbor-hoods.                                                                          This program is complaint-      will be included in the
                                                                                                        driven and staff offers         2013-2021 Housing
                                                                                                        resources and guidance to       Element.
                                                                                                        property owners to correct any
                                                                                                        violations cited.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                            A‐4	                                                                   September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                      Responsible                                                                                             Future Policies and
            Program                                     Funding Source           Program Objectives             Accomplishments
                                        Agency                                                                                                       Actions
6.    Mortgage Revenue Bonds:     SCHFA, County of    Mortgage revenue    Advertise the MCC program       In April 2010, CDBG funding       This program continues
     Assist first-time homebuyers Orange, Rancho      bonds, General Fund administered by the Southern    was authorized by the City        to be appropriate and
     through the Mortgage         Santa Margarita                         California Home Financing       Council to work in partnership    will be included in the
     Revenue Bond program.        Planning Department                     Authority (SCHFA). Assist 5     with Habitat for Humanity to      2013-2021 Housing
                                                                          first-time homebuyers annually. help lower income                 Element.
                                                                                                          homebuyers purchase a home
                                                                                                          in Rancho Santa Margarita.
                                                                                                          Habitat for Humanity
                                                                                                          proposed using NSP funds to
                                                                                                          purchase and rehabilitate
                                                                                                          foreclosed properties in the
                                                                                                          City. They would also assist
                                                                                                          the buyer to qualify for a
                                                                                                          mortgage. City funds would
                                                                                                          be used to provide gap
                                                                                                          financing for those
                                                                                                          homebuyers who needed
                                                                                                          additional resources to qualify
                                                                                                          for their first mortgage. In late
                                                                                                          May 2011, Habitat notified
                                                                                                          the City it had utilized other
                                                                                                          funding resources to leverage
                                                                                                          NSP funds and therefore
                                                                                                          would not be using the City’s
                                                                                                          CDBG funds. These funds
                                                                                                          will be reprogrammed for
                                                                                                          other eligible uses.
Remove Governmental Constraints
7.   Expedited Project Review:    Planning Department General Fund,       Continue to implement priority  Given the market conditions,      This program continues
     Provide fast track permit                        Development Fees    processing procedures.          residential development           to be appropriate and
     processing for projects with                                                                         activities have been limited in   will be included in the
     an affordable component.                                                                             recent years. Therefore, the      2013-2021 Housing
                                                                                                          City has no backlog in project    Element.
                                                                                                          reviews and no expediting has
                                                                                                          been required.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                               A‐5	                                                                          April	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                       Responsible                                                                                      Future Policies and
            Program                                      Funding Source      Program Objectives                Accomplishments
                                         Agency                                                                                                Actions
Promote Equal Housing Opportunities
8.   Fair Housing Council of       Planning Department General Fund     Advertise the Fair Housing       A proportion of 2010-2011    This program continues
     Orange County: Further fair                                        Council’s services in the City’s CDBG funding was used for    to be appropriate and
     housing practices in the                                           newsletters and periodicals.     fair housing enforcement and will be included in the
     community.                                                                                          program administration.      2013-2021 Housing
                                                                                                         Rancho Santa Margarita       Element.
                                                                                                         continued to contract with
                                                                                                         FHCOC to provide
                                                                                                         comprehensive educational
                                                                                                         and enforcement programs to
                                                                                                         City residents.
9.   Reasonable                    Planning Department General Fund     Adopt a Reasonable               The City adopted a formal    This program is
     Accommodations for                                                 Accommodation Ordinance          Reasonable Accommodations    completed and not
     Persons with Disabilities:                                         within one year of Housing       procedure in 2011.           included in the 2013-
     Establish procedures for                                           Element adoption.                                             2021 Housing Element.
     reviewing and approving
     reasonable accommodations
     for persons with disabilities
     in conformance with state
     and federal law.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                             A‐6	                                                                September	2013	

2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
                                                          Table A-2
                                Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives
                                         City of Rancho Santa Margarita
                                                         2008 – 2014
                                                                                   Quantified
                                    Program Category                                          Progress
                                                                                   Objective
                 New Construction*                                                    124        0
                 Rehabilitation                                                        0         0
                 Conservation                                                        106        106
                   Total                                                             230
                 Source: City of Rancho Santa Margarita Planning Department, 2013.
City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
General	Plan	                                                    A‐7	                                  September	2013	


   2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
   Appendix B: Public Participation Summary
   B‐1:	Outreach	List	
   The following agencies received a notice of the City’s public hearing to review the Draft
   Housing Element.
                                                    Table B-1
                                      Public Notice Distribution List
                      City of Rancho Santa Margarita 2013 Housing Element Update
County of Orange                       Kevin Fincher
                                                                        Teryll Hopper
Ignacio Ochoa                          Housing & Community Services
                                                                        OC Association of Realtors
Director of Public Works               County of Orange
                                                                        25552 La Paz Road
PO Box 4048                            1770 N. Broadway
                                                                        Laguna Hills, CA 92653
Santa Ana, CA 92702                    Santa Ana, CA 92706
                                                                        Laura Archuleta
Linda Tang
                                       Fair Housing Council             President
Kennedy Commission
                                       201 South Broadway               Jamboree Housing Corp
17701 Cowan Avenue, Suite 200
                                       Santa Ana, California 92701-5633 17701 Cowan Avenue, Suite 200
Irvine, CA 92614
                                                                        Irvine, CA 92614
Kristine E. Thalman                                                     Vickie Talley
Executive Director                     Orange County Business Council   Board Member
BIA Orange County Chapter              2 Park Plaza, Suite 100          Orange County Housing Providers
17744 Sky Park Circle, Suite 170       Irvine, CA 92614                 25241 Paseo de Alicia, Suite 120
Irvine, CA 92614                                                        Laguna Hills, CA 92653
Chuck Wilson
                                       Dan Ferrons                      Hector Ramirez
City of Mission Viejo
                                       Santa Margarita Water District   Trabuco Canyon Water District
200 Civic Center
                                       26111 Antonio Parkway            32003 Dove Canyon Dr.
Mission Viejo, CA 92691
                                       Las Flores, CA 92688             Trabuco Canyon, CA 92679
                                                                        Rancho Cielo HOA
SAMLARC                                Trabuco Highlands HOA            Huntington West Properties
c/o Merit Property Management          Progressive Community Management Jack Williams
22342-A Avenida Empresa, Suite 102A    Cathy Acquazzino                 13812 Goldenwest Street, Suite 100
Rancho Santa Margarita, CA 92688       27405 Puerta Real, Suite 300     P.O. Box 1098
                                       Mission Viejo, CA 92691          Westminster, CA 92683
Dove Canyon HOA                        Robinson Ranch HOA               Walden HOA
Seabreeze Property Management          Power Stone Property Management  TSG Independent Property Management
Carla Hohmann                          Kendrah Kay                      Tina S. Gustave
39 Argonaut, Suite 100                 16470 Bake Parkway               27129 Calle Arroyo, Suite 1802
Aliso Viejo, CA 92656                  Irvine, CA 92618                 San Juan Capistrano, CA 92675
   City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
   General	Plan	                                           B‐1	                              September	2013	

   2013‐2021	Housing	Element		
SAMCORP
                                                                          Saddleback Valley Unified School
Accell Property Management
                                       Capistrano Unified School District District
Steve Feistel
                                       33122 Valle Road                   25631 Peter Hartman Way
23046 Avenida de la Carlota #700
                                       San Juan Capistrano, CA 92675      Mission Viejo, CA 92691
Laguna Hills, CA 92653
Jacqui Kerze
                                       Kevin Shirata
Community Outreach Coordinator                                            Amaya Genaro
                                       KISCO
Regional Center of Orange County                                          The Bell Tower Foundation
                                       21952 Buena Suerle
P.O. Box 22010                                                            22232 El Paseo
                                       Rancho Santa Margarita, CA 92688
Santa Ana, CA 92702-2010                                                  Rancho Santa Margarita, CA 92688
Dr. Marilyn L. Ditty                   Margaret R. Bayston                Margie Wakeham
Age Well Senior Services               Laura’s House                      Families Forward
24300 El Torro Road Suite A-2000       999 Corporate Drive, Ste 225       9221 Irvine Blvd.
Laguna Woods, CA 92637                 Ladera Ranc, CA 92694              Irvine, CA 92618
                                                                          Suzanne Singh
Lara Fisher
                                       Vocational Visions                 Rancho Santa Margarita
South County Outreach
                                       26041 Pala                         Chamber of Commerce
26776 Vista Terrace
                                       Mission Viejo, CA 92691            31441 Santta Margarita Pkwy A-234
Lake Forest, CA 92630
                                                                          Rancho Santa Margarita, CA 92688
   B‐1:	Other	Outreach	Methods	
   A notice regarding the April 3, 2013 meeting was published in the Orange County Register:
                     http://www.ocregister.com/news/housing-501707-city-element.html
   In addition, the public hearing was announced on the homepage of the City’s website:
   City	of	Rancho	Santa	Margarita	
   General	Plan	                                         B‐2	                                September	2013	

                                                                                                                      Land Use Element
                                                     Table of Contents
Section                                                                                                                                     Page
Introduction .....................................................................................................................................1
        Purpose of the Land Use Element........................................................................................1
        Scope and Content of the Element.......................................................................................2
        Related Plans and Programs ................................................................................................2
        Relationship to Other General Plan Elements .....................................................................7
Issues, Goals and Policies................................................................................................................9
        Balance of Land Uses ..........................................................................................................9
        Control and Direct Future Land Use..................................................................................10
        Land Use and Environmental Compatibility .....................................................................11
        Adequate Public Services and Facilities............................................................................12
        Related Goals and Policies ................................................................................................17
Land Use Plan ...............................................................................................................................18
        Balance of Land Uses ........................................................................................................18
            Land Use Classification System ..................................................................................19
            Land Use Designations ................................................................................................24
            Planned Communities ..................................................................................................28
            Northeast Future Planned Community ........................................................................29
            Land Use Plan Development Capacity ........................................................................31
        Control and Direct Future Land Uses................................................................................33
        Land Use and Environmental Compatibility .....................................................................33
        Provision of Public Facilities and Services........................................................................34
            Water and Sewer Service .............................................................................................35
            Solid Waste Disposal ...................................................................................................36
            Drainage/Flood Control ...............................................................................................37
            Fire Protection and Law Enforcement .........................................................................37
            Public Education ..........................................................................................................39
            Parks, Community Centers and Recreational Opportunities .......................................41
            Libraries .......................................................................................................................43
            Northeast Future Planned Community ........................................................................43
                                                                                                              City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                                        i                                                              General Plan
Land Use Element
                                                    List of Tables
Table                                                                                                                                Page
LU-1 Land Use Related Goals and Policies by Element.............................................................17
LU-2 Land Use Classification System ........................................................................................20
LU-3 Land Use Plan Development Capacity Summary..............................................................32
                                                   List of Figures
Figure                                                                                                                               Page
LU-1 Preliminary Draft Land Use Policy Map...........................................................................21
LU-2 Floor Area Ratio Illustrated ...............................................................................................23
LU-3 Planned Communities ........................................................................................................30
LU-4 School Sites........................................................................................................................40
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                                  ii                                                         December 2002
                                                                               Introduction
                               The Land Use Element is a guide to land use planning within Rancho
                               Santa Margarita. This Element identifies the type and location of
                               existing and future land uses within the City. The specific land uses
                               and their location within the community in turn affect the remaining
                               General Plan elements. For example, the location and types of land
                               use outlined in the Land Use Element rely on the circulation system
                               identified in the Circulation Element, and the open space facilities
                               identified in the Land Use Element are the subject of the
                               Conservation and Open Space Element policies. The land uses
                               identified in the Land Use Element also reflect the community’s
                               goals for its form and character, and the desire to maintain a quality
                               living environment for families, strengthen the community's
                               distinctive image, diversify and expand the local economy, and
                               preserve the natural areas that make Rancho Santa Margarita unique.
  Purpose of the Land          The City of Rancho Santa Margarita incorporated to gain local
             Use Element       political control and strengthen community identity and pride. One
                               of the responsibilities of an incorporated city is controlling future
                               growth and development. According to State law, cities must
                               prepare and adopt a General Plan as a tool to manage growth and
                               development. The Land
                               Use      Element      is    a
                               mandatory element or
                               chapter of the General
                               Plan.
                               The purpose of the Land
                               Use Element is to describe
                               present and planned land
                               use activity, and address
                               the relationship between development and environmental quality,
                               protection of natural water resources, potential hazards, and social
                               and economic objectives. As a guide for future growth and
                               development, the Element identifies the general distribution,
                               location, mix and extent of desired land uses including residential,
                               commercial and business, public/quasi-public facilities, open space
                               uses, and other land uses.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        1                                   December 2002

Land Use Element
                               Through the use of text, maps, and diagrams, a clear and logical land
                               use pattern is established including standards for future development.
                               A particularly important feature of the Element is the Land Use
                               Policy Map. This map shows the location, density, and intensity of
                               development for future desired land uses in the Rancho Santa
                               Margarita Planning Area. Finally, the goals and policies in the
                               Element establish a constitutional framework for future land use
                               planning and development decisions in Rancho Santa Margarita.
                               The Land Use Element of the Rancho Santa Margarita General Plan
                               represents the City's desire for long-range changes and enhancements
                               of its land uses. The Land Use Plan builds on the established land
                               use pattern to provide integration between existing community
                               qualities and the community's vision of the future. Achieving the
                               vision will be accomplished through continued public involvement
                               and diligence by City decision makers and staff.
    Scope and Content          The Land Use Element is comprised of three sections: 1)
          of the Element       Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals, and Policies; and 3) the Land Use
                               Plan. In the Issues, Goals, and Policies section, major land use
                               issues are identified and related goals and policies are established to
                               address these issues. The goals, which are overall statements of the
                               community's desires, are comprised of broad statements of purpose
                               and direction. The policies serve as guidelines for reviewing
                               development proposals, planning facilities to accommodate
                               anticipated growth, and accomplishing community development
                               strategies.
                               The Land Use Plan contains the Land Use Policy Map that
                               graphically identifies the land use designations within the Rancho
                               Santa Margarita planning area. The planning area includes land
                               within the municipal boundaries, unincorporated land within the
                               City’s sphere of influence, and areas of Mission Viejo, Lake Forest,
                               and the Cleveland National Forest that relate to long-range planning
                               for the community. The land use designations are described
                               including the type and density of allowed uses, and a statistical
                               summary of the future land use composition is provided. Areas of
                               special interest, which involve more focused planning efforts, are
                               also identified. Specific implementation programs for the Element
                               are located in the General Plan Implementation Program.
     Related Plans and         The scope and content of the Land Use Element is primarily
                Programs       governed by the General Plan Law and Guidelines and the Planning
                               Zoning and Development Laws for the State (California Government
                               Code Sections 65000-66025). A number of other plans and
                               programs are additionally considered in the formulation, adoption,
                               and implementation of local land use policy.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                         2                                    December 2002

                                                                   Land Use Element
              Related plans and programs are both local and regional in nature.
              Regional planning agencies, such as the Southern California
              Association of Governments (SCAG), recognize that planning issues
              extend beyond the boundaries of individual cities. Efforts to address
              regional planning issues such as air quality, transportation,
              affordable housing, and habitat conservation have resulted in the
              adoption of regional plans.          The form and distribution of
              development in the Rancho Santa Margarita planning area are
              affected by these plans. Relevant local and regional plans are
              discussed briefly and related to the Land Use Element in the
              following sections.
              California Environmental Quality Act and Guidelines
              The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by
              the State legislature in response to a public mandate for thorough
              environmental analysis of projects impacting the environment. The
              provisions of the law and environmental review procedure are
              described in the CEQA Law and Guidelines as amended in 1998.
              CEQA is the instrument for ensuring that environmental impacts of
              local development projects are appropriately assessed and mitigated.
              County of Orange Zoning Ordinance and City of Rancho Santa
              Margarita Zoning Ordinance
              Following incorporation, the City elected to use the County of
              Orange Zoning Ordinance as an interim means of regulating land
              use. The County Zoning Ordinance was supplemented directly by
              City-adopted ordinances, which tailored the Ordinance to the City of
              Rancho Santa Margarita. The City will adopt its own Zoning
              Ordinance and related Zoning Map once the General Plan is adopted.
              The Zoning Ordinance will be the primary implementation tool for
              the Land Use Element. Together, the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning
              Map will identify specific types of land use, intensity of use, and
              development and performance standards applicable to specific areas
              and parcels of land within the City.
              Planned Communities
              Rancho Santa Margarita has been primarily developed as a series of
              Planned Communities prior to incorporation.               The Planned
              Communities comprising the incorporated City include:
                      ?  Rancho Santa Margarita Planned Community (Including
                         Business Park and Town Center)
                      ?  Rancho Trabuco Planned Community
                                                           City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      3                                         General Plan
Land Use Element
                                        ?   Robinson Ranch Planned Community
                                        ?   Dove Canyon Planned Community
                               Pre-incorporation development agreements apply to a number of the
                               Planned Communities in Rancho Santa Margarita and identify
                               permitted levels of development based on the provision of public
                               facilities and infrastructure. The land use designations identified in
                               the Land Use Element are consistent with the development densities
                               identified in the development agreements.
                               Foothill/Trabuco Specific Plan
                               The Foothill/Trabuco Specific Plan was prepared by the County of
                               Orange to address areas within Trabuco Canyon located north of the
                               City. The Specific Plan consists largely of rural and open space
                               designations to preserve the existing character of the canyon area.
                               The Plano Trabuco sub-area described in the Specific Plan
                               corresponds to the Northeast Future Planned Community described
                               in the Land Use Plan within this Element.               Development
                               assumptions made in this Element for the Northeast FPC are
                               consistent with those identified in the Specific Plan.
                               SCAG Growth Management Plan
                               The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG)
                               Growth Management Plan recommends methods to redirect regional
                               growth to minimize traffic congestion and better protect
                               environmental quality. The goals of the Growth Management Plan
                               include balancing jobs and housing. While SCAG has no authority
                               to mandate implementation of its Growth Management Plan,
                               principal goals have implications for the land use composition of the
                               Rancho Santa Margarita Planning Area. The SCAG goals are
                               reflected throughout all of the General Plan elements, including the
                               Land Use Element.
                               South Coast Air Quality Management Plan
                               The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) mandates a
                               variety of measures to improve air quality. To comply with the
                               AQMP, the Land Use Element organizes land uses in relation to the
                               circulation system, promotes commercial land uses with convenient
                               access to transportation, and provides a balanced Land Use Plan that
                               promotes a favorable relationship between jobs and housing.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                         4                                  December 2002
                                                                       Land Use Element
              Orange County Growth Management Plan
              The purpose of the Orange County Growth Management Plan is to
              ensure that the transportation system and other public facilities are
              adequate to meet the current and projected needs of Orange County.
              The Plan establishes the following five major policies:
                  ?   Development Phasing:             Development will be phased
                      according to Comprehensive Phasing Plans (CPPs) adopted
                      by the County. Phasing is limited to roadway and public
                      facility capacities.
                  ?   Balanced Community Development: Development will be
                      balanced to encourage employment of local residents, and
                      both employment and employee housing in the County, as
                      well as in individual growth management areas (GMAs).
                  ?   Traffic Level of Service: Future development creates the
                      need for improvements to major intersections significantly
                      impacted by growth, and a developer fee program is included
                      to pay for improving affected intersections on a pro-rata
                      basis.
                  ?   Traffic Improvement Programs: All new development
                      must provide necessary transportation facilities and
                      intersection improvements as a condition of development
                      approval.
                  ?   Public Facility Plans: Comprehensive public facility plans
                      for fire, sheriff/police, and library services are required. New
                      development participates on a pro-rata basis.
              Implementation of the Orange County Growth Management Plan
              involves the establishment of: (1) growth management areas
              (GMAs) to implement Comprehensive Phasing Plans; (2) Facility
              Implementation Plans to address the financing of public facilities for
              each GMA; (3) County-wide implementation and evaluation of
              compliance with development phasing and improvements; and (4)
              traffic improvement/public facility development agreements.
              Rancho Santa Margarita is located in GMA #9. The Northeast
              Future Planned Community area is located in GMA #5.
              Orange County Local Agency Formation Commission
              The provisions of the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg Local Government
              Reorganization Act of 2000 will be applied by the Orange County
                                                               City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                       5                                            General Plan
Land Use Element
                               Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) in making
                               decisions regarding future City annexations of land within the
                               Rancho Santa Margarita sphere of influence (SOI) and to any
                               reorganizations of other service districts for the Rancho Santa
                               Margarita planning area. Under this act, LAFCO is responsible for:
                               a) encouraging orderly development; b) ensuring that populations
                               receive efficient and quality governmental services; and c) guiding
                               development away from open space and prime agricultural lands
                               unless such action promotes planned, orderly, and efficient
                               development.
                               School District Long-Range Facility Plans and Master Plans
                               To plan for future facility needs, school districts typically implement
                               a long-range planning approach with Long-Range Facility Plans and
                               Master Plans. These documents allow school districts to estimate the
                               number of additional students that new development will generate
                               and plan for needed improvements to meet the demand. The plans
                               may also consider demographic trends, such as increased household
                               size, that can affect the need for future school services. Coordination
                               with the school districts to provide adequate educational facilities is
                               an issue addressed in this Element.
                               National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
                               Rancho Santa Margarita is under the jurisdiction of the San Diego
                               Regional Water Quality Control Board (SDRWQCB), which
                               implements the NPDES permit for the San Diego area (including
                               southern Orange County). The NPDES permit, a requirement under
                               the Clean Water Act, addresses pollution from urban runoff that
                               impacts water quality of receiving waters (such as streams and
                               lakes). Under the NPDES permit, each jurisdiction must implement
                               measures to reduce urban runoff during all phases of development:
                               planning, construction and existing uses. Requirements include
                               incorporating Best Management Practices to reduce runoff from
                               construction and existing uses, reporting any violations to the
                               SDRWQCB and education regarding the negative water quality
                               impacts from urban runoff.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                         6                                     December 2002
                                                                             Land Use Element
                       Urban Water Management Plans and Water Master Plans
                       Water districts use a variety of planning processes to plan for the
                       provision of water within their service areas. Urban Water
                       Management Plans and Water Master Plans are typically used to
                       estimate future demand for water and required improvements to meet
                       future need. Sources of water, and other issues that affect the
                       provision of water within the service area are addressed in the plans.
                       The Land Use Plan addresses the need to coordinate with the water
                       districts’ planning processes to ensure adequate water is available to
                       existing and future development.
      Relationship To  According to State planning law, the Land Use Element must be
  Other General Plan   consistent with the other General Plan elements. Each element is
                       independent and all the elements together comprise the General Plan.
              Elements All elements of the General Plan are interrelated to a degree, and
                       certain goals and policies of each element may also address issues
                       that are the primary subjects of other elements. The integration of
                       overlapping issues throughout the General Plan elements provides a
                       strong basis for implementation of plans and programs, and
                       achievement of community goals.
                                              The Land Use Element relates very closely to
                                              all of the General Plan elements. The Land
                                              Use Plan establishes the land use pattern for
                                              the Rancho Santa Margarita planning area
                                              based on the community vision of the future.
                                              The Land Use Element also ensures that
                                              infrastructure and public facilities are
                                              available to accommodate planned land uses,
                                              and that the unique environmental quality of
                                              Rancho Santa Margarita is safeguarded and
                                              enhanced.
                       For example, the Housing Element of the General Plan provides the
                       basis for establishing housing stock that meets the affordability
                       requirements and other special needs of the community. Emphasis is
                       given to the development of housing that is complementary to
                       existing neighborhood character. The Circulation Element provides
                       a Circulation Plan to accommodate increased traffic from planned
                       development. The use of alternative transportation modes and
                       reduction of automobile trips are addressed in the Circulation
                       Element to meet the transportation demands from new development,
                       and to mitigate the impact of development on regional air quality and
                       traffic conditions. The Land Use Element serves to reduce
                       automobile trips by encouraging the development of office,
                                                                     City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                               7                                          General Plan

Land Use Element
                               commercial and light industrial uses, and consequently improves the
                               jobs-to-housing balance.
                               Rancho Santa Margarita has been recognized as a city that
                               incorporates many of the principles of smart growth. Rancho Santa
                               Margarita includes a mix of housing, commercial, and retail land
                               uses. A system of pedestrian trails and neighborhood parks offers
                               residents numerous alternatives to driving. The City’s mixed-use
                               design reduces the number and length of vehicle trips.1
                               A number of areas are designated for parks and open space on the
                               Land Use Policy Map for recreational and aesthetic purposes. The
                               Conservation/Open Space Element provides policy and plans to
                               maintain and enhance existing parks and recreational facilities and to
                               develop new facilities to meet demand from population growth.
                               Conservation/Open Space Element policy is also designed to protect
                               natural and cultural resources and allow infiltration of natural runoff.
                               The Safety and Noise Elements ensure that the planned land uses
                               identified in the Land Use Element are compatible and will not result
                               in public safety hazards or excessive noise.
                               As development continues in Rancho Santa Margarita, utilities and
                               public services must be available for new and existing businesses
                               and residents. The Public Facilities and Services portion of the Land
                               Use Element addresses the availability of utilities and services for
                               planned development including water supply, treatment and
                               distribution, sewer treatment, solid waste, drainage/flood control, fire
                               protection and emergency services, law enforcement, public
                               education, parks, community centers and recreational opportunities,
                               and libraries. The Public Facilities and Services portion of this
                               Element ensures that adequate utilities and services are available for
                               planned development.
                               1
                                 O’Neill, David. Smart Growth: Myth and Fact. Washington, D.C.: ULI-the Urban
                               Land Institute, Page 7, 1999.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                            8                                       December 2002

                                                                             Land Use Element
                                                Issues, Goals, and Policies
                     Four major issues are addressed by the goals, policies, and
                     implementing actions of the Land Use Element. These major issues
                     include: (1) balancing the mixture of land uses within the City to
                     ensure that revenue generation matches service provision
                     responsibilities; (2) controlling and directing future land use so that it
                     complements and protects the quality of the existing community; (3)
                     ensuring that reuse of MCAS El Toro is environmentally compatible
                     with the established community; and (4) providing adequate public
                     services and facilities to meet the needs of the existing community
                     and future development.
Balance of Land Uses Every community requires a mixture of land uses: residential uses to
                     provide housing for those living within the community; commercial
                     and industrial uses to provide revenue and employment opportunities
                     for the City’s residents; public and institutional uses to provide
                     services such as education and utilities; and open space and
                     recreational uses for the enjoyment of all. Rancho Santa Margarita is
                     fortunate to have a variety of housing and employment generating
                     uses.
                     Goal 1:         Maintain a mix of land uses and a balance of jobs
                                     and housing to support a community in which
                                     people can live, work, shop and play.
                     Policy 1.1:     Attract and retain research and development, light
                                     industrial, and high technology developments that are
                                     compatible with the character and existing land uses
                                     in the City in order to improve the generation of sales
                                     tax and property tax and maintain access to high-
                                     paying employment opportunities within the
                                     community.
                     Policy 1.2:     Encourage high-quality commercial activities in the
                                     community that improve access to essential services
                                     and entertainment opportunities.
                     Policy 1.3:     Maintain a land use composition in Rancho Santa
                                     Margarita that provides a balance or surplus between
                                     the generation of public revenues and the cost of
                                     providing public facilities and services.
                                                                     City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                              9                                           General Plan

Land Use Element
                               Policy 1.4:   Maintain a variety of housing types that complements
                                             the employment opportunities in the community and
                                             encourages a jobs/housing balance.
                               Policy 1.5:   Coordinate with public and private organizations to
                                             maximize the availability and use of parks and
                                             recreational facilities in the community.
    Control and Direct         Rancho Santa Margarita is almost fully developed; however, the City
        Future Land Use        can control changes in land use that would be incompatible with the
                               existing community. While recognizing that change is inevitable,
                               the community can plan and guide future development and land use
                               so that it complements the existing community, and protects and
                               enhances the existing character of Rancho Santa Margarita and its
                               neighborhoods.
                               Goal 2:       Control and direct future land use so that the
                                             community is protected and enhanced.
                               Policy 2.1:   Ensure that new development is complementary to the
                                             existing small-town village character of the City.
                               Policy 2.2:   Annex land within the sphere of influence prior to its
                                             development to ensure that new development is
                                             compatible with existing development in Rancho
                                             Santa Margarita.
                               Policy 2.3:   Ensure that new development and land uses are
                                             architecturally consistent and compatible in scale and
                                             style with existing development.
                               Policy 2.4:   Ensure that new development funds its share of
                                             community services and facilities (e.g., parks,
                                             schools, trails, utilities) and provides fiscal benefit to
                                             the community.
                               Policy 2.5:   Preserve and enhance the quality of Rancho Santa
                                             Margarita by abating any non-conforming buildings
                                             and uses.
                               Policy 2.6:   Evaluate the compatibility of proposed new
                                             development and land uses with surrounding uses and
                                             protection of the watershed shared with our
                                             surrounding       communities        when       reviewing
                                             development proposals.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                      10                                      December 2002
                                                                               Land Use Element
                       Policy 2.7:     Ensure that new development is compatible with the
                                       physical characteristics of the site, surrounding land
                                       uses, and available infrastructure.
         Land Use and  Although the future reuse of MCAS El Toro is undetermined at this
       Environmental   time, one reuse proposal includes development and operation of a
                       commercial airport at the former air station. Reuse of MCAS El
         Compatibility Toro as a commercial airport could result in aircraft overflight
                       activities that pose risks to the residents of Rancho Santa Margarita
                       and surrounding communities.
                       Goal 3:         Encourage reuse of El Toro with development that
                                       is compatible with existing and planned land uses
                                       in Rancho Santa Margarita and surrounding
                                       communities.
                       Policy 3.1:     Coordinate with local and regional agencies to oppose
                                       any reuse of MCAS El Toro that would result in
                                       aircraft overflight over Rancho Santa Margarita and
                                       surrounding communities.
                       Policy 3.2:     Cooperate with local and regional agencies to
                                       encourage a non-aviation reuse of MCAS El Toro,
                                       such as the Orange County Central Park and Nature
                                       Preserve Plan.
                       Policy 3.3:     Establish baseline environmental standards reflecting
                                       environmental conditions in the community (such as
                                       air quality, noise, traffic/circulation) that may be
                                       impacted by proposals for future development as the
                                       basis for assessing the environmental impacts of such
                                       proposals.
                       Goal 4:         To the maximum extent practicable, reduce the
                                       discharge of pollutants and runoff flow from
                                       urban development.
                       Policy 4.1:     To the maximum extent practicable, cause property
                                       owners or developers to minimize pollutant loading
                                       and flow velocity from new development projects and
                                       redevelopment projects during and after construction.
                       Policy 4.2:     To the maximum extent practicable, limit
                                       development that disturbs natural water bodies and
                                       natural drainage systems.
                                                                       City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                               11                                           General Plan
Land Use Element
                               Policy 4.3:     To the maximum extent practicable, educate all who
                                               live, work and shop in the City to minimize activities
                                               that pollute urban runoff.
                               Policy 4.4:     Post-development runoff from a site shall not contain
                                               pollutant loads that cause or contribute to
                                               exceedances of receiving water quality objectives and
                                               which have not been reduced to the maximum extent
                                               practicable.
        Adequate Public        Public facilities and services, such as water supply, treatment and
             Services and      distribution, sewer treatment, solid waste, drainage/flood control, fire
                               protection and emergency services, law enforcement, public
                 Facilities    education, parks, community centers and recreational opportunities,
                               and libraries are provided by the City or other service entities. Other
                               service providers include: the Trabuco Canyon Water District, Santa
                               Margarita Water District, Orange County Flood Control District,
                               Orange County Fire Authority, Orange County Sheriff’s Department,
                               various school districts, and the Orange County Library system. The
                               provision and maintenance of these services and facilities protect the
                               quality of life and the livability of the community. Such facilities
                               and services will need to be expanded to accommodate future growth
                               and development. Existing public facilities such as water and sewer
                               lines will need to be replaced due to age and the need to increase
                               capacity.
                               The following goals and policies are designed to ensure that public
                               services and facilities are provided at acceptable levels of service to
                               meet the community’s needs.
                               Water Supply, Treatment and Distribution
                               Goal 5:         Collaborate with local and regional water
                                               suppliers to ensure that an adequate water supply
                                               is available and that delivery and treatment
                                               capacity is adequate to meet the community’s
                                               needs.
                               Policy 5.1:     Actively coordinate with Santa Margarita Water
                                               District and Trabuco Canyon Water District, as well
                                               as regional water suppliers and distributors, to ensure
                                               that high quality water is available and deliverable to
                                               the community.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        12                                    December 2002

                                                                Land Use Element
              Policy 5.2:  In cooperation with the Santa Margarita Water
                           District and Trabuco Canyon Water District, review
                           development proposals to ensure that adequate water
                           supplies, treatment, and distribution capacity are
                           available to meet the needs of the proposed
                           development without negatively impacting the
                           existing community.
              Policy 5.3:  Work cooperatively with local and regional water
                           suppliers to ensure adequate water reserves exist in
                           case of natural disaster.
              Policy 5.4:  Participate in and support regional programs that
                           target the improvement and conservation of the
                           region’s groundwater and surface water supply.
              Policy 5.5:  Actively promote water conservation by City
                           residents and businesses.
              Policy 5.6:  Promote the use of reclaimed water for irrigation of
                           parks, golf courses, and landscaped areas in the
                           community.
              Sewer Treatment
              Goal 6:      Collaborate with local sewer treatment providers
                           to provide and maintain adequate levels of sewage
                           treatment.
              Policy 6.1:  Actively coordinate with Santa Margarita Water
                           District and Trabuco Canyon Water District to ensure
                           that sewer service and facilities are provided and
                           maintained to meet the community’s need for sewer
                           collection and treatment.
              Policy 6.2:  In cooperation with the Santa Margarita Water
                           District and Trabuco Canyon Water District, review
                           development proposals to ensure that adequate sewer
                           collection and treatment facilities are available to
                           meet the needs of development without negatively
                           impacting the existing community.
                                                        City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                   13                                        General Plan

Land Use Element
                               Solid Waste
                               Goal 7:       Collaborate effectively with local providers of solid
                                             waste collection and disposal to provide a
                                             sufficient level of solid waste disposal.
                               Policy 7.1:   Cooperate with solid waste collection and disposal
                                             service providers to ensure City residents are
                                             provided adequate solid waste collection and disposal
                                             services.
                               Policy 7.2:   Participate in local and regional programs that
                                             encourage the per capita reduction of solid waste in
                                             Rancho Santa Margarita in order to meet State
                                             mandates for waste reduction.
                               Drainage/Flood Control
                               Goal 8:       Collaborate with the Orange County Flood
                                             Control District (OCFCD) to provide a level of
                                             flood control protection that meets the needs of the
                                             community.
                               Policy 8.1:   Cooperate with the OCFCD, Homeowners
                                             Associations, and community foundations to ensure
                                             an adequate level of drainage and flood control
                                             facilities and programs are provided and maintained
                                             within the community.
                               Fire Protection and Emergency Services
                               Goal 9:       Provide effective and responsive fire protection
                                             and emergency response service.
                               Policy 9.1:   Provide a sufficient level of fire protection, public
                                             education and emergency response service (including
                                             facilities, personnel, and equipment) through the
                                             Orange County Fire Authority.
                               Policy 9.2:   Implement and enforce regulations, such as the most
                                             recent building codes, to ensure existing and new
                                             development is constructed and maintained to
                                             minimize potential fire hazards.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                      14                                   December 2002
                                                                  Land Use Element
              Policy 9.3:  Coordinate with Homeowners Associations and
                           community foundations to ensure that street widths
                           and clearance areas are sufficient to accommodate fire
                           protection equipment and emergency vehicles.
              Law Enforcement
              Goal 10:     Provide effective and responsive police protection.
              Policy 10.1: Provide a sufficient level of police protection
                           (including facilities, personnel, and equipment) and
                           public education through the Orange County Sheriff’s
                           Department.
              Policy 10.2: Continue to implement alternative policing methods,
                           such as Community Oriented Policing to maintain the
                           low crime rate within Rancho Santa Margarita.
              Public Education
              Goal 11:     Cooperate with local school districts and other
                           educational organizations to ensure that a level of
                           public education is provided that meets the
                           community’s educational needs.
              Policy 11.1: Cooperate with local school districts and assist them
                           in identifying the need for new, expanded, or
                           rehabilitated school sites and facilities so that
                           sufficient educational facilities for programs are
                           provided and maintained.
              Policy 11.2: Encourage access to equal education opportunities,
                           amenities and curriculums in the school districts that
                           serve Rancho Santa Margarita.
              Policy 11.3: Consider the need for new or expanded educational
                           facilities when annexing new land.
              Policy 11.4: Encourage additional and improved parking facilities
                           at public schools in order to provide adequate parking
                           for large/special events.
                                                          City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                   15                                          General Plan

Land Use Element
                               Parks, Community Centers and Recreational Opportunities
                               Goal 12:     Cooperate with homeowners associations and
                                            community foundations to ensure that parks,
                                            community centers, and recreational opportunities
                                            are provided and maintained that promote a
                                            family-oriented community and encourage
                                            community spirit and participation.
                               Policy 12.1: Collaborate with homeowners associations and
                                            community foundations to provide and maintain a
                                            variety of community amenities such as the lake,
                                            parks, community centers, and pedestrian/bicycle
                                            trails.
                               Policy 12.2: Evaluate the need for and facilitate the provision of
                                            additional neighborhood, senior, youth, and day-care
                                            centers as needed.
                               Policy 12.3: Cooperate with homeowners associations, community
                                            foundations, and other recreational facility owners to
                                            facilitate the maximum effective utilization of parks
                                            and recreational opportunities in the community.
                               Policy 12.4: At the time of review of new residential development,
                                            require park dedication and provision of recreational
                                            trails that enhance the existing private recreational
                                            system.
                               Policy 12.5: Work with all school districts in planning for parks
                                            and recreation facilities to maximize joint use
                                            community recreation opportunities.
                               Libraries
                               Goal 13:     Cooperate with the County of Orange to provide a
                                            level of library facilities and services that meets the
                                            needs of the community.
                               Policy 13.1: Actively work with the County to provide library
                                            services and facilities that meet State standards for
                                            library facilities.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                      16                                   December 2002
                                                                                               Land Use Element
                                 Policy 13.2:        Encourage the maintenance of a high-quality library
                                                     system that: enhances the cultural life of the
                                                     community; is the repository of people’s ideas,
                                                     knowledge and thoughts; and is the information
                                                     center for the community.
                                 Policy 13.3:        Collaborate with the County library system to
                                                     enhance the provision of programs to the residents of
                                                     Rancho        Santa   Margarita         and       surrounding
                                                     communities.
                                 Policy 13.4:        As the community ages, consider the expansion
                                                     and/or improvement of library facilities.
    Related Goals and            The goals and policies described in the Land Use Element are related
                 Policies        to and support subjects included within other General Plan elements.
                                 In turn, many goals and policies from the other elements directly or
                                 indirectly support the goals and policies of the Land Use Element.
                                 These supporting goals and policies are identified in Table LU-1.
                                                     Table LU-1
                          Land Use Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                                        Land Use Element Issue Areas
    General Plan                                             Control and     Land Use and
       Element                                                                                     Public Facilities
                          Balance of Land Uses             Direct Future     Environmental
                                                                                                     and Services
                                                              Land Uses      Compatibility
Land Use
Housing               1.1, 1.2                            1.4, 2.1, 2.2                           1.7
                                                                                                  1.2, 1.3, 2.1, 4.1,
Circulation                                               3.1, 3.2, 4.1     1.5, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4
                                                                                                  4.2, 4.3
Economic
                      1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4   2.5               2.8
Development
                                                                            1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4,
Conservation/Open                                                                                 1.4, 1.6, 1.7, 3.1,
                      6.3                                 6.4               1.5, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1,
Space                                                                                             4.3
                                                                            5.2, 5.3, 6.1, 6.2
                                                                                                  1.2, 3.1, 3.5, 3.6,
Safety                3.4                                                   1.6, 2.5
                                                                                                  3.8
Noise                 3.1                                                   1.1
                                                                                       City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                             17                                              General Plan

Land Use Element
                                                                             Land Use Plan
                               The Land Use Plan consists of two components: a plan for the
                               existing City, and a set of planning assumptions for the Northeast
                               Future Planned Community area, which extends beyond the City’s
                               sphere of influence (SOI). Substantial new growth in the Rancho
                               Santa Margarita planning area will occur within the Northeast Future
                               Planned Community once the area is annexed to the City. The
                               Northeast Future Planned Community is designated by this Land Use
                               Plan as Future Planned Community (FPC). The FPC land use
                               designation allows for innovative land planning and building design,
                               and seeks to continue Rancho Santa Margarita’s heritage as a
                               planned community, ensuring that the quality of planning and design
                               within the area is consistent with that found throughout the rest of
                               the City.
                               The following Land Use Plan focuses on the balance of land uses
                               within the City, the location of future land uses, land use and
                               environmental compatibility, and provision of public services and
                               facilities. The other elements within the General Plan expand on
                               how the Land Use Plan will be implemented to create a compact and
                               livable community.
Balance of Land Uses           The variety of land uses within Rancho Santa Margarita affects the
                               important balance between the generation of public revenues and the
                               provision of public services and facilities.          Achieving and
                               maintaining a balance of land uses can ensure fiscal stability and also
                               create a desirable community in which people work, shop, reside,
                               and recreate. As discussed later in this element, implementation of
                               the Land Use Plan will result in positive net revenue for Rancho
                               Santa Margarita.
                               The majority of Rancho Santa Margarita is developed, and limited
                               vacant land is available for future new development. As a result, the
                               majority of future growth in the Rancho Santa Margarita planning
                               area will occur in the Northeast Future Planned Community. The
                               Land Use Plan identifies the land use types designated for the vacant
                               lots within the City and the Northeast Future Planned Community
                               area. Based on the Land Use Plan, these areas will develop with a
                               land use composition that provides a balance between the generation
                               of public revenues and the cost of providing public facilities and
                               services.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                       18                                    December 2002

                                                                    Land Use Element
              Implementation of the Land Use Plan will also assist in creating a
              balance between jobs and housing units within the City. A balance
              between jobs and housing allows some people to live and work
              within the same community. This results in a reduction of traffic,
              thereby reducing the level of air pollution and improving the quality
              of life for the community. Ensuring that affordable housing is
              available for those lower income households working within the
              commercial, office, and retail areas of Rancho Santa Margarita is
              important. The City has identified land for employment generating
              uses, as well as residential uses. An economic development strategy
              is discussed in the Economic Development Element of the General
              Plan, and the provision of adequate housing is discussed in the
              Housing Element.
              Land Use Classification System
              The Land Use Policy Map (Figure LU-1) illustrates the various types
              and distribution of land uses planned for Rancho Santa Margarita.
              The land use classification system is presented in Table LU-2 and
              includes 13 land use designations. These land use designations
              identify the types and nature of development allowed in particular
              locations depicted on the Land Use Policy Map. Table LU-2 also
              identifies the maximum density or intensity of development allowed
              under each General Plan land use designation.
              The General Plan land use designations are grouped according to the
              following five general land use categories: Residential; Commercial
              and Business; Public/Quasi-Public Facilities; Open Space; and
              Other.
              The Residential categories include four designations that allow for a
              range of housing types and densities. The non-residential categories
              include a variety of designations that promote a range of revenue-and
              employment-generating businesses, such as General Commercial,
              Neighborhood Commercial and Business Park.                   Other non-
              residential designations include Community Facility, Parks, and a
              variety of Open Space designations. A Future Planned Community
              designation is used to address future growth on existing nursery
              properties and the Porter Ranch area located northeast of the City.
              Within the existing City boundary there are currently 5 vacant
              parcels of land totaling approximately 25 acres.
              General Plan land use policy will be implemented through the City’s
              Zoning Ordinance, which will be developed following completion of
              the General Plan. State planning law requires consistency between
              the City’s General Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      19                                         General Plan

                                                Table LU-2
                                       Land Use Classification System
                               Maximum           Average
                            DUs/Net Acre or    DUs/Net Acre          Summary Description of Land Use
        Land Use
                               Maximum          or Average                        Designation
                             FAR/Net Acre     FAR/Net Acre
Residential Land Uses
LDR – Low Density                                             Single-family detached units on moderate to
                           7.0 du/acre       6.5 du/acre
Residential                                                   large lots.
LMDR – Low-                                                   Small-lot single-family detached homes, as
Medium Density             11.0 du/acre      10.0 du/acre     well as some single-family town homes and
Residential                                                   duplexes.
                                                              Duplexes, town homes, row houses, and
MDR – Medium
                           18.0 du/acre      14.3 du/acre     multiple-family units such as apartments and
Density Residential
                                                              condominiums.
HDR – High Density                                            Apartments, condominiums, senior housing,
                           25.0 du/acre      20.0 du/acre
Residential                                                   and multi-family clusters.
Commercial and Business Land Uses
                                                              Retail stores, restaurants, lodging, personal
C – General                                                   services, business services, and financial
                           1.0:1 FAR         0.4:1 FAR
Commercial                                                    services of a citywide or regional nature. Does
                                                              not promote development of commercial strips.
                                                              Retail stores, service stations, restaurants, and
NC - Neighborhood
                           0.6:1 FAR         0.3:1 FAR        services that serve the needs of surrounding
Commercial
                                                              neighborhoods.
                                                              Service commercial, retail commercial, office,
                                                              light industrial, open space, and community
                                                              facilities (excluding public and private
BP – Business Park         1.0:1 FAR         0.35:1 FAR
                                                              schools). Applies to all non-residential
                                                              properties in Rancho Santa Margarita Business
                                                              Park.
Public/Quasi-Public Facilities Land Use
                                                              Fire stations, police stations, public and private
CF – Community                                                schools, recreation centers, water tanks,
                           0.6:1 FAR         0.3:1 FAR
Facility                                                      utilities, or other non-commercial, non-
                                                              residential, or non-industrial purposes.
Open Space Land Uses
                                                              Publicly- or privately-owned and dedicated
P - Parks                  0.5:1 FAR         0.1:1 FAR
                                                              park lands.
                                                              Streams and washes, open space easements,
OS – Open Space            N/A               N/A
                                                              and other private and public open spaces.
OSG – Open Space                                              Maintenance and development of golf courses
                           0.4:1 FAR         0.05:1 FAR
Golf                                                          and other private recreational uses.
                                                              Sections of O’Neill Regional Park within the
ROS – Regional Open
                           0.4:1 FAR         0.05:1 FAR       City. Active and passive recreational uses
Space
                                                              consistent with Orange County regulations.
Other Land Uses
                                                              Denotes large areas of land under single or
                                                              common ownership for detailed planning and
FPC – Future Planned
                           Varies            Varies           development for residential, commercial,
Community
                                                              community facility, recreation and open space
                                                              uses.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                          20                                           December 2002

         City of
       Lake Forest
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Trabuco Oaks
                                                                                                                                                                       L i ve                                                                                                           Rd
                                                          Rd
                                               To                                                                                                                   O ak                                                                                                 C a n y on
                                                  ro
                                                                                                                                                                         Can y o
                                   El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd
                                                                    O'Neill
                                                                   Regional                                                                W                               n                                                                                    R ose
                                                                     Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e     ek
                                                                                                                          a                                                                                                                                                                                               Cr
                                                                                     RVia            Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                                          Rd                                                                                                               Trabu c o
                                                                                Meli                                                                                                                                             n                      Rd
                                                                                     n     da                                                                                                                             n   yo
             Los                                                                                S                                                                                                                    Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R
                       A
                        lis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h
                                                                                                         Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a nc
                             os
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A nt
                                                                                                                                                                                               co
                                        Rd                                                                                                                                                 a   bu                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                        Tr                                                                                                                                Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S                                                                                     ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               or                                                                                                                                      ee
      Santa                                                                                                       FOO                                                                                                                     Fl                                                                                                                  Bir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d Dr
                    Ma r g                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e                                                                                                         d h o l lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Av
                             arit                                                                                                                                                                                                las
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pkwy
                                                                                                                              TH                                                                                                                                                                                           S                                              w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nida
                                    a                                                                                              IL                                                                                    de                                                                                                                                                  Dr
                                        Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pk w y
                                                                                                                                                                                                               da
                                                                                                                                           L
                                                 wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                   e      ni                                        a        de l
                                                                                                                                                                                                Av                                             r it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              os Fund
                                                                                                                                                     TR                                                                              ar                                                                                                       W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                          AN      R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M                        S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      W
                             Rd                                                                                                                            SP   R
                                                                                                                                                                        R R R                                       a                                ore
                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                        S ant                         S           ad
                                                                                                                                                                TIO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
               da
                                                                                                                                                              TA
          in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                                                                            OR
       Mel
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ov
                                                                                                                                           y                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                         Sant                                                      kw                               N
                                                                                a                                                      P
                                                                                           Marg a r i t a                                                                  R                                                                                                                                                                Ca
                                                                                                                                                                               R                                                                                                                                                                 nyo n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dr
                                                                                                                               Av e ntura
                                                                                                                                                           FS
                                                                                                                                                                         CO             Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                                                    R       m             de
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Al
                                                                                                                                           Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                             RR                 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 cam o re
                                                                                                    R                                                                                                                wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Via
                                                                                                                                                                                   ID O R
                                                                                                                                                                      E sp                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                       eranza
                                       w   y                                                                                                                                                            o  i
                                    Pk                                                                                                                                                              t   on
                             cia                                         O'Neill                                                                                                            An
                       Ali                                              Regional                                                  ra
                                                                                                                                       s          Em                                                                                                     Coto
                                                                                                                                                         p re                                                                                                                                                                            on
                                                                                                     W
                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C a ny
                                                                                                                                           s ta
                                                                                                                          nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P aj a ro
                                                                                                                  Ba              Vi                      sa
                                                                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                            las                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dove Canyon
                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                          yo                                                                                                                            de                                                                                  Country Club
                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                      ro
                                                                                                      de
                                                                                                                 Ar                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dr
     City of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Coto de Caza
                                                                                                        n i da
                                                                                            S
                                                                                                    Ave
  Mission Viejo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Caz a
                             Rd                                Vist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vi sta
                                                                    a
                                                                                                wy                R
                                                                                           Pk
                        Olympiad
                                                               r o yo                                                 R                                                                                                                                 Dr
                                                                                     nio                         IDO
                                                              Ar                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sa      n                  M
                                                                                    Anto                         RR
                                                                                                           CO                                                                                                                                                                                           iguel
                                                                                                ORT
                                                                                                   ATIO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Legend
                                                                                                        N                                                                                                                    Low Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LDR
                                                                                            TRANSP
                               O'Neill                                                W                                                                                                                                      (0-7.0 Units/Net Acre, Average 6.5 Units/Net Acre)
                              Regional
                                Park                                                                                                                                                                                    LMDR Low-Medium Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (7.0-11.0 Units/Net Acre, Average 10.0 Units/Net Acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Medium Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MDR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (11.0-18.0 Units/Net Acre, Average 14.3 Units/Net Acre)
                                                                                                     LL
                                                          y                                     OTHI                                                                                                                     HDR High Density Residential
                                                     Pkw                                              FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (18.0-25.0 Units/Net Acre, Average 20.0 Units/Net Acre)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C                 Commercial General
                                                 io                                                                                                                                                                           NC                  Neighborhood Commercial
                                               An t o n
                                                                                                                                                                           Oso
                                                                                                                                                                                        Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BP                  Business Park
                                                                                                                                                                                               wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CF                  Community Facility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P                       Park
                    Oso Pkwy                                                                                                                                                                                             OS                       Open Space                                                                                      Community Facilitie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OSG                      Open Space Golf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CH    City Hall/Community Cente
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ROS                      Regional Open Space                                                                             FSFire Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FPC                   Future Planned Community                                                                        L Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R Religious/Religious School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W Water District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sphere of Influence Boundary
  Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;
          Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001
         0                    2,000                        4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure LU
  N             1,000                      3,000                        5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Land Use Policy Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City of Rancho Santa Marg
December 2002                                                                                                                                                                               21                                                                                                                                                                                 General
Land Use Element
                               This page intentionally left blank.
                                  Back side of 11x17 Figure
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                   22                  December 2002
                                                                                             Land Use Element
              This Element uses certain terminology to describe 13 land use
              designations. The term density is used for residential uses and refers
              to the population and development capacity of residential land.
              Density is described in terms of dwelling units per net acre of land
              (du/net acre).
              Development intensity, which applies to non-residential uses, refers
              to the extent of development on a parcel of land or lot (i.e., the total
              building square footage, building height, the floor area ratio, and/or
              the percent of lot coverage). Intensity is often used to describe non-
              residential development levels; but, in a broader sense, intensity is
              also used to express overall levels of both residential and non-
              residential development types. In this Element, floor area ratio and
              building square footage are used as measures of non-residential
              development intensity.
              Floor area ratio (FAR) represents the ratio between the total gross
              floor area of all buildings on a lot and the total area of that lot. The
              FAR controls the intensity of use on a lot. FAR is determined by
              dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the land area
              of that lot. For example, a 20,000 square foot building on a 40,000
              square foot lot yields a FAR of 0.50:1. A 0.50:1 FAR allows a single
              story building, which covers half the lot, or a two-story building with
              reduced lot coverage. Figure LU-2 depicts the calculation of FAR.
                   1 Floor                                       2 Floors
                                 50% Lot
                                                                                25% Lot
                                Coverage
                                                                               Coverage
                                                 lot depth
                                                                                                              lot depth
                        lot width
                   4 Floors          12.5% Lot
                                                                    lot width
                                    Coverage
                                                                                              In a zone district with a maximum
                                                                                                    FAR of 0.50:1, the maximum
                                                                                         allowable floor area of a building on a
                                                                                              40,000 sq. ft. lot would be 20,000
                                                                                                     sq. ft. (20,000 sq. ft. divided
                                                                                                  by 40,000 sq. ft. equals 0.50).
                                                       lot depth                            NOTE: Variations may occur if upper floors are
                                                                                             stepped back from ground level lot coverage.
                                                                                                   Gross Building Area (All Floors)
                                                                      Floor Area Ratio (FAR) =
                                                                                                                Lot Area
                         lot width
                                                                                                                     Figure LU-2
                                                                                Floor Area Ratio Illustrated
                                                                               City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                 23                                                                   General Plan
Land Use Element
                               State General Plan law requires that the Land Use Element indicate
                               the maximum densities and intensities permitted within the Land Use
                               Plan. The land use designations shown on the Land Use Policy Map
                               are described in detail in this Element. Table LU-2 lists each of the
                               land use designations shown on the Land Use Policy Map and
                               provides a corresponding indication of maximum density or intensity
                               of development. Maximum allowable development on individual
                               parcels of land is governed by these measures of density or intensity.
                               Table LU-2 also includes the average overall level of development
                               within each land use designation within the planning area. These
                               average levels of development represent an anticipated overall
                               density and intensity of development for the planning area and are,
                               therefore, less than the absolute maximum allowed for an individual
                               parcel of land. For various reasons, many parcels in the community
                               have not been developed to their maximum density or intensity and,
                               in the future, maximum development as described in this Element
                               can be expected to occur only on a limited number of parcels.
                               The overall future development of the City is anticipated to occur at
                               the average level of density or intensity indicated in Table LU-2.
                               Development at an intensity or density between the average and
                               maximum levels can occur only where projects offer exceptional
                               design quality, important public amenities or benefits, or other
                               factors that promote important goals and policies of the General
                               Plan. Additionally, a density bonus of 25 percent is required by
                               State law to be offered for certain projects affordable to low or very
                               low income households.
                               Land Use Designations
                               All land in the Rancho Santa Margarita Planning Area is assigned to
                               one of the 13 land use designations described below:
                               Residential Land Use Designations
                               Low Density Residential (LDR): The Low Density Residential land
                               use designation provides for single-family detached homes on
                               moderate to large lots. The designation allows a maximum density
                               of 7.0 units per net acre, with an average density of 6.5 units per net
                               acre. Uses such as mobile and modular homes, second living units,
                               guesthouses, community facilities, parks and open space, day cares,
                               churches, agricultural uses, and others that are compatible with and
                               oriented toward serving the needs of the low-density single-family
                               neighborhood may also be allowed.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        24                                   December 2002
                                                                     Land Use Element
              The maximum density of this land use designation may be exceeded
              with General Plan Housing Element policy in accordance with the
              density bonus provisions of Section 65915 of the California
              Government Code.
              Low-Medium Density Residential (LMDR): The Low-Medium
              Density Residential land use designation provides for single-family
              detached homes on smaller lots, as well as development of single-
              family attached residential units such as town homes and duplexes.
              The designation allows a maximum density of 11.0 units per net acre
              where already subdivided, with an average density of 10.0 units per
              net acre. Uses such as mobile and modular homes, second living
              units, guest houses, community facilities, parks and open space, day
              cares, churches, agricultural uses, and others that are compatible with
              and oriented toward serving the needs of the low-medium density
              single-family neighborhood may also be allowed.
              The maximum density of this land use designation may be exceeded
              with General Plan Housing Element policy in accordance with the
              density bonus provisions of Section 65915 of the California
              Government Code.
              Medium Density Residential (MDR):              The Medium Density
              Residential designation provides for detached and attached single-
              family homes, condominiums, duplexes, and apartments. The
              designation       allows      a
              maximum of 18.0 units per
              net acre, with an average
              density of 14.3 units per net
              acre. Uses such as mobile
              and modular homes, day
              cares, churches and others
              that are compatible with and
              oriented toward serving the
              needs of the medium density
              neighborhood may also be
              allowed.
              The maximum density of this
              land use designation may be
              exceeded with General Plan
              Housing Element policy in
              accordance with the density
              bonus provisions of Section
              65915 of the California
              Government Code.
                                                             City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      25                                          General Plan
Land Use Element
                               High Density Residential (HDR): The High Density Residential
                               designation provides for detached and attached single-family homes,
                               condominiums, duplexes, and apartments. The designation allows a
                               maximum of 25.0 units per net acre, with an average density of 20.0
                               units per net acre. The High Density Residential designation also
                               provides for development of senior housing. Uses such as mobile
                               and modular homes, day cares, parks and open space, churches and
                               others that are compatible with and oriented toward serving the
                               needs of the high density or senior neighborhood may also be
                               allowed.
                               The maximum density of this land use designation may be exceeded
                               with General Plan Housing Element policy in accordance with the
                               density bonus provisions of Section 65915 of the California
                               Government Code.
                               Commercial and Business Land Use Designations
                               General Commercial (C): The General Commercial land use
                               designation provides for retail uses that rely on automobile traffic
                               and attract customers from a citywide and/or regional trade area.
                               This land use designation does not encourage the development of
                               commercial strips. The maximum intensity of development is 1.0:1
                               FAR. The average intensity is 0.4:1 FAR.
                               Neighborhood Commercial (NC): The Neighborhood Commercial
                               land use designation provides for a variety of retail uses that serve
                               the needs of nearby neighborhoods. In addition to retail uses, areas
                               designated Neighborhood Commercial can also include a small
                               amount of space for general business, medical, or professional
                               offices. The maximum intensity of development is 0.6:1 FAR. The
                               average intensity is 0.3:1 FAR.
                                                           Business Park (BP): The Business Park
                                                           designation applies to all non-residential
                                                           properties within the Rancho Santa
                                                           Margarita Business Park area. Permitted
                                                           uses include service commercial, retail
                                                           commercial, office, light industrial, open
                                                           space,      and    community       facilities
                                                           (excluding public and private schools).
                                                           The maximum intensity of development is
                                                           a floor area ratio of 1.0:1 and the average
                                                           intensity of development is a floor area
                                                           ratio of 0.35:1.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        26                                    December 2002
                                                                    Land Use Element
              Public/Quasi-Public Land Use Designation
              Community Facility (CF): The Community Facility land use
              designation allows development of fire stations, police stations,
              public and private schools, recreation centers, water tanks, utilities,
              or other non-commercial, non-residential, or non-industrial purposes.
              The maximum intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.6:1
              and the average intensity of development is a floor area ratio of
              0.3:1.    Ownership and control of properties designated as
              Community Facility are indicated on the Land Use Policy Map using
              the following symbols:
                      S – Public Schools (Capistrano and Saddleback Valley
                      Unified School Districts)
                      R – Churches, Religious Institutions, and Religious Schools
                      (Under various control)
                      L – Libraries (Orange County Library District)
                      CH – City Hall and Intergenerational Community Center
                      (City of Rancho Santa Margarita)
                      FS – Fire Station (Orange County Fire Department)
                      W – Water District (Santa Margarita and Trabuco Canyon
                      Water Districts)
              Open Space Land Use Designations
              Parks (P): The Parks designation provides for privately owned and
              dedicated parklands. Activities that may be developed include areas
              for active sports play, large multipurpose fields for community
              events and informal recreation, tot lots, picnic areas, multipurpose
              sports fields and courts, concessions, community event space,
              maintenance/support facilities, and caretaker facilities.              The
              maximum intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.5:1 and
              the average intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.1:1.
              Open Space (OS): The Open Space designation provides open space
              for outdoor recreation, buffering of incompatible land uses,
              preservation of natural resources, managed production of resources,
              and protection of health and public safety. Areas designated as Open
              Space include: streams and washes, open space easements, and other
              private and public open space. No density or intensity standards are
              applied within this designation.
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                     27                                          General Plan

Land Use Element
                               Open Space Golf (OSG): The Open Space Golf designation
                               provides for maintenance and development of golf courses and other
                               private recreational uses. The maximum intensity of development is
                               a floor area ratio of 0.4:1 and the average intensity of development is
                               a floor area ratio of 0.05:1.
                               Regional Open Space (ROS):               The Regional Open Space
                               designation applies to sections of O’Neill Regional Park that lie
                               within the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. The designation
                               provides for a variety of active and passive recreational uses,
                               consistent with Orange County regulations for use of the Park. The
                               maximum intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.4:1 and
                               the average intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.05:1.
                               Other Land Use Designations
                               Future Planned Community (FPC) - The Future Planned
                               Community designation applies to all land located within the City’s
                               sphere of influence northeast of the City’s existing boundary. The
                               FPC designation denotes large areas of land under single or common
                               ownership for detailed planning and development for residential,
                               commercial, community facility, recreation and open space uses.
                               The maximum intensity of development and the average intensity of
                               development will vary depending on how a proposed development
                               conforms to the allowable use guidelines as stated in the Land Use
                               Plan.
                               Planned Communities
                               Due to Rancho Santa Margarita’s history as a planned community,
                               the City is almost fully developed, leaving little room for significant
                               new development or land use change. Rancho Santa Margarita is
                               based on the land use plans developed for each of the planned
                               communities that form the City. These include:
                                       ?   Rancho Santa Margarita Planned Community (Including
                                           Business Park and Town Center Plans)
                                       ?   Rancho Trabuco Planned Community
                                       ?   Robinson Ranch Planned Community
                                       ?   Dove Canyon Planned Community
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                         28                                    December 2002

                                                                     Land Use Element
              Several of these planned communities are also the subject of
              development agreements, which identify the levels of development
              allowed, and important public facilities that will accompany
              development. Development in these areas will follow the individual
              planned community development plans and agreements.
              Development proposals within these planned communities will be
              reviewed for consistency with approved development plans and
              agreements. Any proposed amendments to the approved planned
              communities will also be reviewed to ensure that such amendments
              support the fiscal stability of the City, provide necessary public
              facilities and services, and minimize environmental impacts.
              The area located southwest of the Robinson Ranch Planned
              Community is referred to as the Rancho Cielo and Walden
              Communities. These areas were developed consistent with the
              Orange County development code. Figure LU-3 identifies the
              locations of all of the above listed planned communities within the
              City.
              Northeast Future Planned Community
              The nursery properties and Porter Ranch area located northeast of the
              City are designated Future Planned Community (FPC) on the Land
              Use Policy Map. The purpose of the FPC designation is to allow for
              innovative land planning
              and building design.
              Application of the FPC
              designation to this area
              continues Rancho Santa
              Margarita’s heritage as a
              planned        community,
              ensuring that the quality
              of planning and design
              within the area is
              consistent with that
              found throughout the rest of the City. The General Plan does not
              determine the actual configuration of land uses within the FPC.
              Rather, development of this area shall be subject to a Specific Plan
              and should reflect the following allowable land use mix guidelines:
                       ?   20% Low Density Residential (not to exceed 4.0 du/acre)
                           concentrated in the Porter Ranch area,
                       ?   17% Low Density Residential (not to exceed 7.0 du/acre),
                       ?   8% Medium Density Residential,
                                                             City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      29                                          General Plan

          City of
        Lake Forest
                                                                                                                                                                                     Trabuco Oaks
                                                                                                                                                            Live                                                                                                       Rd
                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Robinson
     Rancho Trabuco PC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ranch
                                               To                                                                                                        O ak                                                                                           C a n y on                                 PC
                                                  ro
                                                                                                                                                             Can y o
                                    El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                   O'Neill
                                                                  Regional                                                                                      n                                                                               R ose
                                                                    Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e    ek
                                                                                                                   a                                                                                                                                                                                Cr
                                                                                       Via          Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                             Rd                                                                                                         Trabu c o
                                                                               Meli                                                                                                                            n                      Rd
                                                                                    n       da                                                                                                        n   yo
             Los                                                                                                                                                                                   Ca
                        A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
                         lis
                              os                                                                        Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A nt
                                                                                                                                                                              co
                                          Rd                                                                                                                              a   bu                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                                                                                                                       Tr                                                                                                                           Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                es                                                                                                                     ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           or                                                                                                                               ee
       Santa                                                                                                   FOO                                                                                                       Fl                                                                                                           Bir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d Dr
                     Ma r g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dh o llow
                                                                                                                                                                                                               las                    ida
                              arit                                                                                                                                                                                                 en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pkwy
                                                                                                                       TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av
                                     a                                                                                   IL                                                                          de                                                                                                                                           Dr
                                           Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                              da
                                                                                                                                 L
                                                wy
                                                                                                                                                                                         ni                                              de l
                                                                                                                                                                                Av
                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r   it a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            os Fund
                                                                                                                                           TR                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                                                AN                                                         M
                                                                                                                                                 SP                                        a                                           or
                              Rd                                                                                                                                                     S ant                                      e   ad
                da                                                                                                                                    TIO
                                                                                                                                                    TA
           in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                  OR
       Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ov  e
                                                                        Sant                                                 wy                         N
                                                                               a                                             Pk
                                                                                            Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n              Dr
                                                                                                                        Av e ntura                           CO        Al
                                                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                            m             de
                                                                                                                                                                                         Al
                                                                                                                                 Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                RR                                 wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sy
                                                                                                                                                                                               Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Vi a
                                                                                                                                                                   ID O R
                                                                                                                                                         Es p
                                          wy                                                                                                              eranza                         ni
                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                     Pk                                                                                                                                             to
                              cia                                       O'Neill                                                                                             An
                        Ali                                            Regional                                         ra
                                                                                                                             s          Em
                                                                                                                                               p re                                                                                    C ot o                                                               C any
                                                                         Park
                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                   nd                 a
                                                                                                                                 st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P aj a ro
                                                                                                               Ba        Vi                     sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               on
                                                                                                          las                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                   yo                                                                                                                                                                                                Country Club
                                                                                                     de
                                                                                                              Ar
                                                                                                                ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      de                                                                         Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Dove
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rancho                                                                             Canyon
     City of
                                                                                                       nida
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cielo
                                                                                                   Ave
  Mission Viejo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and                                                                                PC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Walden
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C aza                                (County Zoning)
                                                               Vis
                              Rd                                   ta
                                                                                                 wy                                                                                                                                                   Vi s t a
                                                                                            Pk
                         Olympiad
                                                              r o yo                                            R
                                                                                     nio                      IDO                                                                                                                     Dr
                                                             Ar                                                                                                                                                                                         Sa   n
                                                                                                              RR                                                                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                   An t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        el
                                                                                                          CO                                                                                                                                                                         igu
                                                                                                 O RT
                                                                                                     ATIO
                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Coto de Caza
                                                                                             TRANSP
                                O'Neill                                                                                                                 Chiquita
                               Regional                                                                                                                 Canyon
                                 Park                                                                                                                 Conservation
                                                                                                                                                         Area
                                                                                                 THI LL                                                                                                   Rancho Santa
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Margarita PC
                                                                                                   F OO
                                                         y
                                                    Pkw
                                                 io
                                               An t on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Legend
                                                                                 Chiquita                                                                       Oso
                                                                                 Canyon                                                                                Pk
                                                                                                                                                                              wy                                                                                                               City Boundary
                                                                               Conservation
                                                                                  Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sphere of Influence Boundary
                     Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Future Planned Community Boundary
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Planned Communities Boundary
        Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001
       0               2,000                      4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure LU-3
 N         1,000                     3,000                   5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                               Planned Communities
City of Rancho Santa Margarita                                                                                                                                         30
General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     December 2002
                                                                    Land Use Element
                      ?   20% Community Facility and Park combined as a joint
                          use elementary school and park facility,
                      ?   35% Open Space (including preservation of bluffs located
                          southeast of Trabuco Creek and north and east of the
                          Porter Ranch area),
                      ?   Total dwelling units not to exceed 612 units (This
                          residential development cap is equivalent to the
                          maximum number of units allowed within the Plano
                          Trabuco subarea of the Foothill/Trabuco Specific Plan).
              Annexation of any portion of the Northeast Future Planned
              Community area shall not occur until a Specific Plan which is
              substantially consistent with the above-listed guidelines is completed
              for the entire area. The General Plan advocates no changes to the
              Foothill/Trabuco Specific Plan, unless such changes produce positive
              results for the City. The percentage mix of land uses for the
              Northeast Future Planned Community serves as a guideline for
              developers, but may be modified with the approval of the City.
              Parks developed within the Northeast Future Planned Community
              should include a balance of amenities which enhance the overall
              private park system, and trail linkages to the existing trails network
              are required.
              Land Use Plan Development Capacity
              Table LU-3 provides a statistical description of the 13 General Plan
              land use designations within the City and a corresponding indication
              of maximum density or intensity of development at buildout. The
              maximum allowable development on individual parcels is governed
              by these measures of density or intensity.
              For various reasons, many parcels in the community have not been
              developed to their maximum density or intensity. In the future, it is
              anticipated that development will occur in a similar manner with
              only a limited number of parcels being developed at the maximum
              density or intensity. Therefore, the projected future development
              intensity and density listed in Table LU-3 is based upon an average
              level of development. The average level of development was
              generated using a representative sample of existing conditions.
              The identified average density is applied for planning purposes only
              and exceeding the average density does not require a General Plan
              amendment. Development at an intensity or density between the
              average and maximum levels can occur when projects offer
              exceptional design quality, important public amenities or benefits, or
              other factors that promote important goals and policies of the
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      31                                         General Plan
Land Use Element
                                                                           Table LU-3
                                                   Land Use Plan Development Capacity Summary
                                                                   Assumptions                            Estimated Estimated Non-
                   Land Use                           Maximum                     Average       Net Acres Dwelling    Residential   Estimated
                                                                                                            Units    Square Feet    Population
                                               DU/Acre         FAR         DU/Acre        FAR                        (Thousands)
   Residential Land Use Designations
   LDR Low Density Residential                     7             --           6.5           --     948      6,164          --         17,918
   LMDR Low-Medium Density Residential            11             --           10            --     205      2,053          --          5,967
   MDR Medium Density Residential                 18             --          14.3           --     240      3,438          --          9,992
   HDR High Density Residential                   25             --           20            --     267      5,341          --         15,526
   Commercial, Business, and Tourist Land Use Designations
   C General Commercial                           --            1:1            --         0.4:1    123        --         2,135           --
   NC Neighborhood Commercial                     --           0.6:1           --         0.3:1     44        --          581            --
   BP Business Park                               --            1:1            --        0.35:1    255        --         3,886           --
   Public/Quasi-Public Land Use Designation
   CF Community Facility                          --           0.6:1           --         0.3:1    191        --         2,496           --
   Open Space Land Use Designations
   P Parks                                        --           0.5:1           --         0.1:1    140        --          612            --
   OS Open Space                                  --             --            --           --    3,087       --           --            --
   OSG Open Space Golf                            --           0.4:1           --        0.05:1    442        --          963            --
   ROS Regional Open Space                        --           0.4:1           --        0.05:1   1,203       --         2,620           --
   Other Land Uses
   FPC Future Planned Community                           Assumptions per Land Use Plan            261       612          348          1,775
   Water                                          --             --            --           --      38        --           --            --
                                      Total                                                       7,446    17,608       13,641        51,178
Note: Assumes 2.95 Persons per Occupied Housing Unit (per DOF, 2001)
City of Rancho Santa Margarita                                                                                                     December 2002
General Plan                                                                      32
                               General Plan. Additionally, a density bonus of 25 percent is required
                               by State law to be offered for certain projects affordable to low or
                               very low income households, or senior citizens.
                               Table LU-3 includes the planned land use and/or development
                               intensities in the identified Future Planned Community area.
    Control and Direct         Even though Rancho Santa Margarita is a newly formed City, the
                               majority of the land area within the City is parkland, open space, and
      Future Land Uses         regional open space (O’Neill Regional Park). With proper planning,
                               new development will occur without negatively affecting the unique
                               character that City residents enjoy.
                               The approximately 327-acre Northeast Future Planned Community
                               area is the primary location for new residential and non-residential
                               development in the future. The City will work with the Local
                               Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) and owners of the 327
                               acres to prepare appropriate development plans and to annex this
                               area into the City ensuring that new development is compatible with
                               the character of Rancho Santa Margarita. The City’s current sphere
                               of influence is shown in Figure LU-1.
                               Prior to approval of development within the Northeastern Future
                               Planned Community area, an annexation plan will be completed. As
                               part of the annexation plan, developers will need to prepare an urban
                               services plan that outlines how adequate levels of public services and
                               facilities will be provided to serve the new development, without
                               reducing the level of services in the City. The plan will identify who
                               will be responsible for the provision of the various public services
                               and facilities, as well as identify funding sources to finance the
                               services and facilities. Prior to City approval, the urban services
                               plan must demonstrate that the proposed development meets
                               identified service standards.
                               The only new development anticipated to occur within the existing
                               City boundaries will be on 5 vacant lots totaling approximately 25
                               acres (less than 1 percent of total City land area). Future
                               development on these lots will follow existing regulations to ensure
                               that it is compatible with the character of Rancho Santa Margarita.
           Land Use and        Although the future reuse of MCAS El Toro is undetermined at this
          Environmental        time, one reuse proposal includes development and operation of a
                               commercial airport at the former air station. Reuse of MCAS El
           Compatibility       Toro as a commercial airport could result in aircraft overflight
                               activities that pose risks to the residents of Rancho Santa Margarita
                               and surrounding communities. The City encourages reuse of El Toro
                               with development that is compatible with existing and planned land
                               uses in Rancho Santa Margarita and surrounding communities.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                         33                                   December 2002

Land Use Element
                               To achieve this objective, Rancho Santa Margarita will coordinate
                               with local and regional agencies to oppose any reuse of MCAS El
                               Toro that would result in aircraft overflight of Rancho Santa
                               Margarita and surrounding communities. In addition, the City will
                               cooperate with local and regional agencies to encourage a non-
                               aviation reuse of MCAS El Toro, such as the Orange County Central
                               Park and Nature Preserve.
                                          Urban development can affect the environment in many
                                          ways, including water quality, which can be impacted by
                                          pollutants from urban runoff. Pollutants such as heavy
                                          metals, petroleum products, animal waste and trash can be
                                          carried through the storm drain system into receiving
                                          waters, such as Trabuco and Tijeras Canyon creek. These
                                          pollutants affect the beneficial uses of these receiving
                                          waters including recreation, aesthetic enjoyment and
                                          preservation of fish and wildlife habitat. To address this
                                          problem, the Clean Water Act was amended in 1987 to
                                          include the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
                                          Permit (NPDES). This permit, implemented in south
                                          Orange County by the San Diego Regional Water Quality
                                          Control Board (SDRWQCB), requires jurisdictions to
                                          enforce requirements reducing polluted urban runoff during
                                          all phases of development. Rancho Santa Margarita is a co-
                                          permittee of the NPDES permit and will continue to
                                          implement the most recent provisions adopted by the
                                          SDRWQCB.
                               As identified in other elements of this General Plan, Rancho Santa
                               Margarita has established baseline environmental standards
                               reflecting environmental conditions in the community (such as air
                               quality, noise, traffic/circulation) that may be impacted by proposals
                               for future development as the basis for assessing the environmental
                               impacts of such proposals.
    Provision of Public        Public facilities and services are provided by the City or other
           Facilities and      service entities. These facilities and services include: 1) water
                               supply, treatment and distribution; 2) sewer treatment; 3) solid waste
                  Services     disposal, 4) drainage/flood control; 5) fire protection and emergency
                               services; 6) law enforcement; 7) public education; 8) parks,
                               community centers and recreational opportunities; and 9) libraries.
                               Other service providers include the Trabuco Canyon Water District,
                               Santa Margarita Water District, Orange County Flood Control
                               District, Orange County Fire Authority, Orange County Sheriff’s
                               Department, various school districts, and the Orange County Library
                               system. The provision and maintenance of these services and
                               facilities protect the quality of life and community livability. Such
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                         34                                   December 2002

                                                                    Land Use Element
              facilities and services will need to be expanded to accommodate
              future growth and development.
              Water and Sewer Service
              Adequate municipal water and sewer service is necessary to protect
              public health in urban settings. The Rancho Santa Margarita
              planning area is served by two water providers: the Santa Margarita
              Water District (SMWD) and the Trabuco Canyon Water District
              (TCWD). The SMWD provides water to the Rancho Santa
              Margarita and Rancho Trabuco communities. The TCWD provides
              water to the Robinson Ranch, Dove Canyon, Walden and Rancho
              Cielo areas. The SMWD and the TCWD are members of the
              Municipal Water District of Orange County (MWDOC). The
              MWDOC is a member of the Metropolitan Water District of
              Southern California (MWD). Almost all of the water supply is
              purchased from MWD, which imports the water from the Colorado
              River Aqueduct (a small portion comes from Northern California
              through the State Water Project). Small amounts of annual rainfall
              and limited groundwater reserves are the reasons for reliance on
              imported water.
              The SMWD and TCWD are also responsible for the collection of
              wastewater within the City. SMWD owns and operates the Oso
              Creek Wastewater Reclamation System. The water that is reclaimed
              by this system is used to irrigate golf courses, greenbelts, parks, and
              school grounds. In addition, SMWD owns 2.25 million gallons per
              day (MGD) of treatment capacity as a member agency in the South
              East Regional Reclamation Authority (SERRA). SERRA operates a
              wastewater treatment facility in Dana Point. The SMWD Chiquita
              Water Reclamation Plant handles water not treated in Dana Point.
              This plant serves the communities of Rancho Santa Margarita, Coto
              de Caza, and portions of the Trabuco Canyon and Irvine Ranch
              Water Districts. TCWD collects wastewater and reclaims it at the
              Robinson Ranch Wastewater Treatment Plant. 100 percent of the
              reclaimed water is used for irrigation purposes. A portion of the
              TCWD remains unsewered, relying on septic systems for wastewater
              disposal.
              To meet future need, the SMWD is examining expanded use of
              groundwater for irrigation, additional water reclamation facilities,
              desalination, stream flow capture, water conservation, and water
              transfers from outside the area. TCWD is planning additional
              treatment facilities, reclaimed water storage and domestic water
              sources to ensure the District’s capability to provide for customers
              through the projected buildout within its service area in 2030.
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                     35                                          General Plan

Land Use Element
                               Both water districts will continue to work with MWD to ensure that
                               adequate water supplies and sewer services are available to meet the
                               needs of existing development and future growth. As part of this
                               cooperation, the City will provide land use and other necessary data
                               to the districts for use in updating their Urban Water Management
                               Plans, as well as other planning documents. The City will also
                               participate in water conservation programs to reduce future water
                               consumption. A more detailed discussion of water conservation
                               programs is contained in the Conservation/Open Space Element.
                               Encouraging good water and sewer service in the planning area will
                               require maintaining the existing water and sewer infrastructure and
                               extending new infrastructure to serve new development. Because the
                               incorporated area is almost entirely developed, water infrastructure is
                               in place and few improvements will be required to accommodate
                               new development. Development proposals and amendments within
                               Planned Communities will be reviewed for consistency with water
                               and sewer infrastructure requirements established in development
                               plans and agreements. In addition, the City will rely upon district
                               assessment of the water and sewer needs of proposed projects and
                               require infrastructure improvements where needed.
                               Solid Waste Disposal
                               Sufficient solid waste disposal is necessary to protect public safety
                               and provide for a clean, healthy community. A private sector
                               contractor provides residential solid waste collection services for
                               Rancho Santa Margarita. The City’s solid waste is disposed at the
                               County of Orange Integrated Waste Management Department’s
                               Prima Deshecha landfill in San Juan Capistrano. The landfill is a
                               permitted Class III landfill accepting only non-hazardous municipal
                               solid waste for disposal (and no hazardous or liquid waste). As a
                               result of the conflict resulting from the increase in the amount of
                               trash being imported from outside Orange County to the Prima
                               Descheca facility, the City of San Juan Capistrano and County of
                               Orange have established a Memorandum of Understanding to cap the
                               amount of trash the landfill can accept.
                               Services provided by the private sector
                               contractor will be extended as additional
                               development occurs in the future. The City also
                               is obligated to meet State mandates for solid
                               waste reduction by participating in local and
                               regional programs to encourage per capita
                               reduction of solid waste. Reductions will be
                               achieved through recycling and composting of
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        36                                   December 2002

                                                                     Land Use Element
              solid waste, reduction of the amount of solid waste produced, and
              public education.
              Drainage/Flood Control
              The planning area includes three natural creeks and their tributaries.
              Flood control systems have been constructed to direct runoff away
              from developed areas and prevent flooding associated with heavy
              rains. The two agencies responsible for flood control within Rancho
              Santa Margarita are the City and the Orange County Flood Control
              District (OCFCD). The City is responsible for local flood control
              facilities and OCFCD is responsible for regional flood control
              facilities.
              As new development occurs, increased runoff will occur. New
              development is required to provide on-site stormwater
              retention/detention facilities to regulate runoff. Such facilities have
              generally taken the form of ponds that have been designed to handle
              the difference between the 100-year post-development stormwater
              discharge and the 10-year pre-development discharge. In other,
              smaller developments where land is limited, retention facilities have
              included oversizing on-site storm drain systems to store the
              additional runoff capacity underground and allowing a discharge to
              the 10-year predevelopment runoff rate. The City will continue to
              require developments to provide adequate stormwater drainage
              systems concurrently with the construction of new development,
              including detention/retention facilities.
              Development proposals and amendments within Planned
              Communities will be reviewed for consistency with flood control
              improvements required in approved development plans and
              agreements.       Development proposals outside of Planned
              Communities will be assessed for drainage impacts and required
              facilities. Through continued coordination with OCFCD and review
              of proposed development, public safety and private property will be
              protected from flood hazards.
              Fire Protection and Law Enforcement
              Adequate fire protection and law enforcement are imperative to
              protect public health and safety. The City contracts with the Orange
              County Fire Authority (OCFA) for fire protection service within the
              incorporated boundaries. OCFA also serves the unincorporated
              portions of the planning area. One fire station is located on Avenida
              Aventura within the Rancho Santa Margarita Business Park. Other
              stations located within the planning area include one on Trabuco
              Canyon Road (located just south of Trabuco Oaks), one located at
                                                             City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                     37                                           General Plan
Land Use Element
                               the intersection of Olympiad Road and Melinda Road in Mission
                               Viejo, one in Coto de Caza, and one at the SMWD building in Las
                               Flores. Several other stations located outside of the planning area
                               respond to fire and other emergencies within the planning area.
                               OCFA provides fire suppression, emergency medical, and rescue
                               services, as well as public education programs for schools,
                               businesses, community organizations, childcare providers and other
                               members of the community. In addition, the OCFA works with the
                               City to adopt and enforce codes and ordinances relative to fire and
                               life safety, and reviews development projects within the City for
                               potential impacts on fire protection services. The OCFA has
                               established service goals and response times for emergency calls.
                               Public safety is also an important concern for the community.
                               Rancho Santa Margarita contracts with the Orange County Sheriff’s
                               Department (OCSD) for all of its law enforcement needs. OCSD is
                               responsible for public safety and general law enforcement within
                               both the City and unincorporated areas within the planning area. To
                               serve the public safety needs of the City, OCSD operates a Sheriff’s
                               Station at City Hall staffed by a Chief of Police Services, five
                               sergeants, 15 deputies, one motorcycle deputy, two traffic
                               enforcement deputies, one deputy assigned to the Directed
                               Enforcement Team, and three community services officers. Public
                               safety needs of unincorporated areas within the planning area are met
                               by the Sheriff’s South Orange County Substation in Aliso Viejo.
                               OCSD services include patrol services, traffic enforcement and
                               criminal investigations. The Sheriff’s Department also provides a
                               variety of community policing programs for the public, including
                               crime prevention, Business Watch/Neighborhood Watch and
                               community awareness programs. The Department has established
                               service goals and response times for emergency calls.
                               For both fire protection and law enforcement, ensuring public safety
                               requires maintaining adequate staffing, equipment, and facilities.
                               The City will work with both OCFA and OCSD to ensure that
                               service corresponds to the number of residents and businesses in the
                               City as well as current fire hazards and crime problems.
                               Community-oriented policing will continue to be a centerpiece of the
                               City’s approach to crime prevention. The City will also continue to
                               work with homeowners associations to ensure street widths and
                               clearance areas are sufficient to allow these departments to continue
                               to provide valuable, timely service to the community.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                       38                                   December 2002

                                                                     Land Use Element
              Public Education
              Rancho Santa Margarita public schools are operated by two K-12
              districts:    Capistrano Unified School District (CUSD) and
              Saddleback Valley Unified School District (SVUSD), as described
              below. In addition, the City is home to several prominent Orange
              County private schools, including Santa Margarita High School.
              There are no two- or four-year colleges located within the planning
              area. The closest facilities are Saddleback College in Mission Viejo,
              and the University of California, Irvine. Figure LU-4 depicts the
              location of all schools (public and private) in Rancho Santa
              Margarita.
              Capistrano Unified School District: CUSD serves the south and
              west portions of Rancho Santa Margarita with the following seven
              schools located within the planning area: Arroyo Vista Elementary,
              Tijeras Creek Elementary, Reilly Elementary, Las Flores
              Elementary, Wagon Wheel Elementary, Las Flores Middle School,
              and Tesoro High School. Many of these schools are overcrowded,
              and the District has limited or no space within its existing sites to
              accommodate additional growth from surrounding areas outside the
              City. Therefore, the District continues to look for alternative sites
              within the planning area to accommodate future student growth.
              Saddleback Valley Unified School District: SVUSD serves the
              north and east portions of Rancho Santa Margarita with the
              following seven schools located in the planning area: Cielo Vista
              Elementary, Melinda Heights Elementary, Robinson Elementary,
              Trabuco Elementary, Trabuco Mesa Elementary, Rancho Santa
                                         Margarita Intermediate School, and
                                         Trabuco Hills High School. The school
                                         facilities are adequate to accommodate the
                                         existing student population.                 The
                                         incorporated sections of the planning area
                                         are primarily developed and very limited
                                         development will occur in the incorporated
                                         City in future years. SVUSD serves the
                                         Northeast Planned Community area, and
                                         would be the responsible district if a school
                                         is constructed in that area in the future.
                                         SVUSD does not anticipate constructing
                                         any other new facilities.
              New residential development in the planning area will create
              additional demand for schools. Since many CUSD facilities are at
              capacity, additional schools may be required in that District. If a
              new school is needed in the Northeast Future Planned Community,
                                                             City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                     39                                           General Plan
          City of
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                              Live                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                          Trabuco Oaks
                                                          Rd
                                                To                                                                                                              O ak                                                                                          C a n y on
                                                   ro
                                                                                                                                                                   Can y o
                                      El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                    O'Neill
                                                                   Regional                                                                                            n                                                                              R ose
                                                                     Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e    ek
                                                                                                                    a                                                                                                                                                                                       Cr
                                                                                        Via         Al t i s i m
                                                                                Meli
                                                                                                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¹   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                               yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Trabu c o
              Los
                          A
                           lis
                                                                                     n       da
                                                                                                  ¹
                                                                                                  E                                                                                                     Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rd
                               os                                                                       Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A nt
                                                                                                                                                                                    co
                                           Rd                                                                                                                                       bu                                                                                                            Rd
        Santa                                                                                                   FOO
                                                                                                                                                                             Tr
                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¹
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           on i oE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Bir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Trabuco          ¹                                                        d Dr
                      Ma r g                                                                                       TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dh o llow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    las                      ida
                               arit                                                                                                                                                                                                       en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pkwy
                                                                                                                           I                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Av
                                      a
                                                                                                                           LL                                                                               de                                                                                                                                            Dr
                                            Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pkwy
                                                 wy                                                                                                                                          i     da
                                                                                                                                                                                          en                                            a       de l
                                                                                                                                                                                     Av                                           rit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¹        os Fund
                                                                                                                                         TR                                                                             ar
                                                                                                                                                 AN                                                              M                          E
                               Rd                                                                                                                 SPO   ¹ E                               S ant
                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¹
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M               e   ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           or
        Mel
            in
                 da
                                                                                                                                                      RT
                                                                                                                                                        AT
                                                                                                                                                           IO                                                                                                         ¹    H                            D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ov  e
                                                                         Sant                                                  wy                         N
                                                                                a                                              Pk
                                                                                             Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n              Dr
                                                                                             ¹E
                                                                                                                          Av e ntura                             CO          Al m              de
                                                                                                                                                                                              Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                   Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                   RR               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                                        wy
                                                                                                                                                                ID O R                                                                                                                                          Sy
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Vi a
                                           wy                                                                                                                         eranza                  ni
                                                                                                                                                                 Es p
                                                                                                                                                                                          o
                                      Pk                                                                                                                                                 to
                                cia                                      O'Neill                                                                                                  An
                          Ali                                           Regional                                          ra
                                                                                                                               s          Em
                                                                                                                                                 p re                                                                                        C ot o                                                                 C any
                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                    nd                  a
                                                                                                                                   st
                                                                                                                Ba         Vi                     sa
                                                                                                                                                         ¹E                                                                                                                           P aj a ro                        on
                                                                                                               ¹
                                                                                                          las                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                    yo                                                                                                                                                                                                       Country Club
                                                                                                     de         Ero
        City of
     Mission Viejo                                                                           ¹E
                                                                                                       nida
                                                                                                                Ar                                                                                                                          de                                                                           Dr
                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C aza
                                                                Vis
                               Rd
                                                                                                               ¹
                                                                    ta
                                                                                                  wy                                                                                                                                                       Vi s t a
                                                                                                                E
                                                                                             Pk
                           Olympiad
                                                               r o yo
                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                      nio                           IDO                                                                                                                     Dr
                                                              Ar                                                                                                                                                                                              Sa   n
                                                                                                                RR                                                                                                                                                                       M
                  ¹   E
                                                                                    An t o
                                                                                                               CO                                                                                                                                                                            igu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                el
                                                                                                      TATI
                                                                                                           ON
                                                                                                  TRA NSPOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Coto de Caza
                                  O'Neill                                                                                                                 Chiquita
                                 Regional                                                                                                                 Canyon
                                   Park                                                                                                                 Conservation
                                                                                                                                                           Area
                                                                                                   ILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Legend
                                                                                                    F O OT H
                                                     Pkw
                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E                  Elementary School                               ¹                 Public
                                                  io                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M                  Middle School                                   ¹                 Private
                                                An t on
                                                                                  Chiquita
                                                          ¹ ¹
                                                                                                                                                                       Oso
                                                                                  Canyon                                                                                       Pk
                                                                 M              Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                                    wy                                                                                              H                  High School
                                                          E                        Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City Boundary
                      Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sphere of Influence Boundary
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;                                                                         ¹   H                                                                                                                                                                                  Future Planned Community Boundary
        Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001
        0                 2,000                    4,000                                                                                                                                                                      ¹    H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure LU-4
 N          1,000                     3,000                   5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               School Sites
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         December 2002

                                                                    Land Use Element
              SVUSD will be the responsible district. The City will cooperate
              with the school districts to update information in their Master Plans
              and long-range facility plans, identify appropriate future school sites
              that are compatible with surrounding development, and implement
              facility improvement plans.
              Due to the lack of available vacant land in the City, development of
              additional school sites will likely necessitate an amendment to this
              General Plan.        The City will coordinate any such needed
              amendments with the appropriate district. Also, the City will work
              with districts to encourage additional and improved parking facilities
              for special events, so that spillover parking does not become a
              nuisance within surrounding neighborhoods.
              Parks, Community Centers and Recreational Opportunities
              Parks, community centers and recreational opportunities are essential
              public services that help maintain a high quality of life in the
              community. Rancho Santa Margarita was developed as a group of
              planned communities emphasizing the central role of these facilities
              in civic life.
              The Rancho Santa Margarita park and recreation system consists of
              neighborhood parks, community parks, O’Neill Regional Park, joint
              use parks, community services and facilities, an extensive open
              space system, and a future Inter-Generational Community Center.
              All parks in the City (with the exception of O’Neill Regional Park
              and County trails) are privately owned, operated, and maintained by
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      41                                         General Plan

Land Use Element
                               homeowner associations. Parks and recreation services in Rancho
                               Santa Margarita can be characterized as primarily neighborhood-
                               serving with facilities well distributed throughout the City. Most of
                               the neighborhoods in the City are within walking distance from an
                               existing park. Rancho Santa Margarita currently has 22 private
                               developed parks which range in size from 0.5 acre Dove Canyon
                               Trail Rest Area to the 21.4 acre Central Park in the Trabuco
                               Highlands Planned Community. Several of the smaller parks
                               function only as passive parks. Active recreational parkland is
                               provided in the City at 17 of the 22 parks. Of the nearly 152 acres of
                               parkland located in the City, approximately 85 acres (56 percent) are
                               devoted to active recreational use. Approximately 68 acres (44
                               percent) are devoted to passive uses. The Open Space and
                               Conservation Element of the General Plan provides a full inventory
                               and map of all parks located in the City.
                               O’Neill Regional Park serves both as an overnight camping facility
                               and offers day/picnic use. The picnic area provides for single and
                               group uses and contains picnic tables, barbecues, a large turf area,
                               horseshoe pits and playground equipment. About 3.5 acres are
                               available for RV camping. The park facilities offer recreational
                               opportunities including an equestrian campground, an arena, and 18
                               miles of riding trails.
                               The Lago Santa Margarita Beach Club is owned and operated by the
                               Rancho Santa Margarita Landscape and Recreation Corporation
                               (SAMLARC). It consists of a 12.6 acre man-made lake surrounded
                               by 16.8 acres of parks, trails, and a lakeside beach. A grill and
                               picnic area, boating, swim lagoon, two volleyball courts, and Fiesta
                               Room are provided at the facility for local SAMLARC residents.
                               The Rancho Santa Margarita Intergenerational Community Center
                               (IGCC) will be the social, cultural, civic, and wellness center of the
                               southeast regional community. The facility is to be located in the
                               heart of the town center, near Central Park and City Hall. It will
                               provide cultural and recreational programming for all age groups and
                               all interest groups in order to meet the needs of the entire
                               community. The Bell Tower Foundation has been established as a
                               fundraising organization to finance the construction, administration
                               and operation of the IGCC. Future fundraising activities of this
                               Foundation will establish an endowment for recreational activities
                               throughout the City. Completion of the IGCC was a key element in
                               the drive for incorporation.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        42                                   December 2002

                                                                     Land Use Element
              As the City matures, it will continue to promote the value of
              parkland and recreational opportunities for residents. The City will
              coordinate with local homeowner associations and community
              foundations to ensure that the lake, existing parks, trails, and
              community centers are maintained, and new facilities are constructed
              to meet the needs of new City residents. The Open Space and
              Conservation Element of the General Plan establishes community-
              wide standards for the provision of parklands. The City will also
              work with park operators to ensure that park and recreation facilities
              are used to the fullest extent. The City will continue to assist in the
              development of new programs and services for the community, and
              will support the efforts of the Bell Tower Foundation to successfully
              integrate the IGCC into the life of the community.
              Libraries
              Public libraries service several community purposes including,
              education, recreation, and dissemination of public information. The
              Orange County Public Library (OCPL) system serves the planning
              area. The library system has a mission “to provide a framework for
              the delivery of relevant resources meeting the educational, cultural,
              civic, business and life-long learning needs of residents of all ages of
              member communities through a network of locally-focused libraries
              in which knowledgeable, service-oriented staff members offer access
              to information, books and other materials in a variety of formats
              using contemporary technology, and which encourage and foster
              reciprocal community involvement to educate, inform and enrich the
              lives of a diverse population.” The OCPL services residents of the
              City and surrounding areas through the Rancho Santa Margarita
              Branch Library, located at 30902 La Promesa in the Town Center.
              As development occurs, the City will continue to work with the
              OCPL to ensure that the California State Library recommended
              standard of 0.5 square feet of library space per capita is met and
              community needs for library services are met. The City will work
              with OCPL to ensure that library services in Rancho Santa Margarita
              are high quality, enhance the cultural life of the community, and
              provide for an information center within the community. As the
              community matures and grows, the City will work with OCPL to
              identify potential locations and services for new libraries.
              Northeast Future Planned Community
              For the Northeast Future Planned Community area, an urban services
              plan is required to address the public services and facilities identified
              in this Element. Necessary service and infrastructure expansion and
                                                             City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      43                                          General Plan

Land Use Element
                               improvements will be identified in the urban services plan to show
                               how public services will be provided at adequate levels. The urban
                               services plan will also identify funding sources to achieve the service
                               standards. Currently, the City has policies and programs in place to
                               ensure that new development pays its fair share of needed public
                               improvements.
                               The City will review and update funding mechanisms to reflect the
                               specific facilities and costs required to support build out of the Land
                               Use Plan. The City may also participate in regional funding
                               programs for certain key facilities such as road improvements.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                         44                                   December 2002
                                                                                                                            Noise Element
                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section                                                                                                                                     Page
Introduction .....................................................................................................................................1
        Purpose of the Noise Element..............................................................................................1
        Scope and Content of the Noise Element ............................................................................1
        Related Plans and Programs ................................................................................................2
        Relationship to Other General Plan Elements .....................................................................3
Issues, Goals and Policies ................................................................................................................5
        Noise and Land Use Planning..............................................................................................5
        Transportation Related Noise ..............................................................................................6
        Non-Transportation Related Noise ......................................................................................6
        Related Goals and Policies ..................................................................................................7
Noise Plan .......................................................................................................................................8
        Noise and Land Use Planning..............................................................................................8
            Noise Standards and Land Use Compatibility ...............................................................8
            Noise Contours and Noise Impact Areas .......................................................................9
            Construction Standards ................................................................................................11
        Transportation Related Noise ............................................................................................11
            Noise Control at Reception Sites .................................................................................11
            Noise Control at the Source .........................................................................................14
        Non-Transportation Related Noise ....................................................................................14
            Noise Control Ordinance .............................................................................................14
            Business Activity Noise...............................................................................................14
            Nuisance Noise ............................................................................................................15
                                                                                                              City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                                              i                                                        General Plan
Noise Element
                                           LIST OF TABLES
Table                                                                                                                            Page
N-1       Related Goals and Policies by Element ...............................................................................7
N-2       State Criteria for Minimizing Adverse Noise Effects on Humans ......................................9
N-3       Noise/Land Use Compatibility Criteria .............................................................................10
                                          LIST OF FIGURES
Figure                                                                                                                           Page
N-1       Projected Noise Contours ..................................................................................................12
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                              ii                                                          December 2002
                                                                         Introduction
                        Noise levels within Rancho Santa Margarita affect the quality of life
                        experienced by residents living and working within the community.
                        High noise levels associated with various activities can create stress
                        and irritation. The Noise Element addresses the physiological,
                        psychological and economic effects of noise by providing effective
                        strategies to reduce excessive noise and limit community exposure to
                        loud noise sources.
        Purpose of the  The purpose of the Noise Element is to identify and appraise existing
        Noise Element   noise problems in the community, and to provide guidance to avoid
                        noise and land use compatibility problems in the future. This
                        Element addresses existing and projected noise sources in the
                        community and identifies ways to reduce existing and potential noise
                        impacts. In particular, the Noise Element contains policies and
                        programs to achieve and maintain noise levels compatible with
                        various types of land uses. These policies and programs emphasize
                        the need to control noise through land use regulation, as well as
                        enforcement of other City ordinances.
   Scope and Content    The State of California recognizes the
           of the Noise relationship between noise and noise
                        sensitive uses and has adopted State
               Element  Guidelines for Noise Elements. This Noise
                        Element satisfies the requirements of State
                        planning law and is a mandated component
                        of the General Plan. Government Code
                        Section 65302(f) establishes the required
                        components of the Noise Element. The
                        Element also complies with California
                        Health and Safety Code Section 56050.1
                        guidelines for Noise Elements.
                        Future noise conditions from short- and long-term growth are
                        quantified and identified as noise exposure contours. This noise
                        information serves as the basis for: developing guidelines for
                        identifying compatible land uses; identifying the proper distribution
                        of land uses on the General Plan Land Use Policy Map; and
                        establishing proper development standards.
                                                                      City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                1                                          General Plan
Noise Element
                               The Noise Element comprises three sections: 1) this Introduction; 2)
                               Issues, Goals, and Policies; and 3) the Noise Plan. In the Issues,
                               Goals, and Policies section, major issues pertaining to noise sources
                               are identified and related goals and policies are established. The
                               goals are statements of the City’s desires and comprise broad
                               statements of purpose and direction. The policies serve as guides for
                               reducing or avoiding adverse noise impacts on the population. The
                               Plan explains how the goals and policies will be achieved and
                               implemented. Specific implementation programs for the Noise
                               Element are contained in Appendix A of this General Plan.
           Related Plans       There are a number of existing plans and programs that directly
          and Programs         relate to the goals of the Noise Element. These plans and programs
                               have been enacted through state and local legislation and are
                               administered by agencies with powers to enforce state and local
                               laws.
                               California Environmental Quality Act Guidelines
                               The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by
                               the state legislature in response to a public mandate for thorough
                               environmental analysis of projects that might affect the environment.
                               Excessive noise is considered an environmental impact under
                               CEQA. The provisions of the law and environmental review
                               procedures are described in the CEQA Statutes and the CEQA
                               Guidelines. Implementation of CEQA ensures that during the
                               decision making stage of development, City officials and the general
                               public will be able to assess the noise impacts associated with public
                               and private development projects.
                               California Noise Insulation Standards (Title 24)
                               The California Commission of Housing and Community
                               Development officially adopted noise standards in 1974. In 1988,
                               the Building Standards Commission approved revisions to the
                               standards (Title 24, Part 2, California Code of Regulations). As
                               revised, Title 24 establishes an interior noise standard of 45 dBA for
                               residential space (CNEL or Ldn). Acoustical studies must be
                               prepared for residential structures that are to be located within noise
                               contours of 60 dBA or greater from freeways, major streets,
                               thoroughfares, rail lines, rapid transit lines or industrial noise
                               sources. The studies must demonstrate that the building is designed
                               to reduce interior noise to 45 dBA or lower.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        2                                     December 2002

                                                                                 Noise Element
                      County of Orange General Plan Noise Element
                      The County of Orange General Plan Noise Element provides
                      parameters for compatibility of noise and various land uses, and the
                      location of new development. These parameters are described in the
                      Noise/Land Use Compatibility Manual.              For new residential
                      construction, exterior noise must be reduced to 65 dB or less, and
                      interior noise must be reduced to 45 dB or less. The unincorporated
                      portion of the Planning Area is subject to the County Noise Element.
                      City of Rancho Santa Margarita Noise Control Ordinance
                      The City has adopted the County of Orange Noise Control
                      Ordinance, which establishes interior and exterior noise standards.
                      The Ordinance provides controls for excessive and annoying noise
                      from stationary sources such as industrial plants, pumps,
                      compressors and refrigeration units. In addition, specific noise
                      standards for daytime and nighttime hours are provided. Certain
                      noise sources are prohibited and the Ordinance establishes an
                      enforcement process. Noise Control Ordinance requirements are
                      identified in this Element.
      Relationship to According to state planning law, the Noise Element must be
        Other General consistent with the other General Plan elements. Each element is
                      independent and all the elements together comprise the General Plan.
        Plan Elements All elements of the General Plan are interrelated to a degree, and
                      certain goals and policies of one element may also address issues
                      that are primary subjects of other elements. Table N-1 provided in
                      the following section identifies the policies by General Plan element
                      that are related to Noise Element issues. This integration of
                      overlapping issues and policies provides a strong basis for
                      implementation of plans and programs and achievement of
                      community goals.
                      Policies and plans in the Noise Element are designed to protect
                      existing and planned land uses from significant noise impacts. To do
                      this, the Element identifies potential noise sources and establishes
                      programs to avoid or mitigate noise impacts from community
                      development. Concurrently, the Land Use Element contains policies
                      to ensure that environmental conditions, including noise, are
                      considered in all land use decisions. Planning for future residential
                      and other sensitive land uses on the Land Use Policy Map is intended
                      to avoid new noise sensitive development in areas where noise
                      impacts cannot be reduced or mitigated to acceptable levels.
                                                                     City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                               3                                          General Plan
Noise Element
                               The Noise Element is linked to the transportation policies in the
                               Circulation Element. Transportation noise is largely responsible for
                               excessive noise levels in certain locations within Rancho Santa
                               Margarita. The projected noise contours identified in this Element
                               directly correspond to the Circulation Plan and the projected traffic
                               generated from the proposed land uses. Both the Noise and
                               Circulation Elements contain policies and programs to minimize the
                               effects of transportation noise on existing and planned land uses.
                               Noise exposure is a key consideration when locating and designing
                               new arterials.
                               The Noise Element also relates to the Conservation/Open Space
                               Element. Excessive noise can diminish enjoyment of parks and
                               other designated open space. Because of this, noise levels are
                               considered in the planning of new recreational and open space areas.
                               Additionally, open space areas can be used to separate and buffer
                               noise sensitive land uses from noise producers.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        4                                  December 2002
                                                                                 Noise Element
                                                  Issues, Goals and Policies
                       Human activities in the community create noise levels that can affect
                       overall quality of life. The goals and policies of the Noise Element
                       are designed to protect the community from excessive noise.
                       Three major issues related to noise are addressed in the Noise
                       Element: 1) avoiding the negative impacts of noise through the use
                       of land use planning and noise reduction measures; 2) minimizing
                       the impact of transportation-related noise; and 3) minimizing the
                       impact of non-transportation-related noise.
  Noise and Land Use   Certain areas within Rancho Santa Margarita are subject to high
              Planning noise levels. Consideration of the sources and recipients of noise
                       early in the land use planning process can be an effective method of
                       minimizing the impact of noise on population in the community.
                       Consideration may be given to both reducing noise in areas already
                       severely impacted by noise through rehabilitative improvements and
                       avoiding potential noise impacts through proper land use planning.
                       Goal 1:         Minimize the effects of noise through proper land
                                       use planning.
                       Policy 1.1:     Ensure that new development and reuse/revitalization
                                       projects can be made compatible with the noise
                                       environment by utilizing noise/land use compatibility
                                       standards and the Noise Contours Map as a guide.
                       Policy 1.2:     Require the inclusion of design features in
                                       development and reuse/revitalization projects to
                                       reduce the impact of noise on residential
                                       development.
                       Policy 1.3:     Ensure proposed development meets noise insulation
                                       standards    for   construction        and     residential
                                       development.
                                                                     City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                5                                         General Plan
Noise Element
         Transportation        The primary source of noise impacting Rancho Santa Margarita
           Related Noise       results from transportation-related noise.               The Foothill
                               Transportation Corridor, along with other major roadways, create
                               high levels of noise that affect the overall quality of life in the
                               community. Reduction in transportation-related noise is necessary to
                               deal with the detrimental effects attributable to excessive noise.
                               Goal 2:        Minimize transportation-related noise impacts.
                               Policy 2.1:    Reduce transportation-related noise impacts to
                                              sensitive land uses through the use of noise control
                                              measures.
                               Policy 2.2:    Control truck traffic routing to reduce transportation-
                                              related noise impacts to sensitive land uses.
                               Policy 2.3:    Incorporate sound-reduction design in development
                                              projects impacted by transportation-related noise.
  Non-Transportation           Noise sources that are not directly related to transportation include:
           Related Noise       construction noise, manufacturing or business operations noise, and
                               property maintenance activities. Such noise sources should be
                               controlled to minimize exposure to excessive noise levels.
                               Goal 3:        Minimize       non-transportation       related     noise
                                              impacts.
                               Policy 3.1:    Reduce the impacts of noise-producing land uses,
                                              activities, and businesses on noise-sensitive land uses.
                               Policy 3.2:    Incorporate sound-reduction design in new
                                              construction or rehabilitation projects impacted by
                                              non-transportation-related noise.
                               Policy 3.3:    Minimize stationary noise sources and noise
                                              emanating from construction activities and special
                                              events.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        6                                     December 2002
                                                                                           Noise Element
         Related Goals       The goals and policies in the Noise Element are directly related to
           and Policies      and support subjects included in other General Plan elements. In
                             turn, goals and policies from other elements directly support the
                             goals and policies of the Noise Element. These supporting goals and
                             policies are identified in Table N-1.
                                              Table N-1
                              Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                               Noise Element Issue Areas
                General Plan
                  Element      Noise and Land      Transportation     Non-Transportation
                                 Use Planning      Related Noise         Related Noise
               Land Use        2.3, 2.6, 3.1    3.1, 3.2, 3.3
               Housing         2.1
                                                1.1, 1.4, 1.5, 2.2,
               Circulation
                                                2.3, 3.1
               Economic
                               1.2                                    2.7, 2.8
               Development
               Conservation/
                               1.3              1.3, 6.4              1.3
               Open Space
               Safety                           2.5
               Noise
                                                                               City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                      7                                             General Plan
Noise Element
                                                                                   Noise Plan
                               Rancho Santa Margarita, like most urbanized areas, is experiencing
                               increased noise levels associated with transportation and other
                               sources of noise. As the noise level in various parts of the
                               community rises, the City must seek ways to safeguard its population
                               from excessive noise levels. The goals and policies identified in the
                               previous section establish an agenda to reduce overall noise levels
                               within the City. This Noise Plan defines the City’s approach to
                               achieve the agenda and generally outlines the action programs. The
                               Noise Element Implementation Program contained in Appendix A of
                               this General Plan is an extension of the Noise Plan and contains
                               specific programs to protect community well-being.
  Noise and Land Use           Noise in the community is the cumulative effect of noise from
                 Planning      transportation activities and stationary sources. Transportation noise
                               refers to noise from automobile use, trucking, airport operations, and
                               rail operations. Non-transportation noise typically refers to noise
                               from stationary sources such as commercial establishments,
                               machinery, air conditioning systems, compressors, residential and
                               recreational uses, and landscape maintenance equipment.
                               Regardless of the type of noise, the noise levels are highest near the
                               source and decrease with distance. Noise is problematic when noise
                               sensitive land uses are affected. Noise sensitive land uses (i.e.,
                               activities that are interrupted by noise) include residences, schools,
                               hospitals, churches, and recreation areas. Most noise impacts can be
                               avoided when noise sources, sensitive land uses, and information
                               about the future noise environment are considered in land use
                               planning and development decisions.
                               Noise Standards and Land Use Compatibility
                               Noise generally is defined as unwanted or intrusive sound. Because
                               noise consists of pitch, loudness, and duration, describing noise with
                               a single unit of measure presents a challenge. The A-weighted
                               decibel scale (dBA) has been developed to describe the loudness of a
                               sound or sound environment based on the sensitivity of the human
                               ear.
                               Table N-2 outlines criteria the State has established to reduce
                               adverse noise effects on human health.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                         8                                   December 2002

                                                                                Noise Element
                                                 Table N-2
                            State Criteria For Minimizing Adverse Noise
                                            Effects On Humans
              Objective                                                           dBA Range
              Prevent Hearing Loss                                                    75 - 80
              Prevent Physiological Effects (other than hearing loss)                  65-75
              Prevent Speech Interference                                              50-60
              Address People’ s Subjective Preferences for Noise Control               45-50
              Prevent Sleep Interruption                                               35-45
              The dBA descriptor only reports noise from a single source or
              combination of sources at a point in time. To allow a more
              comprehensive description of a noise environment, Federal and State
              agencies have established noise and land use compatibility
              guidelines that use averaging approaches to noise measurement.
              Two measurement scales commonly used in California are the
              Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) and the day-night level
              (Ldn). To account for increased human sensitivity at night, the
              CNEL level includes a 5-decibel penalty on noise during the 7:00
              a.m. to 10:00 p.m. time period and a 10-decibel penalty on noise
              during the 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. time period. The Ldn level
              includes only the 10 decibel weighting for late-night noise. These
              values are nearly identical for all but unusual noise sources.
              The City’s primary goal with regard to community noise is to
              minimize the exposure of residents to unhealthful or excessive noise
              levels to the extent possible, given the City’s built-out condition. To
              this end, this Element establishes noise/land use compatibility
              guidelines based on cumulative noise criteria for outdoor noise.
              Table N-3 outlines the criteria the City will use to review
              development proposals. New residential development will comply
              with Title 24 standards of the State Health and Safety Code. These
              standards establish maximum interior noise levels for new residential
              development, requiring that sufficient insulation be provided to
              reduce interior ambient noise levels to 45 CNEL.
              The Planning Director acts as the noise control coordinator. This
              designation of responsibility allows consistent and continued
              enforcement of the established noise standards.
              Noise Contours and Noise Impact Areas
              The noise environment for the community can be described with
              noise contours based on the major noise sources. Noise contours
              define areas of equal noise exposure. Future noise contours have
                                                                    City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                         9                                               General Plan


                                                                                  Noise Element
                       been estimated with information about existing and projected land
                       use development and transportation activity. These contours have
                       been prepared to assist in setting policies for proper distribution of
                       land uses and the establishment of development standards.
                       Figure N-1 shows the projected noise contours and associated Noise
                       Impact Areas. The noise contours are used as a guide for land use
                       and development decisions. Contours of 60 dBA or greater define
                       noise impacted areas. When noise sensitive land uses are proposed
                       within these contours, an acoustical analysis must be prepared. For
                       the project to be approved, the analysis must demonstrate that the
                       project is designed to attenuate the noise to meet the City noise
                       standards identified in Table N-3. If the project is not designed to
                       meet the noise standards, mitigation measures should be
                       recommended in the analysis. If the analysis demonstrates that the
                       noise standards can be met with implementation of mitigation
                       measures, the project can be approved with the mitigation measures,
                       which shall be required as conditions of project approval.
                       Construction Standards
                       The provisions of the State Noise Insulation Standards (Title 24, Part
                       2, California Code of Regulations) are enforced in Rancho Santa
                       Margarita. Title 24 specifies that combined indoor noise for multi-
                       family living spaces shall not exceed 45 dBA CNEL. This standard
                       must be implemented when the outdoor noise level exceeds 60 dBA
                       CNEL. Title 24 requires that the same standard be applied to all new
                       hotels, motels, apartments and multi-family projects.
      Transportation   Noise from transportation activity is the primary source of noise in
         Related Noise Rancho Santa Margarita. The two major sources of transportation
                       related noise in Rancho Santa Margarita are:
                           ?   Traffic on the Foothill Transportation Corridor (SR-241); and
                           ?   Traffic on arterial roadways within the City.
                       Noise Control at Reception Sites
                       The most efficient and effective means of controlling noise from
                       transportation systems is to reduce noise at the source. However, the
                       City has little direct control over noise produced by transportation
                       sources because State noise regulations preempt local regulations.
                       Because the City cannot control noise at the source, City noise
                       programs focus on reducing the impact of transportation noise
                       reception sites.
                                                                      City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                               11                                          General Plan
          City of
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                                          Live                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Trabuco Oaks
                                                           Rd
                                                 To                                                                                                                         O ak                                                                                         C a n y on
                                                    ro
                                                                                                                                                                              Can y o
                                     El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                         O'Neill
                                                                        Regional                                                                                                   n                                                                             R ose
                                                                          Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e    ek
                                                                                                                              a                                                                                                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                              Via            Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                                               Rd                                                                                                        Trabu c o
                                                                                     Meli                                                                                                                                      n                   Rd
                                                                                          n       da                                                                                                                  n   yo
              Los                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ca
                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd
                          lis
                               os                                                                                Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                co                                                                                                               65
                                            Rd                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                            a   bu                                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                         Tr                                                                                                                           60 Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               es                                                                                                                            ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             or                                                                                                                                   ee
        Santa                                                                                                               FOO                                                                                                         Fl                                                                  65                                              Bir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d Dr
                      Ma r g                                                                                                   TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dh o llow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               las                   ida                                              60 65
                               arit                                                                                                                                                                                                               en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pkwy
                                                                                                                                     I        60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Av
                                      a
                                                                                                                                      LL                                                                               de                          60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dr
                                             Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pkwy                                           60
                                                  wy                                                                                                                                                         da
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ni
                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         de l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              65
                                                                                                                                                                                                    e                                           a
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av                                          rit 65                                             65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           os Fund
                                                               65                                                                                   TR                                                                             ar
                                                                                                                                              60                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                            AN                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                             SPO
                                                                                                                                                                              65
                               Rd                                                                                                                                                                     S ant                                           or
                                                                                                                                                                                                              65                               e   ad        60
                                                                                                                                                                              65
                                                                                                                                                                       IO
                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                 da
                                                                                                                                                                    AT
                                                                                                                                                                              60                                                                                                                                      D
            in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     65 60
                                                                                                                                                                  RT
        Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ov
                                                                       65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                         60                                               wy
                                                                              Sant                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                          Pk
                                                                       60            a                                                                 65
                                                                                                      65                                                            60
                                                                                                     M arg70a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                                                                                                70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nyo
                                                                                                       65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n              Dr
                                                                                                         60                        Av e ntura                                CO          Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                                                                                           m             de
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Al
                                                                                                                                              Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                            ID O R                                                                                                                                              cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   65
                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sy
                                                                                                                                                                         RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pk
                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        65                                                                          Vi a
                                                                                                                                                                              peranza
                                                                                                                                                                           Es
                                            wy                                                                                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                      o
                                        k                                                                                                                                                           o
                               c   ia P                                       O'Neill                                                                                                            nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                         Ali                                                 Regional                                                ra
                                                                                                                                          s          Em                                     A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C ot o                                                                    C any
                                                                                                                                                                         65
                                                                               Park                                                                         p re
                                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                                             nd                  a
                                                                                                                                              st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P aj a ro
                                                                                                                            Ba       Vi                      sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     on
                                                                                                                   las                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                             yo      60
                                                                                                                                              65                                                                                                                                                                                           Country Club
                                                                                                              de             ro
        City of                                                                                                             Ar                                                                                                                      de                                                                                 Dr
     Mission Viejo                                                                                             nida
                                                                                                           Ave
                                                                                                                                                             70
                                                                                                                                          60 65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C aza
                                                                    Vis
                               Rd                                       ta
                                                                                                       wy                                                                                                                                                            Vi s t a
                                                                                                     Pk
                          Olympiad
                                                                    r o yo
                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                           nio                               IDO                                                                                                                    Dr
                                                               Ar                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sa   n
                                                                                                                            RR                                                                                                                                                                      M
                                                                                         An t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         el
                                                                                                                        CO                                                                                                                                                                            igu
                                                                                                              TATI
                                                                                           60                      ON
                                                                                     65
                                                                                                           TRA NSPOR
                                                                       65                                                                                                                                                                Coto de Caza
                                                                60
                                    O'Neill                                                                                                                           Chiquita
                                   Regional                                                                                                                           Canyon
                                     Park                                                                                                                           Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                       Area
                                                                                                            ILL
                                                           y                                                 F O OT H
                                                                                                                        60
                                                      Pkw
                                                   io                                                                  70
                                                 An t on                                                         65
                                                                                       Chiquita                                                                                    Oso
                                                                                       Canyon60                                                                                          Pk
                                                                                     Conservation
                                                                                        Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Boundary
                      Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sphere of Influence Boundary
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Future Planned Community Boundary
        Weiland Associates, 2002
        0               2,000                       4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure N-1
 N          1,000                     3,000                    5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                                      Future Noise Contours
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                                                                                                                                                       12                                                                                                                                                                                  December 2002
                                                                         Noise Element
                                 During the planning stages      of the development
                                 process, potential impacts      from transportation
                                 noise will be identified and    mitigation measures
                                 will be required as needed       to meet City noise
                                 standards.
                                 Site planning, landscaping, topography and the
                                 design and construction of noise barriers are the
                                 most common method of alleviating vehicular
                                 traffic and train noise impacts. Setbacks and
                                 buffers can also be used to achieve noise reduction.
              Noise attenuating barriers are commonly incorporated into projects
              and can be extremely effective in reducing noise levels. The
              effectiveness of the barrier depends on: 1) the relative height and
              materials of the barrier; 2) the noise source; 3) the affected area; and
              4) the horizontal distance between the barrier and the affected area.
              Noise barriers should be included in the design of freeway/tollway,
              roadway and rail improvements. The City supports efforts by
              Caltrans, OCTA and other transportation providers to provide
              acoustical protection for noise sensitive uses. In addition, the City
              will request that barriers are constructed as part of future highway,
              roadway and rail projects in order to mitigate significant noise
              impacts.
              Although noise barriers can be extremely effective, the aesthetic
              effect of barriers on neighborhoods must be considered during the
              preliminary stages of the development process.                  Potentially
              significant aesthetics impacts associated with noise barriers must be
              addressed and mitigated through landscaping or other project design
              measures in all new public and private projects.
                                                             City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      13                                          General Plan
Noise Element
                               Noise Control at the Source
                               The California Vehicle Code contains noise regulations pertaining to
                               the operation of all vehicles on public roads. These noise standards
                               for cars, trucks and motorcycles are enforced through coordination
                               with the California Highway Patrol and the Orange County Sheriff’s
                               Department. The City also regulates traffic flow and coordinates
                               with the California Highway Patrol to enforce speed limits to reduce
                               traffic noise.
  Non-Transportation           Sensitive receptors must also be protected from excessive noise
           Related Noise       generated by non-transportation sources, such as commercial and
                               industrial centers, restaurants and bars, religious institutions and
                               civic centers. Other noise sources commonly referred to as nuisance
                               noises also contribute to the overall noise environment. Application
                               and enforcement of the City Noise Control Ordinance is the best
                               means to control noise from existing noise sources; while noise
                               generated by new development is effectively controlled through the
                               site design review process, compliance with CEQA, and compliance
                               with City noise standards contained in the Noise Element of the
                               General Plan. During the preliminary stages of the development
                               process, potential noise impact must be identified and mitigation
                               measures identified.
                               Noise Control Ordinance
                               Upon incorporation, the City adopted the County of Orange Noise
                               Control Ordinance. This Ordinance is designed to protect people
                               from non-transportation related noise sources such as construction
                               activity, machinery and pumps, and air conditioners. Enforcement of
                               the Ordinance ensures that adjacent properties are not exposed to
                               excessive noise from stationary sources. Enforcing the Ordinance
                               includes requiring proposed development projects to demonstrate
                               compliance with the Ordinance and requiring construction activity to
                               comply with established work schedule limits. The Ordinance is
                               reviewed periodically for adequacy and amended, as needed, to
                               address community needs and development patterns.
                               Business Activity Noise
                               When reviewing a proposed industrial, commercial, or public
                               project, noise generation and potential impacts to surrounding
                               development are considered in accordance with CEQA. An
                               acoustical analysis is required for projects that will generate noise
                               potentially affecting sensitive receptors. Where significant impacts
                               are identified, mitigation measures are required. Common mitigation
                               measures include acoustically treated and quiet-design furnaces,
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        14                                  December 2002

                                                                         Noise Element
              fans, motors, compressors, valves, and pumps. The City may also
              require limited delivery hours and hours of operation in order to
              minimize impacts to adjacent residential users or other sensitive
              receptors.
              In addition, all City departments must comply with state and federal
              Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards.
              Any new equipment or vehicle purchased by the City will comply
              with local, state and federal noise standards.
              Nuisance Noise
              Several noise sources can contribute to the overall noise environment
              in the community, including: barking dogs, loud audio equipment,
              defective or modified auto and motorcycle mufflers and activities at
              parks and civic, community or religious institutions. Existing
              nuisance noises can be addressed through strict enforcement of the
              Noise Control Ordinance, while potential noise impacts may be
              avoided or reduced through the site design review process, review of
              proposed developments per CEQA and mitigation of potential
              nuisance noise impacts.
                                                             City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      15                                          General Plan
Noise Element
                               This page is intentionally left blank.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                     16                   December 2002
                                                                                                                           Safety Element
                                                     Table of Contents
Section                                                                                                                                     Page
Introduction .....................................................................................................................................1
        Purpose of the Safety Element.............................................................................................1
        Scope and Content of the Safety Element ...........................................................................1
        Related Plans and Programs ................................................................................................2
        Relationship to Other General Plan Elements .....................................................................5
Issues, Goals and Policies ................................................................................................................7
        Natural Hazards ...................................................................................................................7
        Human Activity Hazards .....................................................................................................8
        Crime Prevention .................................................................................................................9
        Emergency Preparedness ...................................................................................................10
        Related Goals and Policies ................................................................................................10
Safety Plan ....................................................................................................................................11
        Natural Hazards .................................................................................................................11
            Seismic Hazards...........................................................................................................11
            Geologic Hazards Resulting from Seismic Ground Shaking.......................................14
            Geologic Hazards.........................................................................................................16
            Flood Hazards ..............................................................................................................17
            Fire Hazards .................................................................................................................20
        Human Activity Hazards ...................................................................................................22
            Air Pollution ................................................................................................................22
            Nuclear Power Production ...........................................................................................22
            Hazardous Materials ....................................................................................................23
            Ground Transportation.................................................................................................24
        Crime Prevention ...............................................................................................................24
        Emergency Preparedness ...................................................................................................25
                                                                                                              City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                                              i                                                        General Plan
Safety Element
                                                       List of Tables
Table                                                                                                                                   Page
S-1       Safety Related Goals and Policies by Element ..................................................................10
                                                      List of Figures
Figure                                                                                                                                  Page
S-1       Seismic Hazards.................................................................................................................13
S-2       Geologic Hazards...............................................................................................................15
S-3       Flood Hazards ....................................................................................................................19
S-4       Wildfire Hazard Areas .......................................................................................................21
S-5       Emergency Response Locations and Evacuation Routes ..................................................26
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                               ii                                                                December 2002
                                                                           Introduction
                        The quality of life in Rancho Santa Margarita is directly impacted by
                        the sense of security of its residents and businesses. Addressing the
                        issues of crime and violence, other human caused hazards, as well as
                        preparing a response to uncontrollable natural hazards to provide a
                        safe and enjoyable environment for citizens is important. The Safety
                        Element establishes goals, policies, and a plan to ensure that there is
                        an adequate, coordinated, and expedient response to public safety
                        concerns.
        Purpose of the  The purpose of the Safety Element is to identify and address those
       Safety Element   features or characteristics existing in or near Rancho Santa Margarita
                        that represent a potential hazard to the community’s citizens, sites,
                        structures, public facilities, and infrastructure. The Safety Element
                        establishes policies to minimize the danger to residents, workers, and
                        visitors, while identifying actions needed to manage crisis situations
                        such as earthquakes, fires, and floods. The Element also focuses on
                        preventing criminal activity and violence before they occur.
                        Additionally, the Safety Element contains specific policies and
                        programs to regulate existing and proposed development in hazard-
                        prone areas. Continuing education of City officials and citizens
                        about emergency preparedness is also addressed.
   Scope and Content    The Safety Element satisfies the requirements of State planning law
          of the Safety and is a mandated component of the General Plan. Government
                        Code section 65302(g) sets forth a list of hazards that the Element
               Element  must cover, if they pertain to conditions in the City. These hazards
                        are:
                                       ?   Seismically induced conditions including ground
                                           shaking, surface rupture, ground failure, tsunami,
                                           and seiche;
                                       ?   Slope instability     leading    to    mudslides      and
                                           landslides;
                                       ?   Subsidence and other geologic hazards;
                                       ?   Flooding;
                                                                        City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                            1                                                General Plan

Safety Element
                                       ?   Wildland and urban fires; and
                                       ?   Evacuation routes.
                               State law also permits communities to add safety issues to this list.
                               Additional safety issues that are included in this Element are:
                                       ?   Criminal activities and violence;
                                       ?   Air pollution;
                                       ?   Hazardous materials;
                                       ?   Nuclear hazards from the San Onofre Nuclear Generating
                                           Station; and
                                       ?   Ground transportation.
                               The Safety Element contains three sections: 1) Introduction; 2)
                               Issues, Goals, and Policies; and 3) the Safety Plan. In the Issues,
                               Goals, and Policies section, major issues pertaining to hazardous
                               conditions and safety are identified, and related goals and policies
                               are established.
                               The goals are overall statements of the City’s desires and consist of
                               broad statements of purpose and direction. The policies serve as
                               guidelines for reducing the risk associated with humans, including
                               criminal activity, as well as natural hazards. The policies also serve
                               to direct and maximize community emergency preparedness. The
                               Plan explains how the goals and policies will be achieved and
                               implemented. Specific action programs for the Safety Element are
                               contained in the General Plan Implementation Program in Appendix
                               A of the General Plan.
           Related Plans       The plans and programs described below relate to important issues
          and Programs         addressed in Safety Element.
                               California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines
                               The California Environmental Quality Act was adopted by the State
                               legislature in response to a public mandate for a thorough
                               environmental analysis of projects that might adversely affect the
                               environment. The provisions of the law, required procedure, and any
                               subsequent analysis are described in the CEQA Statutes and
                               Guidelines. Safety hazards are recognized as environmental impacts
                               under CEQA. Continued implementation of CEQA will ensure that
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        2                                    December 2002

                                                                         Safety Element
              City officials and the general public have information describing
              assessment and mitigation of potentially significant safety impacts
              associated with private and public development projects.
              Seismic Hazards Mapping Act
              Pursuant to the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act, the State Geologist
              compiles maps identifying seismic hazard zones. Development in
              seismic hazard areas is subject to policies and criteria established by
              the State Mining and Geology Board. Additionally, approval of
              development on a site within a seismic hazard area requires the
              preparation of a geotechnical report and local agency consideration
              of the policies and criteria set forth by the State Mining and Geology
              Board (Public Resources Code Section 2690 et. seq.).
              Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act
              The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act requires the State
              Geologist to identify earthquake fault zones along traces of both
              recently and potentially active major faults. Cities and counties that
              contain such zones must inform the public regarding the location of
              these zones, which are usually one-quarter mile or less in width.
              Proposed development plans within these earthquake fault zones
              must be accompanied by a geotechnical report prepared by a
              qualified geologist describing the likelihood of surface rupture.
              Landslide Hazard Identification Program
              The Landslide Hazard Identification Program requires the State
              Geologist to prepare maps of landslide hazards within urbanizing
              areas. According to the Public Resources Code Section 2687 (a),
              public agencies are encouraged to use these maps for land use
              planning and for decisions regarding building, grading and
              development permits.
              Cobey-Alquist Floodplain Management Act
              The Cobey-Alquist Floodplain Management Act encourages local
              governments to plan, adopt, and enforce land use regulations for
              floodplain management, in order to protect people and property from
              flooding hazards. The Act also identifies requirements which
              jurisdictions must meet in order to receive State financial assistance
              for flood control.
                                                              City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      3                                            General Plan
Safety Element
                               National Flood Insurance Administration Program (NFIP)
                               Orange County participates in the National Flood Insurance Program
                               (NFIP), which is administered by the Federal Emergency
                               Management Agency (FEMA). The NFIP program provides federal
                               flood insurance and federally financed loans for property owners in
                               flood prone areas. To qualify for federal flood insurance, the City
                               must identify flood hazard areas and implement a system of
                               protective controls.
                               County of Orange General Plan Safety Element
                               The County of Orange General Plan Safety Element contains a
                               comprehensive inventory of hazards impacting persons and property
                               in the unincorporated portion of the City's planning area. Specific
                               subjects include: crime, fire, hazardous materials, flooding and
                               aircraft operations.      The Element guides and directs local
                               government decisions regarding safety matters and coordinates
                               regional, state and federal policies and programs.                The
                               unincorporated portion of the Rancho Santa Margarita planning area
                               is subject to the County Safety Element.
                               Hazardous Materials Area Plan
                               The Orange County Fire Authority, which responds to all hazardous
                               or toxic spill incidents in Rancho Santa Margarita has adopted a
                               Hazardous Materials Area Plan. The Plan guides all emergency
                               response procedures for hazardous materials incidents. All facilities
                               and personnel of the County and affected cities are organized into
                               the Plan to effectively respond to hazardous materials emergencies.
                               Hazardous materials and emergency preparedness are discussed in
                               the Safety Element.
                               Hazardous Waste Management Plan
                               The Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan was
                               adopted in January 1989. The Plan provides basic overall policy
                               direction to address current and future hazardous waste management
                               issues. All facilities and personnel of the County and affected cities
                               are organized in the Plan to effectively respond to hazardous
                               materials emergencies.        Hazardous materials and emergency
                               preparedness are both discussed in the Safety Element.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                         4                                  December 2002
                                                                                 Safety Element
                      San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS)
                      The San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS) is located
                      near the southern boundary of Orange County. The federal and state
                      governments have created three levels of emergency zones
                      surrounding nuclear facilities:
                      ? Emergency Planning Zone: Planning efforts within this zone
                          include emergency sheltering and evacuation;
                      ? Public Education Zone: Rancho Santa Margarita is located within
                          this zone. Education programs are focused in this zone to ensure
                          that residents are prepared for any problems associated with the
                          facility; and
                      ? Ingestion Pathway Zone: The purpose of this zone is to avoid the
                          accidental ingestion of deposited radioactive materials by
                          humans and livestock. Southern California Edison, who operates
                          SONGS, will provide notification to all affected jurisdictions
                          within 15 minutes of declaration of any emergency. At that
                          point, the City will follow procedures established in the
                          Emergency Preparedness Plan (described below).
                      City of Rancho Santa Margarita Emergency Preparedness Plan
                      The City has an Emergency Preparedness Plan in place for the
                      community. This plan complies with the Standardized Emergency
                      Management System (SEMS) established by the State Office of
                      Emergency Services. An integral component of this Element is
                      emergency preparedness planning.
                      City of Rancho Santa Margarita Codes
                      The City has adopted the Uniform Building Code, Uniform
                      Mechanical Code, Uniform Fire Code and the National Electrical
                      Code that contain structural requirements for existing and new
                      buildings. The codes are designed to insure structural integrity
                      during seismic and other hazardous events and prevent personal
                      injury, loss of life and substantial property damage. To protect public
                      safety, planned development in Rancho Santa Margarita is subject to
                      these structural codes.
      Relationship to The Safety Element must be consistent with the other General Plan
        Other General elements and all elements of the General Plan are interrelated to a
                      degree. Certain goals and policies of one element may also address
        Plan Elements issues that are the primary subjects of other elements. Table S-1
                      located in the following section identifies related goals and policies
                                                                      City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                5                                          General Plan
Safety Element
                               by General Plan element. The integration of overlapping issues
                               throughout the General Plan elements provides a strong basis for the
                               implementation of plans and programs and achievement of
                               community goals. The Safety Element most closely relates to the
                               Land Use and Circulation Elements.
                               Policies and plans in the Safety Element are designed to protect
                               existing and planned land uses identified in the Land Use Element
                               from public safety hazards. Potential hazards are identified in the
                               Safety Element, and action programs are established to avoid or
                               mitigate public safety impacts from planned development.
                               Concurrently, the Land Use Element contains policies to ensure that
                               environmental conditions, including hazards, are considered in all
                               land use decisions. The distribution of residential and other sensitive
                               land uses on the Land Use Policy Map is designed to avoid areas
                               where hazardous conditions have been identified.
                               Evacuation routes that utilize the circulation system in the City of
                               Rancho Santa Margarita are also described in the Safety Element.
                               The provision of viable evacuation routes within the City is
                               inextricably linked to the existing and planned circulation system
                               within the Circulation Element.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        6                                    December 2002
                                                                                Safety Element
                                                Issues, Goals and Policies
                     Certain natural conditions and human activities in Rancho Santa
                     Margarita create risks to individuals and properties within the
                     community. Excessive risk from such hazards can be reduced or
                     avoided through implementation of the Safety Element.
                     The goals, policies and plan of the Safety Element address four
                     major issues. These major issues include: 1) reducing risk from
                     natural hazardous conditions; 2) reducing risks from hazards
                     associated with human activities; 3) crime prevention; and 4)
                     preparing for emergency situations. Each issue and the related goals
                     and policies are included in this section of the Element.
     Natural Hazards Due to its geographic location in a seismically active region and the
                     location of floodplains and hillsides within the City, Rancho Santa
                     Margarita is subject to several types of natural hazards such as
                     seismic activity, liquefaction, flooding, wildfires, landslides, and
                     erosion. This risk of exposure can be reduced through appropriate
                     land use planning, development engineering, and building
                     construction practices.
                     Goal 1:      Reduce the risk to the community from hazards
                                  related to geologic conditions, seismic activity,
                                  wildfires, structural fires, and flooding.
                     Policy 1.1: Reduce the risk of impacts from geologic and seismic
                                  hazards by applying and enforcing development
                                  standards and building construction codes.
                     Policy 1.2: Protect the community from flooding hazards by
                                  providing and maintaining flood control facilities and
                                  limiting development within the floodplain.
                     Policy 1.3: Reduce the risk of wildfire hazards by working with the
                                  Homeowner Associations, business park associations,
                                  and community foundations to maintain fire retardant
                                  landscaping and buffer zones in areas of high wildfire
                                  risk.
                     Policy 1.4: Reduce the risk of fire to the community by
                                  coordinating with the Orange County Fire Authority.
                                                                     City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                             7                                            General Plan
Safety Element
                               Policy 1.5: Participate in local, regional, state, and federal
                                           programs that educate residents and businesses about
                                           how to protect themselves and their property from
                                           hazards.
                               Policy 1.6: Avoid development of areas that are particularly
                                           susceptible to erosion and sediment loss.
         Human Activity        Rancho Santa Margarita is subject to many of the same human-
                  Hazards      related hazardous conditions that are encountered in other
                               communities. Certain human activities such as flying, use of cars
                               and other gasoline powered vehicles, nuclear power production, use
                               of hazardous or toxic materials, and the use of combustibles expose
                               the population of Rancho Santa Margarita to risk. The risk of
                               exposure to these hazards can be reduced to acceptable levels
                               through proper planning and regulation of human activity.
                               Goal 2:     Protect the community from hazards related to air
                                           pollution, nuclear power production, hazardous
                                           materials and ground transportation.
                               Policy 2.1: To reduce the risk posed by air pollution, work with
                                           responsible federal, state and county agencies to
                                           decrease air pollution emissions occurring within the air
                                           basin.
                               Policy 2.2: Coordinate with local, state, and federal agencies to
                                           reduce the risks related to nuclear power production.
                               Policy 2.3: Cooperate with responsible federal, state, and county
                                           agencies to minimize the risk to the community from
                                           the use and transportation of hazardous materials
                                           through the City.
                               Policy 2.4: Reduce the per capita production of household
                                           hazardous waste in Rancho Santa Margarita in concert
                                           with the County of Orange plans for reducing
                                           hazardous waste.
                               Policy 2.5: Reduce risks and avoid excessive noise levels
                                           associated with transportation activities.
                               Policy 2.6: Participate in local and regional programs that facilitate
                                           the proper disposal of household hazardous waste.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                       8                                    December 2002
                                                                                Safety Element
                Crime  Occasionally, residents, businesses and visitors to Rancho Santa
            Prevention Margarita are exposed to criminal activity. Creating and maintaining
                       a safe environment requires not only traditional policing activities,
                       but also programs that address the source of criminal activity. The
                       risk of exposure to criminal activity can be reduced through proper
                       planning, education methods and regulation of human activity.
                       Additionally, proper design and effective use of the built
                       environment can lead to a reduction in fear and the incidence of
                       crime, improving the quality of life, and helping create a sense of
                       community.
                       Goal 3:      Protect citizens and businesses from criminal
                                    activity.
                       Policy 3.1: Utilize the services of local, state, and federal law
                                    enforcement agencies to reduce the risk of criminal
                                    activity.
                       Policy 3.2: Promote after school programs, volunteer programs,
                                    and Business and Neighborhood Watch programs to
                                    help maintain a safe environment.
                       Policy 3.3: Continue to implement existing programs that promote
                                    a peaceful, non-violent problem solving approach for
                                    conflict resolution within the community.
                       Policy 3.4: Continue to explore new techniques and approaches to
                                    create a community in which the residents feel safe.
                       Policy 3.5: Encourage the development and operation of
                                    community and recreational facilities as a pre-emptive
                                    strategy to reduce youth related crime.
                       Policy 3.6: Promote public awareness of both the responsiveness of
                                    local law enforcement and ways to reduce criminal
                                    activity.
                       Policy 3.7: Apply design techniques aimed at reducing criminal
                                    activity to new development and redevelopment.
                       Policy 3.8: Ensure that adequate street and property lighting is
                                    provided and maintained in order to protect public
                                    health and safety.
                                                                     City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                               9                                          General Plan
Safety Element
              Emergency           Major emergencies occur periodically in all communities. Proper
            Preparedness          preparation for emergencies is an essential action to minimize the
                                  disruption, person injury, and property damage associated with such
                                  events. Preventative measures and preparatory responses before an
                                  emergency occurs will hasten recovery from these emergencies.
                                  Goal 4:          Improve the ability of the City to respond effectively
                                                   to natural and human-caused emergencies.
                                  Policy 4.1: Support the development of local preparedness plans
                                                   and        multi-jurisdictional         cooperation       and
                                                   communication for emergency situations consistent
                                                   with the Standardized Emergency Management System
                                                   (SEMS).
                                  Policy 4.2: Educate City staff, residents, and businesses regarding
                                                   appropriate actions to safeguard life and property
                                                   during and immediately following emergencies.
           Related Goals          The goals and policies described in the Safety Element are related to
             and Policies         and support subjects included within other General Plan elements. In
                                  turn, many goals and policies from the other elements directly or
                                  indirectly support the goals and policies of the Safety Element.
                                  These supporting goals and policies are identified in Table S-1.
                                                      Table S-1
                               Safety Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                                        Safety Element Issue Areas
          General Plan
          Element                                              Human Activity            Emergency
                                    Natural Hazards
                                                                   Hazards              Preparedness
          Land Use              2.7, 5.3, 8.1, 9.2         3.1, 3.3, 10.1, 10.2    9.1, 9.3
          Housing               2.5
          Circulation                                      1.1, 1.3, 2.2, 4.2      2.1
          Economic
                                                                                   2.4
          Development
          Conservation/Open
                                2.1, 4.1, 4.2              6.1
          Space
          Safety
          Noise                                            2.1, 3.1
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                              10                                        December 2002
                                                                               Safety Element
                                                                           Safety Plan
                     As in all communities, human activities and natural conditions occur
                     in Rancho Santa Margarita that have an effect on the quality of life
                     of its residents. Providing an environment where businesses and
                     residents can operate and feel safe, as well as being prepared for
                     emergency situations, is essential. The City can minimize hazards
                     and protect public health and private property through proper
                     prevention and emergency preparedness planning.
                     This section of the Safety Element identifies the City’s approach for
                     reducing potential hazards from natural conditions and human
                     activities. Geologic conditions, seismic activity, flooding, and fires
                     are considered natural hazards. Human activity hazards include air
                     pollution, the use and transport of hazardous materials, ground
                     transportation, and structural fires. The Plan is based on goals and
                     policies identified in the previous section of this Element. The
                     Safety Element Implementation Program contained in Appendix A
                     of the General Plan is an extension of the Safety Plan and contains
                     specific actions that the City will take to protect the welfare of the
                     community.
     Natural Hazards Natural hazards addressed in the Safety Plan include seismic activity,
                     geologic conditions, flooding, and fires.
                     Seismic Hazards
                     The Rancho Santa Margarita planning area is situated in the western
                     part of the Peninsular Ranges province, a region with a characteristic
                     northwest trend to its landforms and to its underlying geologic
                     structures.
                     Earthquake severity is normally classified according to magnitude (a
                     measure of the amount of energy released when a fault ruptures), and
                     seismic intensity (a qualitative estimate of the damage caused by an
                     earthquake at a given location). Because the amount of destruction
                     generally decreases with increasing distance away from the epicenter
                     (the point at the Earth's surface directly above where the earthquake
                     originated), earthquakes are assigned several intensities. The most
                     commonly used seismic intensity scale, called the Modified Mercalli
                     Intensity (MMI) scale, has 12 levels of damage. The higher the
                     number, the greater the damage.
                                                                    City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                            11                                           General Plan

Safety Element
                               The largest earthquake likely to occur on a fault or fault segment is
                               termed the maximum credible (MCE) or characteristic earthquake.
                               Depending on the planned use, lifetime, or importance of a facility, a
                               maximum probable earthquake (MPE) is the earthquake most likely
                               to occur in a specified period of time, (such as 30 to 500 years). In
                               general, the longer the time period between earthquakes on a specific
                               fault segment (recurrence interval), the larger the earthquake.
                               The State of California, under the guidelines of the Alquist-Priolo
                               Earthquake Fault Zoning Act of 1972 classifies faults according to
                               the following criteria:
                                       ?   Active: faults showing proven displacement of the ground
                                           surface within about the last 11,000 years; and
                                       ?   Potentially Active: faults showing evidence of movement
                                           within the last 1.6 million years (modified to 750,000
                                           years by the U.S. Geological Survey).
                               No active faults are known to pass through Rancho Santa Margarita.
                               The closest active faults are the Elsinore-Glen Ivy fault (10.1 miles
                               away), the Chino fault (11.1 miles away), and the Newport
                               Inglewood fault (14.4 miles away). The occurrence of surface
                               rupture on these segments would not be expected to produce fault
                               surface rupture within the City.
                               The two known local faults, Aliso and the Cristianitos, are thought to
                               be inactive. These faults are shown on Figure S-1. An earthquake
                               on either of these two faults would be particularly damaging to
                               residential buildings, particularly those of wood or reinforced
                               masonry construction, and to mobile homes. Other buildings that do
                               not typically perform well in earthquakes are soft-story buildings.
                               These have a story (typically the first floor) that lacks adequate
                               strength or toughness due to too few shear walls. Two types of soft-
                               story buildings are common: 1) buildings with large window
                               openings used for display purposes on the first floor, and 2)
                               buildings housing the garage on the first floor.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        12                                    December 2002
          City of
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                                          Live                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Trabuco Oaks
                                                                 Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C a n y on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AL I S O
                                                     To                                                                                                                    O ak
                                                        ro
                                                                                                                                                                              Can y o
                                      El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                           O'Neill
                                                                          Regional                                                                                                n                                                                                 R ose
                                                                            Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e ek
                                                                                                                             a                                                                                                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                                           Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LT
                                                                                               Via
                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FA U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Trabu c o
                                                                                       Meli                                                                                                                                      n                      Rd
                                                                                            n       da                                                                                                                  n   yo
              Los                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ca
                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd
                          lis
                               os                                                                               Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                 co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A nt                                                                 Ran
                                             Rd                                                                                                                                              a   bu                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                          Tr                                                                                              on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   es                                                                                                                 Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 or                                                                                                                          ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ee
                                                                                                                        FOO                                                                                                                 Fl                                                                                                             Bir
        Santa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d h o llow
                      Ma r g                                                                                               TH                                                                                                                           ida
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 las                 en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pkwy
                               arit                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Av
                                      a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dr
                                                                                                                                      LL                                                                               de
                                              Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pkwy
                                                      wy                                                                                                                                                        da
                                                                                                                                                                                                     e     ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 it a       de l
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Av                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               os Fund
                                                                                                                                                      TR                                                                                  ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                                            AN                                                               M
                                                                                                                                                             SPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                             a                                           or
                               Rd                                                                                                                                                                      S ant                                      e   ad
                 da                                                                                                                                                   IO
                                                                                                                                                                   AT
            in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                                                 RT
        Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ov  e
                                                                                Sa                                                            wy                      N
                                                                                  nt
                                                                                       a                                                  Pk
                                                                                                    Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n               Dr
                                                                                                                                  Av e ntura                                CO            Al                de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                            m
                                                                                                                                              Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                              RR                           Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                                 a                   wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sy
                                                                                                                                                                           ID O R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vi a
                                           wy                                                                                                                                    eranza                    ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                                                                            Es p
                                      Pk                                                                                                                                                              to
                               cia                                              O'Neill                                                                                                        An
                         Ali                                                   Regional                                              ra
                                                                                                                                          s           Em
                                                                                                                                                            p re                                                                                           C ot o                                                                 C any
                                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                 Park                                        nd                    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P aj a ro
                                                                                                                        Ba           Vi       st              sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     on
                                                                                                                      las                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                             yo                                                                                                                                                                                                            Country Club
                                                                                                             de             ro
        City of
                                                OS
                                                                                                                        Ar                                                                                                                              de                                                                                Dr
     Mission Viejo                                                                                            nida
                                                                                                          Ave
                                 CR ISTI A N I T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C aza
                                                                      Vis
                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Vi s t a
                                                                          ta
                                                                                                         wy
                                                                                                    Pk
                           Olympiad
                                                                      r o yo                                                     R
                                                                                             nio                            IDO                                                                                                                         Dr
                                                                   Ar                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sa      n
                                                                                                                        RR                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                           An t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              el
                                                                                                                        CO                                                                                                                                                                                 igu
                                                 FAULT
                                                                                                              TATI
                                                                                                                   ON
                                                                                                          TRA NSPOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Coto de Caza
                                  O'Neill                                                                                                                            Chiquita
                                 Regional                                                                                                                            Canyon
                                   Park                                                                                                                            Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                      Area
                                                                                                           ILL                                                                                                                                     Legend
                                                               y                                            F O OT H                                                                                                                               Earthquake Fault Locations
                                                           Pkw                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Certain Location
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Concealed Location
                                                       io
                                                     An t on                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Approximate Location
                                                                                         Chiquita                                                                                 Oso
                                                                                         Canyon                                                                                           Pk                                                                                        Queried
                                                                                                                                                                                                 wy
                                                                                       Conservation
                                                                                          Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Boundary
                      Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sphere of Influence Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Future Planned Community Boundary
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;
        Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001
        0               2,000                          4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure S-1
 N          1,000                     3,000                        5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Seismic Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                                                                                                                                                     13                                                                                                                                                             General Plan
Safety Element
                               Geologic Hazards Resulting from Seismic Shaking
                               Geologic hazards resulting from seismic shaking include
                               liquefaction, seismically induced settlement and slope failure.
                               Liquefaction is a geologic process that causes various types of
                               ground failure. Three general conditions need to be met for
                               liquefaction to occur: (1) strong ground shaking of relatively long
                               duration; (2) loose, or unconsolidated, recently deposited sediments
                               consisting primarily of silty sand and sand; and (3) water saturated
                               sediments within about 50 feet of the surface. Most of the lowlands
                               in the Santa Margarita area have a high liquefaction potential
                               because shallow ground water, within 50 feet of the ground surface,
                               has been reported historically. Areas of liquefaction in the City are
                               shown on Figure S-2, Geologic Hazards.
                               Under certain conditions, strong ground shaking can cause the
                               densification of soils, resulting in local or regional settlement of the
                               ground surface. During strong shaking, soil grains become more
                               tightly packed due to the collapse of voids and pore spaces, resulting
                               in a reduction of the thickness of the soil column. This type of
                               ground failure typically occurs in loose granular, cohesionless soils,
                               and can occur in either wet or dry conditions. Unconsolidated young
                               alluvial deposits are especially susceptible to this hazard. Artificial
                               fills may also experience seismically induced settlement. Damage to
                               structures typically occurs as a result of local differential settlements.
                               Those portions of the planning area that may be susceptible to
                               seismically induced settlement are generally the floodplains and
                               larger drainages that are underlain by late Quaternary alluvial
                               sediments (similar to the liquefaction-susceptible areas). These
                               include areas in Trabuco Canyon, Live Oak Canyon and especially
                               the flatter areas along these drainages. Also included are the areas
                               along Tijeras Canyon. Sites near the base of natural hills (valley
                               margins) may be particularly vulnerable.
                               Strong ground motions can worsen existing unstable slope
                               conditions, particularly if coupled with saturated ground conditions.
                               Seismically induced landslides can overrun structures, people or
                               property, sever utility lines, and block roads, thereby hindering
                               rescue operations after an earthquake. The area east of Rancho Santa
                               Margarita and some steep slopes within the City would be most
                               vulnerable to seismically induced slope failure, due to the steep
                               terrain and the presence of weak sedimentary rock units. Areas on
                               the gentler slopes may also be susceptible where slopes have been
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        14                                       December 2002
           City of
         Lake Forest                                                                                                                                                     Live                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Trabuco Oaks
                                                             Rd
                                                 To                                                                                                                    O ak                                                                                              C a n y on
                                                    ro
                                                                                                                                                                          Can y o
                                       El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd
                                                                       O'Neill
                                                                      Regional                                                                                                n                                                                                 R ose
                                                                        Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e ek
                                                                                                                         a                                                                                                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                           Via         Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                                              Rd                                                                                                          Trabu c o
                                                                                   Meli                                                                                                                                      n                      Rd
                                                                                        n       da                                                                                                                  n   yo
               Los                                                                                                                                                                                               Ca
                          A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
                           lis
                                os                                                                          Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ch
                                                                                                                                                                                             co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A nt                                                                 Ran
                                            Rd                                                                                                                                           a   bu                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                      Tr                                                                                              on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               es                                                                                                                 Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             or                                                                                                                          ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ee
                                                                                                                    FOO                                                                                                                 Fl                                                                                                             Bir
         Santa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d h o llow
                       Ma r g                                                                                          TH                                                                                                                           ida
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             las                 en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pkwy
                                arit                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Av
                                       a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dr
                                                                                                                                  LL                                                                               de
                                             Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pkwy
                                                  wy                                                                                                                                                        da
                                                                                                                                                                                                 e     ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             it a       de l
                                                                                                                                                                                              Av                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           os Fund
                                                                                                                                                  TR                                                                                  ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ar
                                                                                                                                                        AN                                                               M
                                                                                                                                                         SPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                         a                                           or
                                Rd                                                                                                                                                                 S ant                                      e   ad
                  da                                                                                                                                              IO
                                                                                                                                                               AT
             in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                             RT
         Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ov  e
                                                                            Sa                                                            wy                      N
                                                                              nt
                                                                                   a                                                  Pk
                                                                                                Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n               Dr
                                                                                                                              Av e ntura                                CO            Al                de
                                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                                          Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                          RR                           Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                             a                   wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sy
                                                                                                                                                                       ID O R
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Vi a
                                            wy                                                                                                                               eranza                    ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                                                                        Es p
                                       Pk                                                                                                                                                         to
                                cia                                         O'Neill                                                                                                        An
                          Ali                                              Regional                                              ra
                                                                                                                                      s           Em
                                                                                                                                                        p re                                                                                           C ot o                                                                 C any
                                                                                                                             e
                                                                             Park                                        nd                    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P aj a ro
                                                                                                                    Ba           Vi       st              sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 on
                                                                                                                  las                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                         yo                                                                                                                                                                                                            Country Club
                                                                                                         de             ro
         City of                                                                                                    Ar                                                                                                                              de                                                                                Dr
      Mission Viejo                                                                                       nida
                                                                                                      Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C aza
                                                                  Vis
                                Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Vi s t a
                                                                      ta
                                                                                                     wy
                                                                                                Pk
                            Olympiad
                                                                  r o yo                                                     R
                                                                                         nio                            IDO                                                                                                                         Dr
                                                               Ar                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sa      n
                                                                                                                    RR                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                       An t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          el
                                                                                                                    CO                                                                                                                                                                                 igu
                                                                                                          TATI
                                                                                                               ON
                                                                                                      TRA NSPOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Coto de Caza
                                   O'Neill                                                                                                                       Chiquita
                                  Regional                                                                                                                       Canyon
                                    Park                                                                                                                       Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                  Area
                                                                                                       ILL
                                                           y                                            F O OT H
                                                       Pkw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Legend
                                                   io
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Landslide
                                                 An t on
                                                                                     Chiquita                                                                                 Oso
                                                                                     Canyon                                                                                           Pk
                                                                                   Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                                             wy                                                                                                Liquefaction
                                                                                      Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                       Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sphere of Influence Boundary
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;
 Sources:CBA,  Inc.,County
          Orange     2001 Land Base, 2001;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Future Planned Community Boundary
          Earth Consultants International, 2001
         0               2,000                     4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure S-2
  N          1,000
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
                                       3,000                   5,000 Feet
                                                                                                                                                                         21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Geologic Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     January 2002
Preliminary Draft General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City of Rancho Santa Margarita
 December 2002                                                                                                                                                                          15                                                                                                                                                   General Plan
Safety Element
                               undercut by streams or roadcuts. Figure S-2 shows areas mapped by
                               the State as having a potential for seismically-induced landsliding.
                               A combination of geologic conditions leads to landslide
                               vulnerability. The hilly and mountainous areas within the planning
                               area are underlain by soft sedimentary bedrock. Numerous landslides
                               have been mapped in the eastern half of the Santa Margarita area,
                               these sediments have the potential to fail (by landsliding) during an
                               earthquake. Sections of Trabuco Canyon Road or Live Oak Canyon
                               Road could be blocked by fallen rock debris immediately following
                               an earthquake, or worse, could be destroyed by landsliding. This
                               would hinder rescue and evacuation operations. Earthquake induced
                               landslides could also impact developments adjacent to the mountain
                               front.
                               Geologic Hazards
                               Rancho Santa Margarita lies primarily on a long narrow older river
                               terrace called the Plano Trabuco. The land rises and steepens
                               eastward while, across Trabuco Creek to the north and Tijeras Creek
                               to the south, the land becomes more rolling and underlain by less
                               stable geologic materials. Elevations range from about 350 feet
                               above mean sea level in the valleys to about 2,400 feet at the highest
                               ridgeline north of the City. Most of the City sits on competent
                               alluvial materials that are less prone to natural hazards than the
                               perimeter portions of the City. Potential geologic hazards in the
                               planning area include landslides, expansive soils, subsidence and
                               collapsible soils.
                               The sedimentary bedrock units that underlie the hillside areas appear
                               to be grossly stable in their natural conditions, as remarkably few
                               landslides have been mapped in the planning area. However, an
                               earthquake on a nearby seismic source could trigger landslides. The
                               stability of these slopes can also be negatively impacted by
                               development.
                               Most of the planning area is underlain by sedimentary units (both
                               bedrock and alluvium) that are composed primarily of granular soils
                               (silty sand, sand, and gravel).
                               Such units are typically in the
                               low to moderately-low range
                               for     expansion      potential.
                               However, every sedimentary
                               unit in the area contains layers
                               of fine-grained soils that are
                               typically in the moderate to
                               highly expansive range. The
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        16                                    December 2002
                                                                      Safety Element
              areas most susceptible to expansive soils are located along the
              western boundary of the City. Potentially expansive layers may be
              exposed at the surface by erosion or may be uncovered by grading
              cuts made for developments.
              Ground subsidence is the gradual settling or sinking of the ground
              surface with little or no horizontal movement. Most ground
              subsidence is man-induced. No regional subsidence as a result of
              either groundwater pumping or oil extraction has been reported.
              However, thick alluvial deposits may be susceptible to subsidence
              should rapid groundwater withdrawal occur beneath these areas in
              response to population increase. These areas are primarily located in
              designated open spaces in the City, however, development in the
              northeastern portion of the City and adjacent to Antonio Parkway
              may be susceptible to this geologic hazard.
                              Collapse occurs when saturated, collapsible soils lose
                              cementation, resulting in substantial and rapid
                              settlement under relatively low loads. The alluvial
                              deposits in the valley and canyon floors are
                              susceptible to collapse.
                              The City will enact programs to reduce geologic
                              hazards to protect public safety. To minimize
                              hazards from earthquakes and other geologic hazards,
                              the most recent state seismic guidelines and
                              guidelines for other geologic hazards will be
                              implemented for structural design. During the review
                              of development proposals involving slopes, grading,
                              unstable soils and other hazardous conditions,
                              surveys of soil and geologic conditions by a state-
                              licensed engineering geologist will be required.
                              Based on the results of the survey, design measures
                              will be incorporated into projects to minimize
                              geologic hazards.
              Flood Hazards
              The unpredictable seasonal range in rainfall that is typical of coastal
              southern California, coupled with geographic and geologic
              conditions, makes Orange County extremely vulnerable to flooding
              during the winter storm season.
              Three main north to south draining stream systems drain the
              planning area. Trabuco Creek and Tijeras Canyon drain the northern
              and western areas of the City while Dove Canyon drains the
              southeastern side.
                                                           City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      17                                        General Plan
Safety Element
                               The City participates in the
                               National      Flood      Insurance
                               Program (NFIP). The last Flood
                               Insurance Study was completed in
                               Rancho Santa Margarita in
                               September 1999. Flood Insurance
                               Rate Maps (FIRMs), prepared by
                               the       Federal      Emergency
                               Management Agency (FEMA),
                               showing potential flood zones are
                               available for areas within the
                               municipal limits. Due to the
                               recent incorporation date of the
                               City, these maps are labeled as
                               areas of unincorporated Orange
                               County. The FEMA 100-year and
                               500-year map for the City is
                               shown on Figure S-3.           This
                               outlines the area of potential flooding within Rancho Santa
                               Margarita.
                               As can be seen from Figure S-3, the only major potential flooding
                               problems for the City are located along the Arroyo Trabuco Creek
                               and Tijeras Canyon Creek areas. Along the Trabuco Creek a dense
                               growth of trees and brush are located in the main channel, which
                               may raise flood levels considerably. If flooding were to occur, it
                               would be difficult to predict and plan for because rainfall in the area
                               is extremely variable. Floods that would impact the City would be
                               typically of short duration, with high peak volumes and high
                               velocity. This is due to the arid to semi-arid nature of the area.
                               When a major storm moves in, water collects rapidly and runs off
                               quickly due to the rapid descent of the mountains into Trabuco
                               Creek, Tijeras and Dove Canyon. Consequently, resultant flows are
                               of the flash-flood type, generally having sharp peaks and short
                               durations. Although some severe floods have impacted the area in
                               the past, flooding damage in this area has generally been lower than
                               in other areas of Orange County because of its relatively
                               undeveloped state in the upper watershed areas. No homes or
                               structures are located within the 100-year or 500-year flood zones
                               within the City.
                               No major dam is located upstream from the planning area. However,
                               several large detention basins and reservoirs are located near the
                               City. The Upper Oso reservoir is located to the northwest of the City
                               and Lake Mission Viejo is located to the southwest. Other, smaller
                               flood control improvements, such as canals, culverts, levees, and
                               retention basins may crack and suffer some structural damage during
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                       18                                    December 2002
          City of
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                                     Live                                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                Trabuco Oaks
                                                            Rd
                                                To                                                                                                                    O ak                                                                                            C a n y on
                                                   ro
                                                                                                                                                                         Can y o
                                      El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                                      O'Neill
                                                                     Regional                                                                                                n                                                                               R ose
                                                                       Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e ek
                                                                                                                        a                                                                                                                                                                                         Cr
                                                                                          Via         Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                                             Rd                                                                                                        Trabu c o
                                                                                  Meli                                                                                                                                    n                      Rd
                                                                                       n       da                                                                                                                n   yo
              Los                                                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rd
                          lis
                               os                                                                          Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ch
                                                                                                                                                                                          co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A nt                                                                 Ran
                                           Rd                                                                                                                                         a   bu                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                   Tr                                                                                              on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            es                                                                                                                 Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          or                                                                                                                          ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ee
                                                                                                                   FOO                                                                                                               Fl                                                                                                             Bir
        Santa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d h o llow
                      Ma r g                                                                                          TH                                                                                                                         ida
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          las                 en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pkwy
                               arit                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Av
                                      a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dr
                                                                                                                                 LL                                                                             de
                                            Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pkwy
                                                 wy                                                                                                                                                      da
                                                                                                                                                                                              e     ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          it a       de l
                                                                                                                                                                                           Av                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        os Fund
                                                                                                                                                 TR                                                                                ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ar
                                                                                                                                                       AN                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                        SPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                      a                                           or
                               Rd                                                                                                                                                               S ant                                      e   ad
                 da                                                                                                                                              IO
                                                                                                                                                              AT
            in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                D
                                                                                                                                                            RT
        Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ov  e
                                                                           Sa                                                            wy                      N
                                                                             nt
                                                                                  a                                                  Pk
                                                                                               Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n               Dr
                                                                                                                             Av e ntura                                CO          Al                de
                                                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                                         Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                         RR                         Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                          a                   wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sy
                                                                                                                                                                      ID O R
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vi a
                                           wy                                                                                                                            peranza                    ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                o
                               cia
                                      Pk
                                                                           O'Neill                                                                                    Es                       to
                         Ali                                                                                                         s           Em                                     An
                                                                          Regional                                              ra
                                                                                                                                                       p re                                                                                         C ot o                                                                 C any
                                                                                                                            e
                                                                            Park                                        nd                    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P aj a ro
                                                                                                                   Ba           Vi       st              sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              on
                                                                                                                 las                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                        yo                                                                                                                                                                                                          Country Club
                                                                                                        de             ro
        City of                                                                                                    Ar                                                                                                                            de                                                                                Dr
     Mission Viejo                                                                                       nida
                                                                                                     Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C aza
                                                                 Vis
                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Vi s t a
                                                                     ta
                                                                                                    wy
                                                                                               Pk
                           Olympiad
                                                                 r o yo                                                     R
                                                                                        nio                            IDO                                                                                                                       Dr
                                                              Ar                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sa      n
                                                                                                                   RR                                                                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                      An t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       el
                                                                                                                   CO                                                                                                                                                                               igu
                                                                                                         TATI
                                                                                                              ON
                                                                                                     TRA NSPOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Coto de Caza
                                  O'Neill                                                                                                                       Chiquita
                                 Regional                                                                                                                       Canyon
                                   Park                                                                                                                       Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                 Area
                                                                                                      ILL
                                                          y                                            F O OT H
                                                      Pkw
                                                  io                                                                                                                                                                                                         Legend
                                                An t on
                                                                                    Chiquita                                                                                 Oso
                                                                                                                                                                                   Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100 - Year Flood
                                                                                    Canyon                                                                                                wy
                                                                                  Conservation
                                                                                     Area                                                                                                                                                                                                    500 - Year Flood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City Boundary
                      Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sphere of Influence Boundary
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Future Planned Community Boundary
        Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001
        0               2,000                     4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure S-3
 N          1,000                     3,000                   5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Flood Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                                                                                                                                                19                                                                                                                                                           General Plan
Safety Element
                               an earthquake, especially in areas prone to ground failure. These
                               facilities could pose an inundation hazard if they contain water at the
                               time of the seismic event, or if they are not repaired soon after an
                               earthquake and prior to the next winter storm season.
                               Seismically induced inundation can also occur if strong ground
                               shaking causes structural damage to aboveground water tanks.
                               Several reservoir sites are within the planning area. Most of these are
                               owned and operated by either the Trabuco Canyon or Santa
                               Margarita Water Districts.
                               The Orange County Flood Control District (OCFCD) is the agency
                               responsible for the regional drainage facilities while the City controls
                               local facilities. The City has a Drainage Master Plan that addresses
                               the stormdrain system that serves the community. Given the highly
                               developed nature of the City, no more planned upgrades are included
                               in the Drainage Master Plan.
                               The flood hazard areas in Rancho Santa Margarita are within open
                               space lands in the City. These areas remain open space, as outlined
                               in the Land Use Element. The City will monitor the local drainage
                               system and will work with the OCFCD to identify needed
                               improvements for new development projects.
                               Fire Hazards
                               Rancho Santa Margarita is subject to both wild and urban fires.
                               Weather, topography and vegetation type all affect the intensity of
                               fires. Given the large portion of land that remains as open space
                               including rugged topography with highly flammable native
                               vegetation, wildland fires are a significant risk. Figure S-4 shows
                               the various levels of potential fire risk in the City. Extreme fire
                               severity zones are located in the northwest, west and northeast areas
                               of the City.
                               Areas posing a significant risk
                               to the City are subject to the
                               Public       Resources      Code,
                               Sections 4291-4299, which
                               require property owners to
                               conduct maintenance to reduce
                               the fire danger. The Orange
                               County Fire Authority (OCFA)
                               has responsibility for wildfire
                               suppression on all private land in Rancho Santa Margarita. Any
                               proposed development plans are reviewed by the OCFA to determine
                               if fuel modification plans or other preventative measures are
                               required. The Planned Communities that are now incorporated in the
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        20                                    December 2002
          City of
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                                      Live                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Trabuco Oaks
                                                             Rd
                                                To                                                                                                                     O ak                                                                                              C a n y on
                                                   ro
                                                                                                                                                                           Can y o
                                      El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rd
                                                                       O'Neill
                                                                      Regional                                                                                                n                                                                                 R ose
                                                                        Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e ek
                                                                                                                         a                                                                                                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                           Via         Al t i s i m
                                                                                                                                                                              Rd                                                                                                          Trabu c o
                                                                                   Meli                                                                                                                                      n                      Rd
                                                                                        n       da                                                                                                                  n   yo
              Los                                                                                                                                                                                                Ca
                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rd
                          lis
                               os                                                                           Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ch
                                                                                                                                                                                             co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A nt                                                                 Ran
                                           Rd                                                                                                                                            a   bu                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                      Tr                                                                                              on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               es                                                                                                                 Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             or                                                                                                                          ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ee
                                                                                                                    FOO                                                                                                                 Fl                                                                                                             Bir
        Santa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d h o llow
                      Ma r g                                                                                           TH                                                                                                                           ida
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             las                 en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pkwy
                               arit                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Av
                                      a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dr
                                                                                                                                  LL                                                                               de
                                            Pk                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pkwy
                                                 wy                                                                                                                                                         da
                                                                                                                                                                                                 e     ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             it a       de l
                                                                                                                                                                                              Av                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           os Fund
                                                                                                                                                  TR                                                                                  ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ar
                                                                                                                                                        AN                                                               M
                                                                                                                                                         SPO
                               Rd                                                                                                                                                                       a nta                                        or
                                                                                                                                                                                                   S                                          e   ad
                 da                                                                                                                                               IO
                                                                                                                                                               AT
            in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                             RT
        Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ov  e
                                                                            Sa                                                            wy                      N
                                                                              nt
                                                                                   a                                                  Pk
                                                                                                Marg a r i t a                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n               Dr
                                                                                                                              Av e ntura                                 CO           Al                de
                                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                                          Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                          ID O R
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cam o re
                                                                                                                                                                                             a                   wy
                                                                                                                                                                       RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sy
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Vi a
                                                                                                                                                                            peranza
                                                                                                                                                                         Es
                                           wy                                                                                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                   o
                                      Pk                                                                                                                                                          to
                               cia                                          O'Neill                                                                                                        An
                         Ali                                               Regional                                              ra
                                                                                                                                      s           Em
                                                                                                                                                        p re                                                                                           C ot o                                                                 C any
                                                                                                                             e
                                                                             Park                                        nd                    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P aj a ro
                                                                                                                    Ba           Vi       st              sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 on
                                                                                                                  las                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                         yo                                                                                                                                                                                                            Country Club
                                                                                                                        ro
        City of
                                                                                                         de
                                                                                                                    Ar                                                                                                                              de                                                                                Dr
     Mission Viejo                                                                                        nida
                                                                                                      Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C aza
                                                                  Vis
                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Vi s t a
                                                                      ta
                                                                                                     wy
                                                                                                Pk
                           Olympiad
                                                                  r o yo                                                     R
                                                                                         nio                            IDO                                                                                                                         Dr
                                                               Ar                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sa      n
                                                                                                                    RR                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                       An t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          el
                                                                                                                    CO                                                                                                                                                                                 igu
                                                                                                          TATI
                                                                                                               ON
                                                                                                      TRA NSPOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Coto de Caza
                                  O'Neill                                                                                                                        Chiquita
                                 Regional                                                                                                                        Canyon
                                   Park                                                                                                                        Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                  Area
                                                                                                       ILL
                                                           y                                            F O OT H                                                                                                                                                Legend
                                                       Pkw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Very High
                                                   io                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           High
                                                An t o n
                                                                                     Chiquita                                                                                 Oso
                                                                                                                                                                                      Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Very Low
                                                                                     Canyon                                                                                                  wy
                                                                                   Conservation
                                                                                      Area                                                                                                                                                                                                      None
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City Boundary
                      Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sphere of Influence Boundary
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Future Planned Community Boundary
        Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2001
        0               2,000                      4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure S-4
 N          1,000                     3,000                    5,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                                           Wildfire Hazard Areas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                                                                                                                                                                 21                                                                                                                                                             General Plan
Safety Element
                               City included fuel modification requirements in the Feature and
                               Development Plans. The fire flow rates from the Uniform Fire Code
                               are also implemented by the OCFA and reviewed for any new
                               development.
                               The City will continue to reduce the potential for dangerous fires by
                               coordinating with the OCFA to implement fire hazard education, fire
                               protection and fuel modification programs. The current Uniform
                               Fire Code will be used to reduce structural fire hazards. In addition,
                               the City will work closely with the local water districts and OCFA to
                               ensure that water pressure is adequate for fire fighting purposes.
         Human Activity        Human activity hazards addressed in the Safety Plan include air
                  Hazards      pollution, nuclear power production, hazardous materials and ground
                               transportation.
                               Air Pollution
                               As discussed in the Conservation/Open Space Element, Rancho
                               Santa Margarita is located within the South Coast Air Basin, a non-
                               attainment area for federal and state air quality standards for ozone
                               and state standards for particulate matter less than ten microns in
                               diameter (PM10). The City is split between two South Coast Air
                               Quality Management District (SCAQMD) Source Receptor Areas:
                               #19 - Saddleback Valley Air Monitoring Subregion and #21
                               Capistrano Valley Air Monitoring Subregion. However, no active
                               monitoring station is located in the Capistrano Valley subregion.
                               Motor vehicles are the major source of regional emissions
                               throughout the air basin and within Rancho Santa Margarita. No
                               major point source emitters, such as heavy industrial uses, are
                               located within the City. The City will work with SCAQMD and the
                               most recent Air Quality Management Plan to improve the regional
                               transportation system and regional air quality.
                               Nuclear Power Production
                               The San Onofre Nuclear Generating System (SONGS) is located on
                               the Camp Pendleton U.S. Marine Corps Base in San Diego County,
                               approximately five miles south of San Clemente. The SONGS
                               operations are regulated by FEMA and the California Office of
                               Emergency Services (OES).            An Interjurisdictional Planning
                               Committee (IPC), comprised of several local jurisdictions, was
                               established to coordinate emergency response plans. The City is
                               located within the SONGS Public Education Zone. Education
                               programs coordinated by the State and Southern California Edison
                               are focused on in this zone to ensure that residents are prepared for
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                       22                                     December 2002
                                                                       Safety Element
              any problems associated with the facility. The City will continue to
              implement measures related to SONGS in its Emergency
              Preparedness Plan.
              Hazardous Materials
              Hazardous materials are used in Rancho Santa Margarita for a
              variety of purposes, including service industries, small businesses,
              schools and households. Many chemicals used in household
              cleaning, construction, dry cleaning, film processing, landscaping,
              and automotive maintenance and repair are considered hazardous.
              Accidents can occur in the production, use, transport and disposal of
              hazardous waste.
              In order to effectively manage hazardous materials and waste, the
              City implements applicable portions of both the Orange County
              Hazardous Materials Area Plan and the Orange County Hazardous
              Waste Management Plan. Both the federal government and the State
              of California require all businesses that handle more than a specified
              amount of hazardous materials or extremely hazardous materials,
              termed a reporting quantity, to submit a business plan to the local
              Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA). The CUPA with
              responsibility for the City of Rancho Santa Margarita is the Orange
              County Environmental Health Department. These business plans are
              submitted to the CUPA annually.
              The City participates in a Household Hazardous Waste (HHW)
              collection program set up by the County of Orange in accordance
              with the California Integrated Solid Waste Management Act of 1989.
              HHW drop-off facilities are located throughout the county. The City
              also participates in a recycling program operated under private sector
              contract.
              The City will work to minimize accident and health risk from
              hazardous materials with the following approaches:
                      ?   Cooperate with federal, state, and county agencies to
                          effectively regulate the management of hazardous
                          materials and hazardous waste;
                      ?   Cooperate with the County of Orange to implement the
                          applicable portions of the County Hazardous Waste
                          Management Plan and the Hazardous Materials Area
                          Plan;
                                                            City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                      23                                         General Plan
Safety Element
                                       ?   Identify roadway transportation routes for conveyance of
                                           hazardous materials (the City does not exercise
                                           jurisdiction over transportation of freight along railroad
                                           right-of-way);
                                       ?   Implement the emergency response plan for accidents
                                           involving hazardous materials; and
                                       ?   Cooperate with the Certified Unified Program Agency
                                           (CUPA) for Rancho Santa Margarita (the Orange County
                                           Environmental Health Department) and the Orange
                                           County Fire Authority to administer risk management
                                           plans for businesses within the City.
                               Ground Transportation
                               Rancho Santa Margarita is traversed by a variety of transportation
                               systems including the Foothill Transportation Corridor, Antonio
                               Parkway, Oso Parkway and Santa Margarita Parkway. The Orange
                               County Transportation Authority (OCTA) transit system provides
                               bus service. The preponderance of ground transportation systems is
                               an asset to local economic development but poses several potential
                               hazards including automobile accidents and pedestrian and bicycling
                               accidents. The risk of accidents can be reduced by properly
                               maintaining the transportation infrastructure and correcting
                               deficiencies. The City will work with the Orange County Sheriff’s
                               Department and the California Highway Patrol to monitor the ground
                               transportation system for hazardous conditions. When safety
                               problems are identified, the City will request the appropriate agency
                               (i.e. Caltrans, OCTA or the City Public Works Department) to take
                               corrective measures.
      Crime Prevention         Criminal activity in Rancho Santa Margarita is lower than in most
                               parts of Orange County. Protecting citizens and businesses from
                               criminal activity is a priority in Rancho Santa Margarita. Police
                               protection is provided by the Orange County Sheriff’s Department.
                               A Police Services Department is located at City Hall and provides a
                               variety of community policing programs, including Community
                               Oriented Policing and youth programs. The City will ensure that
                               contracted staffing levels correspond to the City population and
                               needs, and will monitor mutual aid agreements between the Orange
                               County Sheriff’s Department and the police departments of
                               surrounding jurisdictions. Crime prevention programs will continue
                               to be implemented through Police Services for both residential and
                               business communities. When property owners present development
                               proposals, the City will encourage the use of defensible space and
                               lighting concepts to deter on-site crime. Crime control techniques
                               can also be built into new development projects.
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                        24                                   December 2002

                                                                                  Safety Element
            Emergency  Local Emergency Preparedness Plans serve as extensions of the
          Preparedness California Emergency Plan and the Emergency Resource
                       Management Plan. The purpose of the Emergency Preparedness
                       Plan is to respond to emergency situations with a coordinated system
                       of emergency service providers and facilities.
                       The City will maintain its emergency preparedness plan. The plan
                       identifies resources available for emergency response and establishes
                       plans for response to emergency situations and disasters including
                       earthquakes, floods, hazardous materials release, nuclear power plant
                       emergency, wildland fire and aircraft accident.
                       To support the Emergency Preparedness Plan, the City will support a
                       high level of multi-jurisdictional cooperation and communication for
                       emergency planning and response management. Private individuals
                       and organizations will be solicited to enhance local communication
                       and response with cellular phones, ham radios, AM/FM radio and
                       cable television. Effective emergency response also requires vital
                       facilities such as hospitals, fire stations, communication centers and
                       schools to be functional and operational after a disaster. In addition,
                       the City has identified several routes to assist residents leaving the
                       City in the event an evacuation of all or part of the City is required.
                       Emergency response locations and evacuation routes are illustrated
                       on Figure S-5.
                       Educating residents and businesses about potential disasters and the
                       Emergency Preparedness Plan can increase the effectiveness of
                       response efforts. An educated public will know how to prevent
                       injury and property damage during and after emergency episodes and
                       also know how to find help. The City will work to educate residents
                       and businesses about appropriate actions to safeguard life and
                       property during and after emergencies. Education about emergency
                       preparedness can occur through distribution of brochures,
                       presentations to civic groups and homeowners associations and
                       instruction in local schools.
                                                                       City of Rancho Santa Margarita
December 2002                               25                                           General Plan
          City of
        Lake Forest                                                                                                                                                                      Live                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Trabuco Oaks
                                                                   Rd
                                                  To                                                                                                                                  O ak                                                                                                     C a n y on
                                                     ro
                                                                                                                                                                                           Can y o
                                      El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                                                                             O'Neill
                                                                            Regional                                                                                                                                                                                                  R ose
   To
                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                              Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
 North
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                          a                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cr
                                                                                                                                        im
 County                                                                                         R      Via A l t i s
                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd         To                                                                                                         Trabu c o
                                                                                  Melinda                                                                                                            Trabuco                                    on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
              Los                                                                                          S                                                                                         Canyon                          C   an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            y
                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                          lis
                               os                                                                                  Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                              o                                                                                       A nt                                                                       Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c
                                           Rd                                                                                                                                                                bu                                                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Robinson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          on i o
                                                                                                                                                                                                         a                                                                                                                                                                                    Broo
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Tr                                                           or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S                                                                                 ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fl                                                                                                                      Bir
        Santa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Trabuco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d Dr
                                                                                                                            F OO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d h o llow
                      Ma r g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ida
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     las               en                                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pkwy
                               arit                                                                                             TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Av
                                      a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dr
                                                                                                                                              I                                                                                           de                                          Pkwy
                                            Pk                                                                                                LL
                                                   wy                                                                                                                                                                           da
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              de l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       en                                          it a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Av                                      ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Plano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 os Fund
                                                                                                                                                              TR                                                                                     ar                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M                        S
                                                                                                                                                                    AN             R                                                                                                                                   WD
                                                                                                                                                                                 R R RRR                                             a                                     or
                               Rd                                                                                                                                                                                      S ant                          S                 ad
                                                                                                                                                                          SPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                 da
                                                                                                                                                                                 IO
            in                                                                                                                                                                                                              FCH                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                              AT
        Mel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ov
                                                                                                                                                                            RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FCC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L
                                                                                                                                                       wy                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                  Sant
                                                                                         a                                                         Pk                            N
                                                                                                      Marg a r i t a                                                                         R                                                                                                                                                                    Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                              R                                                                                                                                                                        nyo
                                                                                                                                                                            FS                                                                                                                                                                                               n               Dr
                                                                                                                                              Av e ntura                                              Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                           ID O R
                                                                                                                                                                                                      R ma                  de
                                                                                                                                                                           CCH
                                                                                                                                                            Ave n i d a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cam o re
                                                                                                               R                                                                                                                         wy
                                                                                                                                                                                         RR peranza                                                                                                                                                  Sy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Vi a
                                                                                                                                                                                      C O Es
                                           wy                                                                                                                                                                              ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       o
                                      Pk                                                                                                                            s
                               cia                                                O'Neill                                                                   ra                                                        to
                         Ali                                                                                                                           de           Em                                       An
                                                                                 Regional                                                         an
 To                                                                                                                                                                       p re                                                                                               C ot o                                                                       C any
                                                                                                                                         B
                                                                                   Park                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P aj a ro
                                                                                                                                                        st
 I-5
                                                                                                                                        s
                                                                                                                                    la            Vi                        sa
                                                                                                                                                                                 S                                                                                                                                                                           on
                                                                                                                          de                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dove Canyon
                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                        yo                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Country Club
                                                                                                                                        ro
        City of                                                                                                                  Ar                                                                                                                                       de                                                                                      Dr
                                                                                                               Avenida                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bell Cany
     Mission Viejo                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C aza                                                                                                                                            on
                                                                        Vis
                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vi s t a
                                                                            ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fir e R oa d
                                                                                                           wy                    R
                                                                                                      Pk
                           Olympiad
                                                                        r o yo                                                                    R
                                                                                               nio                                           IDO                                                                                                                          Dr
                                                                    Ar                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sa      n                    M
                                                                                             An t o                                      RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  el
                                                                                                                                        CO                                                                                                                                                                                     igu
                                                                                                                               ION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        To
                                                                                                                           RTAT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ortega
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Coto de Caza
                                  O'Neill                                                                           TRA NSPO                                                       Chiquita
                                 Regional                                                                                                                                          Canyon
                                   Park                                                                                                                                          Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                                    Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Legend
                                                                                                                                  ILL
                                                                                                                         F O OT H
                                                                           To
                                                                         South                                                                                                                                                   CCH Current City Hall              City Boundary
                                                                         County                                                                                                                                                  FCH Future City Hall               Sphere of Influence Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FCC Future Community
                                                               y
                                                        Pkw                                                                                                                                                                                                         Future Planned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Center
 To                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FS Fire Station                   Community Boundary
 I-5
                                                An t o n i o
                                                                                           Chiquita                                                                                           Oso
                                                                                           Canyon                                                                                                      Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                             wy                   L Library                         Evacuation Routes
                                                                                         Conservation
                                                                                            Area                                                                                                                                  S School                 Note: Sheriff station is located
                      Oso Pkwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R Religious/                   in Aliso Viejo.
                              WD                                                                                                                                                                                                     Religious School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WD Water District Offices
Sources: Orange County Land Base, 2001;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure S-5
                                                                                                                                                                                       Emergency Response Locations
        Cotton/Bridges/Associates, 2002
        0               2,000                         4,000
 N          1,000                     3,000                         5,000 Feet                                                                                                                and Evacuation Routes
City of Rancho Santa Margarita
General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                  26                                                                                                                                                                                               December 2002
