GENERAL FLAN
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
UPDATE ADOPTION DATE: March 15, 2000
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
ADOPTED BY CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION NO. 2000-21 MARCH 15, 2000
CITY COUNCIL
Frank Hall, Mayor Hal Clark, Mayor Pro Tem Barbara Carmichael Herb Higgins Harvey Sullivan
PLANNING COMMISSION
David Henderson, Chairperson Bill Gardner, Vice Chairperson Wayne Hinson Paul Ryan James M. Wilson
STAFF
Gerald F. Johnson, City Manager James E. Daniels, Community Development Director Steve King, Senior Planner
TABLE OFCONTENTS:
TITLE
1.0 INTRODUCTION TO THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
1.1	History of the Circulation Element
1.2	Purpose of the Circulation Element
1.3	Scope and Format of Element
2.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
2.1	Circulation System Issues and Problems Commuter Traffic
Safety Design Coordination Gateway Specific Plan Southeast Quadrant Norco Hills (Remaining)
Alternative Modes of Transportation Maintenance and Improvement
2.2	Safe, Convenient, and Efficient Transportation System (Goals and Policies)
2.3	Alternative Transportation Modes (Goals and Policies)
2.4	Separation of Traffic (Goals and Policies)
2.5	Parking
(Goals and Policies)
3.0 THE CIRCULATION PLAN
3.1	Street and Trail Network
3.1.1	Street Circulation System
3.1.2	Truck Routes
3.1.3	Pedestrian/Equestrian Trail Circulation System
3.1.4	Traffic Level of Service Standards
3.1.5	Future Travel Demand
3.1.6	Revised Circulation Element - Year 2010
3.2	Public Transportation Network
3.3	Relationship to Other Jurisdictions/Plans
3.3.1	Riverside County
3.3.2	City of Corona
3.3.3	City of Riverside
3.3.4	Riverside County Transportation Commission
3.4	Infrastructure Network
3.4.1	Water System
3.4.2	Sewage System
3.4.3	Storm Drain
PAGE NUMBER
1
1
2
2
3
3
3
7
7
8
10
10
10
11
13
14
15
16 17 17
25
26
30
31 36
39
40 40
42
43
44
45
45
46
47
TITLE (cont.)
PAGE NUMBER (cont.)
4.0 IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES	48
4.1	Master Plan of Streets	48
	4.1.1 City/Regional Circulation	48
	4.1.2 Transportation System Management	48
	4.1.3 Transportation Demand Management	48
4.2	Public Transportation Plan	49
	4.2.1 Bus Service	49
4.3	Non-motorized Transportation	49
	4.3.1 Pedestrian/Equestrian Circulation	49
	4.3.2 Bicycle Facilities	50
4.4	Parking	50
	Off-street Requirements	50
4.5	Truck Routes	50
	4.5.1 Truck Route Designation	50
4.6	Infrastructure	51
	4.6.1 Water System	51
	4.6.2 Sewage System	51
	4.6.3 Storm Drain System	51
LIST OF EXHIBITS:
EXHIBIT	PAGE NUMBER
1	Existing Roadway Classification	19
2	Existing (1998) ADT Volumes	20
3	Existing Equestrian Trail System	28
4	Estimated 2010 Build-Out Average Daily Traffic Volumes	34
5	Typical Cross-sections of Roadways	37
LIST OF TABLES:
TABLE		PAGE NUMBER
1	Existing Arterial Segment Average Daily Traffic Volumes and Levels of Service	5
2	Existing Level of Service for Selected Intersections	6
3	Levels of Service for Signalized Intersections	32
4	Proposed Typical Cross-Sections	36
INTRODUCTION TO THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
The City of Norco was incorporated to preserve an equestrian/animal-keeping lifestyle. As such the equestrian circulation system is as extensive as the road circulation and all policies of the Circulation Element need to adhere to, and promote that lifestyle. Reliance on the private automobile, for not only commuting to work but for shopping, educational, and social activities, is a necessity for Norco residents as well as for all Southern California residents. The unmatched freedom provided by the automobile and its associated system of freeways and arterial streets provides the expectation that timely and convenient access can be made of the far ranging assets of Southern California, ranging from mountain-skiing to ocean-surfing, and the amenities of a world-class city all in the same day. As a rural community designed around a circulation system of equestrian trails, the City of Norco provides a unique opportunity within that urban framework.
1.1 HISTORY OF THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
The City of Norco Circulation Element, was originally adopted as part of a General Plan Program in 1970. That element had two significant updates and revisions in 1976 and again in 1983. The analyses conducted for each update of the Circulation Element have clearly demonstrated that the maintenance of a high level of service on the circulation system is under extreme pressure, and, therefore, the challenge of maintaining these expectations is formidable. The revision in 1976 was based on a survey of residents and their commuting patterns at that time. Until the revision in 1983 it had been anticipated that there would be a regional connection between Second Street in Norco and McKinley Avenue in Corona. With the revision in 1983 that connection was eliminated in exchange for the ultimate Hidden Valley Parkway connection to McKinley Avenue.
The element was further amended in 1993 to revise the Goals and Policies section to address issues that were of concern to the City Council. The outcome of this amendment was direction from the City Council to have studies prepared that would address the following issues:
1.	How to accommodate regional traffic impacts on California Avenue without destroying the character of the street.
2.	The use of Sierra and Valley View Avenues as bypass routes between the Sixth Street and Second Street freeway ramps.
3.	The decision on whether to extend Western Avenue through.
4.	To determine the appropriate classification for Second Street.
5.	The possible connection between Norco Hills Road and Sixth Street.
Norco
1
General Plan Circulation Element
6.	An additional crossing of the Santa Ana River to reduce traffic on California Avenue.
7.	The possible realignment of First Street with Lincoln Avenue.
The Circulation Element was again revised in 1994 to update the map and text to match the road classification changes that had occurred with the adoption of the Gateway Specific Plan.
1.2	PURPOSE OF ELEMENT
The primary purpose of the Circulation Element is to provide for a safe, convenient, and efficient circulation system for the City’s automobiles and equestrians. Since there is strong encouragement for the use of its equestrian trails city-wide and for an equestrian lifestyle, there are additional issues that need to be addressed for the City of Norco in order to provide a safe, functional, and integrated circulation system for all forms of transportation. In order to meet this objective, the Circulation Element has been designed to accommodate all anticipated transportation needs. The determination for these needs is based on estimated intensities of the various land uses within the City and the immediate area; and the demand for transportation to those uses. This element describes the extent of physical improvements needed to accommodate anticipated traffic demand and also introduces other techniques which can be used to improve and maintain an acceptable level of service for the City’s circulation system.
The element is also intended to serve as a basic plan of transport for other
infrastructure systems including water and sewer lines. As the State’s General Plan Guidelines indicate, the Circulation Element is actually an infrastructure plan which “concerns itself with the circulation of people, goods, energy, water, sewage, storm drainage and communications.”
1.3	SCOPE AND FORMAT OF ELEMENT
This element is composed of four sections. The first section, the Introduction, includes a description of the Element’s purpose and related plans and programs. The second section, which follows, contains the City’s goals and policy statements for improving circulation in Norco. The third section is the Circulation Plan, which identifies standards for existing and future circulation systems, defines the City’s service level objectives to be achieved by the circulation system, and the future travel demand. Also included in the Circulation Plan is a discussion of alternate modes of transportation, and the City’s infrastructure network. The fourth section of the Circulation Element contains the implementation program, which contains specific implementation measures to realize the Element’s Goals and Policies.
Norco
2
General Plan Circulation Element
2.	CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
The City's primary circulation goal is to provide a system that has adequate capacity to meet existing and future travel demands, for automobiles, equestrians, pedestrians, and bicyclists in a manner that maintains Norco as an animal-keeping community.
Future travel demand has been estimated by closely correlating expected land uses and specific plan developments within the City and the immediate areas. The year 2010 has been selected as the build-out year for the purpose of travel demand forecast. (Section 3.1.5 deals specifically with travel demand forecast).
In the year 2010 the population of the City of Norco is projected to be approximately 30,000. This represents only a small increase over the 1990 census population of 23,302. However, substantial commercial and industrial growth is expected to occur over the next 20 years. At build-out, the City is projecting approximately six million square feet of commercial space and over three million square feet of industrial space.
2.1 CIRCULATION SYSTEM ISSUES AND PROBLEMS
Under current traffic and street development conditions, the major issues are as follows:
•	Distribution and handling of regional commuter traffic through the community;
•	Safety design coordination for automobiles, equestrians, pedestrians, and bicyclists;
•	Improving circulation and access within the Gateway Specific Plan Area;
•	Movement within and out of the southeast quadrant of the City;
•	Development of an adequate circulation system within the Norco Hills area;
•	Maintaining and improving alternative modes of transportation;
•	Maintenance and improvement of roadways and trails;
Commuter Traffic. A study of the arterials and intersections selected by the City for review with this update of the Circulation Element indicated that most of the Collectors and Major Arterials in the City are currently operating at a Level of Service (LOS) D or better (See Appendix A [Level of Service Classification]). The City Council determined
Norco
VYTx General Plan Circulation Element 3
last year that this was an acceptable level-of-service. Table 1 summarizes the existing (1991) link ADT and LOS, with updates at specific locations in September 1997. Capacity analysis performed at the selected intersections also indicates that most of the intersections are operating at an acceptable Level of Service. Table 2 summarizes the existing (1991) LOS at these selected intersections.
There is concern that certain segments of collectors and major arterials within the City are used to serve through traffic or those bypassing congestion on freeways, and that this intrudes upon the rural nature of residential areas. The following by-pass routes were noted:
•	North Drive/California Avenue/Sixth Street/lnterstate 15
•	Interstate 15/Second Street/Pacific Avenue/Lincoln Avenue/Route 91 (in City of Corona)
•	Archibald Avenue (in Riverside County)/River Road/Route 91
These bypass routes are used primarily by commuters and have the potential to negatively impact traffic safety and congestion in the City of Norco. The majority of this traffic is early morning and late evening, and has a tendency to exceed posted speed limits. This high volume of traffic also creates access problems onto major arterials and collectors. Because of the high volume of traffic and those seeking shortcuts through residential areas, these residential areas are impacted with an amount of traffic not usually experienced on local streets.
Currently the Four Corners Transportation Commission, is examining transportation improvements in the area where Riverside, San Bernardino, Orange, and Los Angeles Counties meet, and is recommending the study of a main arterial corridor linking Pine, Schleisman, and Arlington Avenues by bridging the Santa Ana River near the Hidden Valley Wildlife Area. This study is considered to be a high priority project among the many projects recommended for implementation. This east-west arterial has also been proposed to the CETAP Advisory Committee for the Riverside County Integrated Plan (RCIP), a planning effort expected to take approximately three years to complete and which will result in an updated Riverside County General Plan. This arterial will accommodate the majority of commuter traffic presently using California Avenue and Sixth Street through Norco to the 1-15 Freeway.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 4
TABLE 1
EXISTING ARTERTIAL SEGMENT AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC VOLUMES AND LEVEL OF SERVICE
ROADWAY SEGMENT	NUMBER OF LANES	EXISTING (1998)
ADT	LOS
Hamner Avenue
First Street to Third Street	4	24,210	C
Third Street to Sixth Street	4	17,700	C
At Santa Ana River crossing Sixth Street 1-15 to California Avenue	2 4	16,270	C
California Avenue North Drive to Sixth Street	2	8,450	D
North Drive California Avenue to City boundary	2	8,060	C
River Road South of City boundary	2	7,230	B
Corydon Avenue to Second Street	2	10,610	E
ParkrLdse Aven ue First Street to Second Street	2	2,910	A
Hidd_e_n_ Valley Par_k_way Hamner Avenue to City boundary	4	9,700	A
First Street Parkridge Avenue to Hamner Avenue	2,4	3,065	A
Second Street Parkridge Avenue to Hamner Avenue	2,4	10,810	A
Hamner Avenue to Corona Avenue	2	7,240	A
Third Street RCC to Hamner Avenue	4	5,920	A
Fourth Street Hamner Avenue to Hillside Avenue	2	1,160	A
Fifth Street Norco Drive to Hamner Avenue	2	7,515	A
Hamner Avenue to Hillside Avenue	2	1,540	A
Norco Drive Bluff Street to Fifth Street	2	5,085	A
Fifth Street to Hamner Avenue	2	2,800	A
Bluff Street River Road to Norco Drive	2	1,435	A
Corydon Avenue River Road to Norco Drive	2	3,870	A
(TT) Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 5
TABLE 2
EXISTING LEVEL OF SERVICE AT SELECTED INTERSECTIONS
INTERSECTION	LEVEL OF SERVICE		
	AM PEAK	PM	PEAK
North Drive/California Avenue	B		B
Sixth Street/California Avenue	B		C
Sixth Street/Hamner Avenue (Q)	C		C
Fifth Street/Hamner Avenue (0)	C		C
Second Street/Hamner Avenue (@)	D		D
Bluff Street/River Road	D		D
Corydon Avenue/River Road (fl)	C		C
Second Street/River Road (n)	B		B
First Street/Parkridge Avenue	B		B
(fl) - Signalized intersection			
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element
6
The Riverside County General Plan previously showed a future extension of Etiwanda Avenue southerly across a bridge that would connect into Arlington Avenue somewhere near the Norco/Riverside city boundary. That crossing is not being considered anymore because of environmental concerns and cost constraints. This means that the City, while it can support the concept of a future crossing in a policy statement, needs to anticipate, and plan for the continuing use of California Avenue and Sixth Street as a commuter route to the 1-15 Freeway. As such, it is likely that the traffic impact to these roads will increase in the future.
Another alternative to reduce regional through traffic on local roads, that the City is likely to consider for certain roads in the future, is the implementation of traffic calming measures. These are designed to allow local traffic access, but to discourage regional by-passing by lowering traffic speed to the point of making it inconvenient as a by-pass route. They also have the affect of reducing the speed of traffic to levels that are not threatening to the safety and lifestyle of the community.
Safety Design Coordination. Commuter traffic often conflicts with equestrian and pedestrian uses on Norco roadways. Motorists from outside the City are not always aware of the problems associated with equestrian use within public right-of-way or of the potential hazards, which are created. The City has taken steps to warn motorists of equestrian uses and the existence of livestock within the community. However, this awareness needs to be promoted to ensure the safety of equestrians and that the equestrian lifestyle of the community is not jeopardized in any way. In addition to appropriate signage, the City is continuing to provide adequate and necessary improvement of horse trails to promote the safe and efficient use of the roadways. The City also needs to evaluate the needs of pedestrians and bicyclists, especially on major arterials to ensure that the rural lifestyle is promoted, and that pedestrians and bicyclists are protected from vehicular traffic.
Gateway Specific Plan. The Gateway Specific Plan was adopted in 1992. The traffic analysis for this plan predicted an ultimate daily traffic count of over 71,000 additional two-way trips per day with build-out of this commercial district. The importance of adequate traffic control measures, and a well-planned circulation system cannot be over emphasized. In 1992 the Gateway Specific Plan called for the following major traffic circulation system modifications and improvements, some of which have been constructed.
1.	Widen and realign Parkridge Avenue, First Street, Second Street, and Mountain Avenue (under constuction).
2.	Close the Pacific Avenue intersection with First Street, providing a cul-de-sac for
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element
Pacific Avenue just north of the existing intersection (under construction).
3.	Install landscaped medians on Hamner Avenue (completed).
4.	Extend Mountain Avenue between First Street and the extension of Hidden Valley Parkway (completed).
5.	Provide major intersection traffic control measures and landscape treatments (on-going).
6.	Provide a street tree program on all project area roadways (on-going).
7.	Vacate existing right-of-way no longer needed.
8.	Continue to work with Caltrans to ensure the Hidden Valley Parkway Interchange is completed (completed).
Southeast Quadrant. In 1970 the City adopted its first Circulation Plan as part of the General Plan Program wherein McKinley Avenue in Corona was planned to ultimately connect with Second Street in Norco. In 1980 the boundary between Norco and Corona was revised and a large area was de-annexed from Norco and concurrently annexed into Corona and then subsequently rezoned to a higher residential density. Based on concerns of the increased traffic this would create, and the impact to the l-15/Second Street interchange, the City of Norco revised its Circulation Element eliminating the connection between Second Street and McKinley Avenue. Hidden Valley Parkway then became the regional connection between McKinley Avenue in Corona and Hamner Avenue in Norco.
The original plan for Hidden Valley Parkway in the Circulation Element was to have only Valley View Avenue connect. At some point, and for a reason that cannot be ascertained by staff, a connection was made between Corona Avenue and Hidden Valley Parkway. After the detachment of the Corona Hills area from the City, and the development of a master plan for that site at high residential densities, the City Council decided to remove the master-planned connection between McKinley Avenue and Second Street. The alternative connection became Hidden Valley Parkway/McKinley, and based on concerns of Corona Avenue residents about traffic and trash on their street, the developer of the Corona Hills Specific Plan was required to build a cul-de-sac on Corona Avenue.
When the Norco Hills Specific Plan (NHSP) (north of Hidden Valley Parkway and east of Corona Avenue) was approved in 1992 it provided for four connections to the City’s circulation system. The first two connections will come from the construction of a backbone road between Hillside Avenue and Parkridge Avenue (El Paso Drive). The third access is a redirection of Corona Avenue into the NHSP project along another backbone road that will connect into El Paso Drive. The fourth connection is an outlet from El Paso Drive onto Norco Hills Road.
In September 1997, the Hidden Valley Parkway interchange with the 1-15 Freeway was
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 8
opened. Prior to that, while the different design options for the interchange were being considered, Caltrans and the City of Norco together made the decision to close Valley View Avenue at Hidden Valley Parkway so as to reduce the construction and land acquisition costs for the interchange. Although the closure of Valley View Avenue had already been anticipated prior to interchange construction, many residents in the southeast quadrant of the City were unaware of the impacts that this, would cause them in terms of accessing Hidden Valley Parkway and Hamner Avenue, as well as the impacts to Second Street from school related traffic to Norco High and Norco Intermediate Schools.
The complaints to City Hall now began to come in from residents in the southeast quadrant of the City addressing the lack of access into and out of their neighborhood. The alternative openings had not yet been constructed through NHSP. Likewise, the Fire Department now had concerns about the increased emergency response time into that portion of the City without any connection to Hidden Valley Parkway.
On August 6, 1997 the City Council authorized a traffic study to determine the potential impacts of reconnecting Valley View Avenue and adding a Corona Avenue connection to Hidden Valley Parkway. The report concluded that while traffic would increase on the two streets, there would be a greater overall impact to the City by leaving the connections closed. Based on this recommendation, the City Council made the determination to connect both streets to Hidden Valley Parkway. Throughout this process, several residents around Corona Avenue and Valley View Avenue have maintained their concern about the impacts that would result from opening the two intersections again. The existing right-of-way for streets in the southeast quadrant are as follows:
Corona Avenue
existing: 45’ south of First Street (15 + 30)
60’ north of First Street (30 + 30)
60’north of Second Street (30 + 30)
ultimate: 60’
First Street
existing: 50’ east of Valley View Avenue (25 + 25)
50’ west of Corona Avenue (25 + 25)
ultimate: 60’
Second Street
existing: 50’ east of Interstate 15 (25 + 25) ultimate: 60’
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 9
Different options are being considered to slow down traffic on both streets once the reconnections are made. Possibilities include a roundabout in the streets, off-set from Hidden Valley Parkway; narrowing the necks of the two roads as they connect into Hidden Valley Parkway to discourage in-bound turning movements; or speed humps. Any improvements to reduce speed and/or reduce through traffic on these two streets will have to be done in cooperation with emergency response agencies to make sure that their operations are not also impeded.
At the writing of this update document, the re-connections had not been completed and situations affecting the two proposed re-connections have changed. First, the Corona-Norco Unified School District in July of 1999 changed the school boundaries for Norco High School and Norco Intermediate School. Students from Corona, east of the 1-15 freeway, now attend schools in the City of Corona, relieving some of the traffic congestion that had previously occurred on Second Street. In addition, the street circulation pattern for NHSP is now being constructed. A backbone road connection system between Corona Ave., Hidden Valley Pkwy., Parkridge Ave., Hillside Ave., and First Street east of the freeway is expected sometime during the year 2000.
Norco Hills (remaining). One of the last major areas for development within the City of Norco will be the area along the City’s eastern boundary known collectively as Norco Hills which is in addition to and located to the north and east of NHSP. It has long been anticipated that Norco Hills Drive, which runs northeast from Hidden Valley Parkway, would meander through the hills and eventually connect to Sixth or Fifth Street. Norco Hills Drive would then become the major connection street for anticipated development in the hillside area.
Alternative modes of transportation, such as public transportation, should be promoted within the City for persons who choose not to utilize the automobile for various reasons. The Riverside Transit Agency (RTA) provides Fixed Bus Route and Dial-A-Ride services within the City of Norco and other portions of Western Riverside County. The City should continue to cooperate with RTA for the continuation of these services, and should encourage the establishing of adequate bus shelters to increase public recognition and their use.
Maintenance and improvement of streets and trails is an on-going process that is typically accomplished through routine maintenance and a rotating capital improvement program. There are maintenance and improvement projects that sometimes have to wait longer than the need presents itself so that funding becomes available.
The goals and policies presented below emphasize the importance of establishing a circulation system, which can support existing and future travel demands. The implementation measures identify specific programs and infrastructure improvements
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 10
designed to achieve service level objectives.
2.2	SAFE, CONVENIENT, AND EFFICIENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
The City desires development of a circulation system, which meets the transportation needs of both existing and future development.
GOAL 1: A circulation network of equestrian trails and streets, integrated with the planned land uses, that provide for a safe, efficient, and economic movement of people and goods.
Policy 1.1: Develop a circulation system of equestrian trails connecting all residential lots into a city-wide network that connects residential areas with commercial areas, public facilities, and open space/recreational elements.
Policy 1.2: Establish a trail system that is separate and safe from vehicular traffic with appropriate (signalized as necessary) road and intersection crossings to maintain circularity of the trail system.
Policy 1.3: Develop a circulation system of City streets, excluding freeways, capable of serving existing and future increases in traffic.
Policy 1.4: Follow appropriate City standards in designing and constructing future street improvements.
Policy 1.5: Take a leadership role in the preparation of a regional traffic mitigation program designed to resolve regional traffic issues which impact the City of Norco.
Policy 1.6: Logically relate local street patterns with arterial and collector streets shown in the Circulation Network. Through traffic on interior residential streets should be minimized and an improved circulation system developed which does not significantly deteriorate rural lifestyles in the City's rural residential areas. Pursuant to Policy 3.4, if the City determines that neighborhood access to arterials is best accomplished by access over roads designated as “local” in the Circulation Element, the City Council shall authorize the linking of local roads to arterials for this purpose so long as the number of average daily trips does not exceed the design capacity of the road in question.
Policy 1.7: Establish a signalized arterial street system that provides an acceptable level of service during peak hours under build out conditions.
Policy 1.8: Develop, and update as necessary, a program for general mitigation fees for
raS?) Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 11
roads and traffic signals.
Policy 1.9: Encourage a minimum Level of Service D for roadway segments and a minimum Level of Service D for intersections at peak hours under build out conditions.
Policy 1.10: Develop a five year capital improvement program which maintains or improves the Level of Service and transit performance standards adopted by the County of Riverside as a part of its Congestion Management Program.
Policy 1.11: Encourage the reduction of vehicle trips through implementation of Transportation Demand Management (TDM) strategies, such as requiring major employers to prepare Transportation Management Plans with provisions for carpooling, vanpooling, flexible work hours, etc.
Policy 1.12: Support, where feasible, the regional Transportation Demand Management strategies developed by the Riverside County Transportation Commission.
Policy 1.13: Prepare traffic studies for the following areas of special concern to identify problems and appropriate mitigation measures, and to implement mitigation measures as feasible:
1.	Sierra Avenue between Sixth Street and Valley View Avenue, including the intersection of Sixth Street and Sierra Avenue.
2.	Valley View Avenue between its intersection with Sierra Avenue and Second Street.
3.	California Avenue between North Drive and Sixth Street (completed, California to remain at two lanes).
4.	Second Street between Hamner Avenue and River Road, and Hamner Avenue to Hillside Avenue (completed, Second Street to be widened between Corona Avenue and Mountain Avenue).
5.	Western Avenue between Fifth Street and Belgian Drive (completed, Western Avenue to not be connected).
6.	Re-connection of Valley View Avenue and Corona Avenue to Hidden Valley Parkway (completed, both streets to be re-connected).
Policy 1.14: Continue to encourage the County and City of Riverside to include in their respective general plans, and then construct a bridge crossing of the Santa Ana River to
Norco
\£_Tx General Plan Circulation Element 12
connect Arlington Avenue to an east-west extension of Schleisman Avenue.
Policy 1.15: Encourage the utilization of Opticom Traffic Control System on all signalized intersections within the City.
Policy 1.16: Discourage the development, creation and utilization of private streets within the community.
Policy 1.17: City should not encourage traffic calming, street closure and unnecessary stop signs at the expense of emergency response.
Policy 1.18: Encourage the Corona-Norco Unified School District (CNUSD) and the Jurupa Unified School District (JUSD) to adjust their appropriate boundaries to detach the Eastvale area from the CNUSD and annex it into the JUSD.
Policy 1.19: Encourage the CNUSD to adjust school boundaries to match corporate boundaries so that Norco students go to Norco schools and the same for Corona, and eventually Eastvale.
2.3	ALTERNATE TRANSPORTATION MODES
Alternate modes of transportation for Norco residents include the City’s equestrian trail system which provides access to all parts of the City with only a few exceptions. Other modes include public transportation that is provided by the Riverside Transit Agency (RTA) and by bicycle. Alternative modes are used by those who either do not have access to automobiles and must rely on an alternative, or by those who otherwise choose to leave their cars at home. Bicycle facilities should be considered, in conjunction with circulation system improvements to reduce dependency on private automobiles and to encourage regional recreational/transportation use in addition to that already provided by the equestrian trail system. A separate bicycle transportation plan is being considered at the time of preparation of the Circulation Element.
GOAL 2: Encourage the use of alternate transportation modes.
Policy 2.1: Encourage the use of the City’s equestrian circulation system for uses other than recreational where feasible, such as the installation of hitching posts, water troughs, and feed bins along equestrian trails that are close to commercial centers and public gathering places.
Policy 2.2: Continue to cooperate with the Riverside Transit Agency for the provision of public bus service (fixed route and Dial-a-Ride).
O?) Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 13
Policy 2.3: Establish bus shelters at RTA stops to increase public recognition and use of the local and regional transit system.
Policy 2.4: Cooperate with Caltrans and the County of Riverside in providing sites and improvements for Park-and-Ride facilities.
Policy 2.5: Continue to maintain and improve the City's system of equestrian trails to also meet the needs of pedestrians within the community.
Policy 2.6: For commercial areas along Sixth Street, encourage on-site, and between site pedestrian connections to adjoin businesses and parking areas that are separate from the equestrian trails.
Policy 2.7: Support the development of the Crest to Coast Trail (equestrian, biking and hiking) through the Santa Ana River corridor.
Policy 2.8: Prepare a bicycle transportation plan in conjunction with the Crest to Coast Trail to provide City access to the trail for both equestrians, pedestrians, and bicyclists; and to qualify for state and federal funding to help pay for the trail improvements.
Policy 2.9: Provide a system of bicycle facilities (paths, lanes, and routes) in conjunction with circulation system roadway improvements to separate bicycle traffic from equestrian trails.
Policy 2.10: Continue to cooperate in the development of the Santa Ana River Equestrian Trail through the City.
Policy 2.11: Provide safe and convenient equestrian/pedestrian access between residential neighborhoods and the parks, open space and schools which service those neighborhoods.
Policy 2.12: Provide safe crossings of major arterials for pedestrians and equestrians.
2.4	SEPARATION OF TRAFFIC
Separating heavier non-residential traffic, particularly intra-community commuter traffic, from residential areas helps preserve neighborhood character and safety. Higher capacity roadways are intended to accommodate this heavier traffic to reduce and avoid impacts to residential areas.
GOAL 3: Separate vehicular traffic associated with regional commuter and commercial
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 14
users from residential areas.
Policy 3.1: Provide a circulation network, which includes higher capacity roadways for commuters and commercial users to avoid overflow into adjacent residential areas. Where a neighborhood does not have access to a secondary road to convey neighborhood traffic to arterial roadways, the City Council shall authorize the use of local roads for neighborhood and emergency access between the neighborhood and arterial roads.
Policy 3.2: Establish a system of truck routes that reduces truck traffic on residential streets.
Policy 3.3: Encourage the design of a residential street system that reduces through traffic, or reduces the speed of through traffic. These street designs may include "traffic calming" methods where these methods would not impede access and response time by emergency vehicles.
Policy 3.4: Discourage “short-cuts” through residential neighborhoods by minimizing the linking of local street connections to arterial roads. However, in neighborhoods not directly served with reasonable outlets to arterials, the elimination of local street connections can have the effect of maximizing traffic impacts on the few outlets that do exist. This creates a “bottleneck” situation at those outlets rather than spreading the traffic volumes over more options. To avoid “bottlenecking” in neighborhoods that have limited access in and out, the City Council where necessary, shall authorize the linking of roads designated as “local” in the Circulation Element” for neighborhood access to arterial roads.
Policy 3.5: Preserve existing mature trees as a method of separating streets and adjacent property or trails. This can be accomplished by realigning roadways or by relocating the trees. Tree protection and/or relocation feasibility should be reviewed on a project by project basis.
2.5	PARKING
Adequate and convenient parking is an essential part of an effective circulation system. Sufficient off-street parking increases the overall efficiency of the circulation system by providing motorists better visibility of both vehicular/pedestrian movements along the roadways.
GOAL 4: Ensure the provision of adequate off-street parking for all land uses including Sixth Street where a provision has been made to reduce on-site parking requirements in exchange for pedestrian connections between adjoining buildings, properties, and public
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 15
parking facilities.
Policy 4.1: Require all new developments to provide adequate off-street parking based on expected parking needs.
Policy 4.2: Provide adequate loading areas within off-street parking areas for all commercial and manufacturing land uses.
3.	THE CIRCULATION PLAN
The Circulation Plan consists of three components: the Street and Trail Network, the Public Transportation Network, and the Infrastructure Network. Each component consists of the following sections:
Street Network
•	Existing Circulation System
•	Truck Routes
•	Pedestrian/Equestrian Trails
•	Traffic Level of Service Standards
•	Future Travel Demand
•	Revised Circulation Element
Public Transportation Network
•	Fixed Route System
•	Dial-a-Ride System
Infrastructure Network
•	Water System
•	Sewage System
•	Storm Drain
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 16
3.1 STREET AND TRAIL NETWORK
3.1.1 STREET CIRCULATION SYSTEM
A network of local streets, collector streets, major arterials and the Interstate 15 Freeway serve the City of Norco. In addition, the City has many privately maintained streets, some which are developed to City standards for local public streets.
The Circulation Element classifies City streets as Major Arterial, Collector or Local Streets (Exhibit 1). Streets designed to less than City standard requirements are often categorized as private streets or drives.
Exhibit 2 shows the existing (1998) average daily traffic volumes on the collectors and major streets and peak hour volumes at selected intersections. Traffic count data is presented in Appendix E in a separate volume.
URBAN ARTERIAL
The Urban Arterial classification is applied to roadways that at buildout will have six lanes of travel (three each direction) within a right-of-way width of 110’ and a curb to curb pavement width of 86’. It is designed to accommodate regional through traffic with a limited number of accesses and driveways. Hamner Avenue is the only road in Norco with this classification.
Hamner Avenue is the major north-south roadway through the City linking the City of Corona to the south and the Eastvale and Jurupa Community Plans of Riverside County to the north. The name of the road changes to Main Street in the City of Corona and to Milliken Avenue in the County of San Bernardino. Hammer Avenue was designated as State Route 31 prior to the completion of the Interstate 15 Freeway through the City. It was removed from State Route classification after completion of the freeway and is currently under the jurisdiction of the City of Norco.
Primarily serving commercial development along both sides of the road, Hamner Avenue currently provides two through lanes in each direction. A raised landscape median separates north and south bound traffic along Hamner Avenue from Hidden Valley Parkway north to First Street, with a two-way left turn lane providing traffic separation through the remainder of its’ 3.75 mile course through Norco. A small portion of Hamner Avenue north of Sixth Street transitions to a two-lane roadway as it crosses the Santa Ana River due to existing width restrictions of the Hamner Avenue Bridge. This two-lane bridge is one of the major local crossings of the Santa Ana River. The majority of the street right-of-way has been dedicated,
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 17
although several locations do not have full street improvements.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element
18
MAJOR ARTERIAL
The Major Arterial classification is applied to roadways that at buildout will have four lanes of travel (two in each direction) within a right-of-way width of 100’ and a curb to curb pavement width of 64’ for major arterials with equestrian trails; and a curb to curb pavement width of 80’ for major arterials without equestrian trails. The additional pavement width on major arterials without equestrian trails is for a parking lane on each side of the street. Major arterials are designed to carry through traffic for regional connection to and from urban arterials and freeways. Sixth Street and California Avenue are the only major arterials that are designed with equestrian trails.
Sixth Street (between Hamner Avenue and California Avenue) is an existing east-west arterial linking Hamner Avenue and Interstate 15 at the west with California Avenue and Ingalls Park to the east. It is classified as a Major 4E (Exhibit 5) and currently provides two through lanes in each direction with equestrian trails on both sides. A two-way left turn lane provides traffic separation between Sierra Avenue and California Avenue. The street is bordered by commercial zones on each side and is completely dedicated and improved with ultimate street improvements. Sixth Street is one of three arterials in the City of Norco providing access to Interstate 15. Caltrans operates a Park-and-Ride facility with approximately 100 spaces for commuter use just north of Sixth Street.
North Drive is a short east-west arterial at the northeastern corner of the City. It is classified as a Major-4 (Exhibit 5) and is currently improved as a two-lane roadway. It remains the only direct link between the Cities of Norco and Riverside. A residential zone along the north side and a commercial zone along the south side border it. North Drive changes name to Arlington Avenue in the City of Riverside, and transitions to California Avenue at its’ westerly terminus in Norco. Much of this segment does not have full dedication or right-of-way improvements.
California Avenue (between North Drive and Sixth Street) is an existing north-south arterial in the northeast portion of Norco, and transitions to North Drive at its northerly terminus. The classification is Major-2E (Exhibit 5) and is improved as a two-lane roadway with equestrian trails on both sides. It is bordered by residential zones along both sides. There are two small commercial zones along California Avenue at the intersection of 7th Street and 6th Street. The street serves as a major thoroughfare to and from the Sixth Street commercial district even though the majority of the street does not have ultimate dedication or improvement. A traffic study determined that the pavement width can be maintained at two lanes and still achieve a LOS “D”, which the City Council has approved. Upon completion of a
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 21
bridge over the Santa Ana River connecting Arlington Avenue to Schleisman Avenue, California Avenue should be downgraded from a Major Arterial to a Collector or Local.
River Road is an existing north-south arterial linking the City of Corona to the south with the Jurupa Community Plan area to the north. The classification is Major-4 (Exhibit 5) with the majority of it fully dedicated and improved with four lanes of traffic and a raised landscaped median island between Second Street and Corydon Avenue. The portion north of Corydon Avenue transitions to a two-lane roadway as it crosses the Santa Ana River due to existing width restrictions of the River Road Bridge. This two-lane bridge serves as the second of two major local crossings (besides the 1-15 bridge) of the Santa Ana River used by surrounding residence and commuter traffic.
Hidden Valiev Parkway is an existing east-west arterial along the southern boundary of the City, which extends east from Hamner Avenue to McKinley Avenue. Portions of this street form the boundary line and share right-of-way with the City of Corona. The street is classified as a Major-4 (Exhibit 5) raodway. The majority east of Hamner Avenue is fully improved with four lanes of traffic separated by a painted median first and then by a raised landscaped median. Residential zones exist on both north and south sides of this arterial, except a small portion just east of the 1-15 Freeway. West of Hamner Avenue Hidden Valley Parkway becomes Mountain Avenue through the Gateway Specific Plan Area. The four lanes become two lanes north of First Street.
A modified interchange connection with the Interstate 15 freeway was completed in 1997 with a planned future expansion of the design to a full Acloverleaf= (timing unknown). This interchange replaced an existing freeway overcrossing and realigned Hidden Valley Parkway to form a four-way intersection with Hamner Avenue, and allowed for the loop connector to Mountain Avenue at First Street.
COLLECTOR
The collector classification is applied to roadways that at buildout will have four lanes of travel (two each direction) within a right-of-way width of 88’ and a curb to curb width of 64’. It is designed to collect traffic from local streets and carry it to major arterials. Collector roads are designed to include an equestrian/pedestrian trail on one side.
Corydon Avenue is a north-south collector roadway connecting Norco Drive to the north with River Road on the south, and continues southwesterly into the City of Corona. This street is bordered on both sides by residential zones, and is fully dedicated and improved with ultimate street improvements.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 22
Fifth Street is an existing east-west collector road serving residential and mixed-use areas in the central portion of the City between Corydon Avenue and the Interstate 15 Freeway. East of the freeway Fifth Street becomes a local street and is primarily bordered by residential zones. The right-of-way for Fifth Street is generally fully dedicated, but the street remains a two-lane roadway through most of its length.
The portion of Fifth Street just west of Hamner Avenue is bordered on the north by Snipes Park and on the south by commercial and light industrial zones. Further west, Fifth Street is bordered on the north by residential zones and on the south by the U.S. Naval Weapons Station, California State Rehabilitation Center, and Wayne Makin Park. Due to the variation in adjoining uses and staged development, much of Fifth Street remains only partially improved. Due to the City of Norco's continuing policy of protecting mature eucalyptus trees whenever possible, the portion of Fifth Street in front of the State's facility has been improved with a raised median island.
First Street is an existing east-west Collector serving the Gateway Specific Plan Area from Hamner Avenue to River Road. The easterly portion of First Street near Hamner Avenue is fully improved to ultimate width, with the remaining portions partially constructed with two lanes of traffic. The planned realignment of First Street at its' westerly terminus is scheduled to be completed in 2000, which will help provide a major connecting link between the City of Corona on the west and the commercial district of the Gateway Specific Plan Area to the east.
Norco Drive is an east-west collector connecting Hamner Avenue on the east with Corydon Avenue to the west. Norco Drive is bordered predominantly by residential zones except at its' intersection with Hamner Avenue. The street is fully dedicated and constructed with ultimate street improvements throughout its entire length.
Parkridge Avenue (between Cota Street and Second Street) is an existing north-south collector sharing some right of way with the City of Corona. It provides a parallel corridor with River Road to Hamner Avenue, connecting the City of Corona on the south with Second Street on the north. It is primarily bordered by residential zones through much of its length, and is constructed as a two-lane roadway.
Second Street is an existing east-west collector serving as one of three connections to the 1-15 Freeway. Though much of Second Street is bordered by residential zones, portions of this street are constructed with commercial development, especially near its' intersection with Hamner Avenue. Through the commercial district, Second Street is fully dedicated and improved with ultimate street improvements. The easterly portion of Second Street provides the main thoroughfare for access to Norco High School and Wyle Labs. It is bordered primarily by residential zones, and is constructed as a two-lane roadway. The westerly portion of Second Street transitions to a two lane roadway at Mountain
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 23
Avenue, and is also bordered by residential zones, except its westerly terminus at River Road where a small amount of commercial frontage exists. It serves as the main connection between the City of Corona on the west to the commercial zones of Hamner Avenue and the 1-15 Freeway. In order to provide ultimate improvements through this portion of the street, several residences would need to be acquired due to the minimal building setbacks, which would result with ultimate street build-out. The traffic study conducted for Second Street recommended that Second Street be widened and improved to four lanes between Mountain Avenue on the west and Corona Avenue on the east. West of Mountain Avenue and east of Valley View Avenue, Second Street will remain a Local street at two lanes.
Third Street (between Riverside Community College and Hamner Avenue) is
designated as a Collector, and currently provides the only means of accessing Riverside Community College. It is fully dedicated and improved with ultimate street improvements, and has a raised landscaped median island throughout most of its' length. Originally designed to continue westerly through the adjoining residential zones and link with Corydon Avenue, public concern over traffic resulted in terminating the street in a cul-de-sac at the westerly boundary of the college.
LOCAL STREET
The Local Street classification is applied to roadways that at buildout will have two lanes of travel within a right-of-way width of 60’ and a curb to curb pavement width of 36’. Local street standards can be applied for commercial or residential uses. Local streets are intended to provide access to adjacent properties. They also serve as legal easements for updating public utilities. Any street not classified as an arterial or collector is included in this classification, with the exception of private streets or drives.
PRIVATE STREETS OR DRIVES
There are a number of private streets or drives, which currently exist within the community. Private streets are typically designed to public local street standards, but for one reason or another, are not accepted by the City for ongoing maintenance and traffic control. Usually, this is because the street cannot be fully constructed at the time of development, due to lack of sufficient right of way or available funding. The street remains privately owned and maintained by the developer or adjacent land owners until such time as the remaining portions can be constructed.
Private streets can present several problems however, and should be discouraged wherever possible. Liability concerns with streets that are designed to less than normal standards in visibility, gradient, and/or widths are often voiced by both legal and maintenance personnel. Frequently, these substandard design parameters
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 24
have no easy means of correction in later years. The adjoining property is often fully developed by the time private owners grow tired of maintenance costs, and opportunities for the City to obtain additional right of way, or make changes in the existing design become nonexistent.
In addition, the future development, which normally triggers acceptance of the street by the City, occurs far enough into the future that maintenance costs become considerable. Since street repairs are often very minimal in the early years, they can sometimes be neglected by the owners with little consequence. Then, as the City assumes maintenance responsibilities, previously neglected repairs become critical and maintenance costs escalate.
INTERSTATE 15 FREEWAY
Interstate 15 Freeway, which traverses in a north-south direction through the central part of the City, is not under the jurisdiction of the City. It is currently a six lane freeway which provides access to the City of Norco through three diamond interchanges at Sixth Street, Second Street and Hidden Valley Parkway. Grade separation structures along Interstate 15 in Norco include an undercrossing at Third Street and overcrossings at Detroit Avenue, Fourth Street, and Fifth Street.
In 1991 Caltrans prepared the Route Concept Report of Interstate 15 indicating that this segment of freeway was operating at a Level of Service D with an annual average daily traffic volume of 82,000, and a peak hourly volume of 7,380 vehicles. The Route Concept Report recommended future construction of a total of eight general traffic lanes and two high occupancy vehicle lanes for this segment of the freeway. The Route Concept Report did not indicate a schedule of implementation. The annual report from Caltrans in 1996 indicated an annual average daily traffic volume of 99,000 and a peak hourly volume of 7,400 vehicles.
Caltrans operates two Park-and-Ride facilities in the City of Norco. One facility is located at the northeastern corner of Hamner Avenue and Sixth Street and contains 100 spaces. The second facility contains 200 spaces and is located west of Hamner Avenue on West Four Wheel Drive near the Interstate 15 / Second Street interchange.
3.1.2	TRUCK ROUTES
The City of Norco has designated and established commercial vehicle truck routes throughout the City. These routes indicate arterial streets that should be used for truck movements that exceed the established weight limits of local streets. Local and state laws do allow trucks to be on local streets where they exceed established weight limits for the purpose of making deliveries. These deliveries are only allowed
Norco
General p|an Circulation Element 25
provided that the trucks use the most direct route between a particular delivery/pick-up location and the closest arterial (or freeway) that is designated as a truck route. The established commercial vehicle truck routes in the City of Norco are:
•	Hamner Avenue in its entirety through the City;
•	Sixth Street from Hamner Avenue to California Avenue;
•	California Avenue from Sixth Street to North Drive;
Amended City Council Resolution 2003-17, Februarv 19. 2003
•	North Drive in its entirety;
•	River Road in its entirety;
*—Hidden Valley Parkway east of the Hamner Avenue to Norco Hills Road;
*—Mountain Avenue between Second Street and Hamner Avenue;
♦—Second Street east of Mountain Avenue to the 1-15 Freeway
All commercial vehicle truck routes have been posted with signs indicating ATruck Route" located at all intersections of designated truck routes within the boundary of the City.
3.1.3	PEDESTRIAN/EQUESTRIAN TRAIL CIRCULATION SYSTEM
The motto "City Living in a Rural Atmosphere" arches over the profile of a horse on the City of Norco’s official seal. This motto symbolizes a central long-term goal of Norco's community leaders. The voters of Norco have, for 25 years, maintained the majority of their City's land as animal-keeping properties of one-half acre or more.
The streets of Norco are lined with horse trails wherever possible, helping to maintain its commitment to the rural atmosphere. The City has eschewed the standard suburban sidewalk treatment in favor of decomposed granite pedestrian/equestrian trails. These trails are designated for pedestrian and equestrian use only and are not meant to serve as multi-purpose recreational trails.
This elaborate system of over 80 miles of well-maintained trails is regarded as a major asset of the community, and is an amenity that many residents have moved to the City to take advantage of. The majority of all residential lots have direct access
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 26
to this trail system. It affords an opportunity to ride through the urban environment and move from there into local and regional areas such as the Norco Hills and the Santa Ana River. The typical equestrian trail is twelve (12) feet wide, and is located along one side of the street. Ultimate trail improvements include a forty-two (42) inch high rail fence, which separates the trail from a 6-foot wide tree-lined parkway. This parkway serves as a buffer between vehicular traffic and the equestrian trail. The trails are marked with special equestrian signs where they cross roadways and are signed with the Equestrian Symbol (W45) warning signs and supplemented by the xing (W80) warning signs. Exhibit 3 illustrates the existing equestrian trail system in the City of Norco.
In 1955, the Santa Ana River was recommended to the State Parks Commission as a multi-purpose recreation area. Since that time, the river corridor has been viewed by many as an important regional recreation and open space resource. The river corridor covers three counties and has always had the potential to include a regional trail system from the crest of the San Bernardino Mountains to the Pacific Ocean, some 110 miles long. In 1969, the first "Crest to Coast Trail Event" was held, drawing attention to the significance of the river corridor and the need for a continuous trail system.
The County of San Bernardino Regional Parks Department has completed a comprehensive study of the river corridor covering the counties of San Bernardino, Riverside, and Orange. The overall goal of this study was to promote and to plan for a continuous multi-use regional trail system along the Santa Ana River corridor linking the Pacific Ocean and the Pacific Crest Trail. The City of Norco is located approximately halfway between the Pacific Ocean and the San Bernardino Mountains. This study envisioned the expansion of the City's local trail system with three proposed points of-access to the river corridor; 1) Corydon Avenue at Fifth Street; 2) northerly terminus of Old Hamner Avenue; and 3) the northerly terminus of Pedley Avenue.
The City's adopted Master Plan for Parks, Recreation and Open Space identifies the existing equestrian trail system and makes recommendations for future implementation/and improvement. The trail system should provide circulation for pedestrian and equestrian use. With the exception of Primary Access Trails described below, all bicycle traffic is intended to stay within the street pavement and not on the pedestrian/equestrian trails. This will accommodate the community's need for various modes of transportation and reduce conflicts between them.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 27
The trail system includes several types of trails and organizes the community's circulation needs into a coherent pattern of movement. This system minimizes conflicts between pedestrians and equestrians and defines each trail according to its function and level of enhancement. The three types of trails are:
Primary Access Trails:
A primary access trail system would consist of major circulation routes, not necessarily adjacent to the streets which are wider and which can carry the bulk of non-auto traffic volume moving within and through the City. This system will integrate pedestrian, equestrian and bicycle circulation within wider trail sections, and which will minimize conflict between bicycles and equestrians through trail location and buffer planting. The primary trails would connect the community to major regional features including Riverside Community College, Norco Hills, the Santa Ana River, and parks as feasible. Currently there are no trails in the City that can be designated as primary access trails, and the opportunity for creating such trails is limited because of the extent of development in the City. The Coast to Crest Trail when completed will be the backbone primary access trail within Norco. Other primary access trails in the City should be designed to provide equestrian and bicycle access to the regional facilities that will be located along that corridor. It is anticipated that these types of trails will be located in areas where wider trail sections can be accommodated such as vacated streets, public utility easements, and flood channels. Development of primary trails should include rest stops, information kiosks, and maps of the trail system.
Secondary Trails:
Secondary trails are the trails that connect to the primary access trails and to most locations in the city. These are the twelve foot trails that are designed to be adjacent to the streets and represent the bulk of trails that currently exist. They carry most of the City’s pedestrian and equestrian circulation. They are not intended to carry the City’s bicycle traffic because of the potential conflict with equestrian traffic (Section 3.1.4). Since these trails are designed to carry most of the equestrian traffic in the City, and are highly visible by being adjacent to the streets, appropriate landscaping should be incorporated into street/trail sections to enhance the use of the trails, and to improve the aesthetics of the community.
Tertiary Trails:
Tertiary trails are meant only to provide access to the main trail system from small residential areas that are not adjacent to the trail system. Since the tertiary trails carry only a small volume of traffic, surfacing and planting will be minimal.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 29
Use Of Drainage Channels as Trail Corridors:
As described above, drainage channels can also provide a network of primary interconnections with the existing equestrian trails. By allowing access, these drainage channels can be incorporated as part of a primary trail system. Integration of the drainage channels may involve some surfacing and planting treatment, and may require additional trail safety measures. Riverside County Conservation and Flood Control District has given conceptual approval to the City for the use of drainage channels for trail purposes, and the City is currently reviewing use priorities.
Natural equestrian trails are located away from the surfaced streets, and are generally located on the edge of town. These trails are important in enhancing the rural atmosphere because they provide trail users a unique opportunity to access the City’s surrounding open space. They can provide an important link to the regional trail system as well as providing access to local landscape features such as the Norco Hills and the Santa Ana River. These trails accommodate hikers and equestrians, but are generally not wide enough to also accommodate bicycles. Rest stops for pedestrians and equestrians should also provided along the natural trails wherever possible.
3.1.4	TRAFFIC LEVEL OF SERVICE STANDARDS
In order to be consistent with the Riverside County Congestion Management Program (CMP), the City has adopted the use of the Highway Capacity Manual method in the evaluation of intersection Level of Service (LOS). Level of Service is a qualitative measure of traffic flow. At intersections, it is based on the estimated delay experienced by the average driver. Levels of service are designated from LOS A (best) to LOS F (worst). LOS F is the level at which the intersection is overloaded and is characterized by stop-and-go traffic with extensive delay to drivers. Table 3 shows the Levels of Service for Signalized Intersections. The City of Norco has established LOS D as the minimum standard for intersections during peak hours. Based on the Riverside County definition of LOS D Average Daily Traffic volumes (Appendix B), the City has adopted the minimum standard of LOS D for the planning of roadway segments. LOS E is considered the minimum standard for CMP purposes as recommended in the CMP legislation.
There are several factors that affect the capacity of a street, including the following:
•	Level of service selcted.
•	Lane configuration.
Norco
\£_JX General Plan Circulation Element 30
•	Width of Available Shoulders.
•	Street Gradient.
•	Curvature.
•	Operating speed.
•	Lateral clearance.
•	Side friction generated by parking, driveways, intersections, and interchanges.
•	Volumes of trucks, buses, and recreational vehicles.
•	Spacing and timing of traffic signals.
•	Sight distance.
•	Pedestrian, equestrian, and bicycle traffic.
3.1.5	FUTURE TRAVEL DEMAND
Future travel demand has been estimated in close correlation with the expected land uses and specific plan developments. Year 2010 has been selected as the build-out year for the purpose of travel demand forecast. Specific plans included in the travel demand forecast are the Gateway Specific Plan (including the Interstate 15 Corridor Study), the Norco Hills Specific Plan, the Third Street Area Plan and the Rancho La Sierra Specific Plan (City of Riverside). The Savi Ranch Estate Specific Plan area which was immediately outside the northeast City boundary, was also indirectly included in the travel forecast analysis even though no development ever occurred there.
There will need to be another assessment for future travel demand made once the Program EIR for the proposed Eastvale Community Plan is made available as a public document. The Norco model was done in 1992 before traffic numbers for the higher density of development north of the river were available and is therefore outdated as far as what future demand is going to actually be. The traffic study that has been prepared for the Eastvale Community Plan assumes those higher densities. Future modeling for Norco will have to take those numbers into consideration and determine how the impacts to Norco are going to be addressed in the City’s circulation system.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 31
TABLE 3
LEVLES OF SERVICE FOR SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS
LEVEL OF SERVICE
A
B
C
D
E
F
STOPPED DELAY PER VEHICLE (SECONDS)
< 5.0 5.1-15.0
15.1-25.0
25.1	-40.0
40.1	-60.0 >60.0
LEVEL OF SERVICE A describes with very low delay, i.e., less than 5.0 seconds per vehicle. This occurs when progression is extremely favorable, and most vehicles arrive during the green phase. Most vehicles do not stop at all. Short cycle lengths may also contribute to low delay.
LEVEL OF SERVICE B describes operations with delay in the range of 5.1 to 15.0 seconds per vehicle. This generally occurs with good progression and/or short cycle lengths. More vehicles stop than for LOS A, causing higher levels of average delay.
LEVEL OF SERVICE C describes operations with delay in the range of 15.1 to 25.0 seconds per vehicle. These higher delays may result from fair progression and/or longer cycle lengths. Individual cycle failures may begin to appear in this level. The number of vehicles stopping is significant at this level, although many still pass through the intersection without stopping.
LEVEL OF SERVICE D describes operations with delay in the range of 25.1 to 40.0 seconds per vehicle. At level D, the influence of congestion becomes more noticeable. Longer delays may result from combination of unfavorable progression, long cycle lengths, or high v/c ratios. Many vehicles stop, and the proportion of vehicles not stopping declines. Individual cycle failures are noticeable.
LEVEL OF SERVICE E describes operations with delay in the range of 40.1 to 60.0 seconds per vehicle. This is considered to be the limit of acceptable delay. These delay values generally indicate poor progression, long cycle lengths, and high v/c ratios. Individual cycle failures are frequent occurrences.
LEVEL OF SERVICE F describes operations with delay in excess of 60.0 seconds per vehicle. This is to be unacceptable to most drivers. This condition often occurs with oversaturation, i.e., when arrival flow rates exceed the capacity of the intersection. It may also occur at high v/c ratios below 1.00 with many individual cycle failures. Poor progression and long cycle lengths may also be major contributing causes to such delay levels.
(^S?) Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 32
The current_travel demand forecasting model was developed to estimate future traffic volumes in the Circulation Element and was_completed in 1992. The Norco Transportation Model delineated 63 Traffic Analysis Zones (TAZ) within the City based on land uses and existing roadway locations. The network of Collectors, Major Arterials along with_the Interstate 15 freeway, that existed at that time were used as basic transportation links within the model. Existing and build-out land uses were provided by the City for each TAZ. The model used constant trip rates for each type of land use in trip generation. Future travel demand in terms of vehicle trips were estimated for each TAZ using trip generation rates recommended by the Institute of Transportation Engineers and San Diego Association of Governments. These trip generation rates were applied to the land use variables (such as number of dwelling units, square footage of commercial or industrial building, number of students, etc.) of each TAZ to produce the number of vehicle trips generated by or attracted to each zone. The model classified trip production and attraction as home-base work trips, home-base non-work trips and non-home-base trips.
The Norco Transportation Model was compatible with the (RIVSAN) model at the time when it was completed in 1992 with regards to method of analysis, traffic analysis zones grouping, highway network, external station traffic distribution and general consistencies in trip production and attraction. A RIVSAN 2010 run dated January 2, 1992 was provided by the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) as basis for a compatibility check. The link (roadway) network in the RIVSAN run included the Etiwanda Avenue crossing of the Santa Ana River and the existing crossings at Hamner Avenue and River Road. The RIVSAN model also included the Lincoln Avenue connection between First Street in Norco and Route 91 in Corona. The RIVSAN model was updated in 1999 and according to the Riverside SCAG office, they feel that development north of the river has been modeled correctly. The problem is that while the impacts have been determined, the impacts have not been addressed and mitigated appropriately.
The Norco Transportation Model was validated by 1991 ground traffic counts of collectors and major arterials. New traffic numbers have since been provided which will need to be accommodated in a new model for Norco.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 33
SCALE 1”= 2500’
EXHIBrT 4
ESTIMATED 2010 BUILD-OUT AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC VOLUMES
Based on the land use parameters provided by the City, the Norco model determined the total number of vehicle trips as a result of commercial and industrial build-out in 2010. That number was estimated at 196,000 vehicles per day while the total number of trips generated by residential units was 74,000 vehicles per day. Other public services would generate approximately 40,000 trips per day. With adjustments to reflect the different production and attraction characteristics of each generator, the City will experience a net attraction of approximately 100,000 daily vehicle trips in 2010, based on the City’s buildout scenario. It is not known how this might change with a new Norco model that takes into consideration the new land uses north of the river.
Exhibit 4 shows the estimated build-out Average Daily Traffic volumes on the existing roadway network, based on the 1992 model scenario. It is noted that there will be heavy concentration of vehicle trips along Sixth Street and the central segments of Hamner Avenue. These concentration of trips, which more than double the volumes estimated by the RIVSAN model, are the result of the assumed full development of the commercial areas (25% construction coverage) along these streets. First Street and Second Street east of Hamner Avenue also showed substantial increase in traffic volumes because of full commercial development and the RIVSAN assumption that Lincoln Avenue would be connected to Route 91 (subsequently constructed).
The Norco Transportation Model showed some increase in volumes along Fifth Street in the vicinity of Hamner Avenue but the volumes were relatively low compared to Sixth Street. This was in contrast to the RIVSAN output which showed Fifth Street being utilized more than Sixth Street.
Estimated ADT at external links with Interstate 15, Arlington Avenue, Hamner Avenue and River Road were compatible to the RIVSAN output because the Norco Transportation Model was set to accept RIVSAN estimated volumes at external stations.
Of the nine intersections selected by City staff for detail study, the build-out 2010 ADT volumes would warrant traffic signals at the four currently un-signalized intersections: California Avenue/North Drive, California Avenue/Sixth Street, Bluff Street/River Road, and Parkridge Avenue/First Street. Heavy turning movement at the intersections of Hamner Avenue/Sixth Street and Hamner Avenue/Second Street would result in unacceptable LOS at these locations.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 35
3.1.6	REVISED CIRCULATION ELEMENT - YEAR 2010
Based on the estimated 2010 build-out ADT volumes on the existing roadway network, Hamner Avenue and Sixth Street would require three through lanes in each direction to maintain an acceptable LOS D. A separate traffic study for California Avenue indicated that it can be kept at two lanes and still be able to maintain LOS “D”. All other Collectors could continue to provide LOS D maintaining two through lanes in each direction. Exhibit 5 shows the proposed typical cross-sections of roadways based on the classifications in Table 4:
TABLE 4
PROPOSED TYPICAL CROSS-SECTIONS
Classification Right-of-way	Pavement/	Parkway
No. of Lanes
Local	60’	3672	Equestrian trail on one side
Collector	88’	6474	Equestrian trail on one side
Major Arterial 2E	tbd*	3672	Equestrian trails on both sides
Major Arterial 4	100’	8074	10’ sidewalk on both sides and, 12’ raised median
Major Arterial 4E	100’	6474	Equestrian trails on both sides
Urban Arterial	110’	8676	8’ sidewalk, 4’ parkway on
both sides and 14’ raised median or 10’ striped median
* - to be determined
Norco
VJjy General Plan Circulation Element 36
Local
Equestrion
Troil
Collector
>	 I	64-	_____/ I
6'i	8', 12'	■ 12’ , 12’ ,	I 12’ , 8’ , 6’, 12'
		
		
Equestrion
Troil
Major - 4
River Road
Major - 4E
Sixth Street
Hidden Valley Parkway (%)
100'
Urban Arterial
Hamner Avenue Without Median
110'
12’ , 14’	112‘	1 12'	W ,	12- . 12-	14' 1	12’
1 t	1	—		r L	1	1	-r i	
r	38’		r	38’	1 	J-	—
Urban Arterial Hamner Avenue With Raised Median
/■	,						
12’	I-13' 1 1V	1 12’	14’ 1	12’ 11’	13’	12’
	t		1 L	I	I I	
	36’		r	36’	I	
EXHIBIT 5
TYPICAL CROSS SECTIONS OF ROADWAYS
Hamner Avenue is classified as an Urban Arterial with right-of-way for an ultimate six lanes, although it is currently striped for four lanes through its entire length with the exception of the north end. The Norco Transportation Model projected a decrease in traffic volume at the south end of Hamner Avenue. The reduction could be the result of the assumed full development of commercial zones along Hamner Avenue, which increases the attraction of Norco and decreases the volumes of external trips. Traffic volumes also decrease to a level serviceable by a two lane roadway at the north end of Hamner Avenue in the vicinity of Santa Ana River crossing. However, this relatively low volume is based on the RIVSAN model assumption that Etiwanda Avenue will be extended across Santa Ana River to connect with Arlington Avenue. RIVSAN model output with the deletion of the Etiwanda crossing was not available at the time of the circulation element update in 1992, and with this update.
The width of the northern portion of Hamner Avenue is likely going to need to change once the full impacts from development in the Eastvale area is known.
California Avenue, Sixth Street, and North Drive are currently classified as Major Roadways with equestrian trails on both sides of California Avenue and Sixth Street. California is classified as Major 2-E and Sixth Street as 4-E. North Drive has an equestrian trail only on the north side of the street. Upon completion of a bridge connection between Arlington, Schleisman, and Pine Avenues, over the Santa Ana River, it is anticipated that traffic levels on California Avenue and North Drive will drop significantly. At that time California Avenue and North Drive should be reclassified as Collectors.
Estimated build-out traffic on all other Collectors are moderate and would not require widening of the existing width of two or four through lanes. A link between Fourth Street and Hidden Valley Parkway along Hillside Avenue was tested in the 2010 build-out scenario of the Norco Transportation Model. It was concluded that the diverted traffic would only marginally warrant a designation of a Collector. The heavy concentration of build-out commercial area along Hamner Avenue attracts a substantial amount of trips and results in predominant east-west movements with relatively less demand for north-south through movements. For the same reason, the proposed hillside developments in the eastern region of the City would require the extension of east-west Collectors (Second Street, Fourth Street and Fifth Street). A north-south Collector would be required to connect to Hidden Valley Parkway. This requirement has not been tested in the Norco Transportation Model because Hidden Valley Parkway is loaded heavily by developments in the City of Corona and the RIVSAN model has not coded this link in the current model.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 38
The current classification of roadways is basically consistent with the current roadway classifications in adjacent jurisdictions. However, the current classifications in the Jurupa Community Plan are not consistent with development being proposed and now occurring. A general plan amendment is being processed in the County that will increase the planned widths of most roadways there. When that does occur there will be inconsistencies between the classifications for Hamner Avenue and River Road in Norco and the corresponding roadways in the County. The classification of roads for primary connections between Norco and Corona are primarily consistent with one another. Section 3.3 specifically identifies compatibility between jurisdictions.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION NETWORK
The Riverside Transit Agency (RTA) operates a fixed route service and a dial-a-ride service for the City of Norco. The fixed route service for the City is Route 3, originally implemented on March 6, 1989.
Two vehicles operating thirteen trips per day, Monday through Friday, on an hourly frequency serviced the original route. In January 1990, Route 3 eliminated one vehicle and obtained a ninety-minute frequency. Due to increased demand this service has now_reverted back to two operating vehicles. Ridership has increased since 1992 on Route 3, with the first two months in 1998 averaging 2926 passengers per month (1,272 average riders in 1990) for a daily average ridership of 146 passengers (64 in 1990). Route 3 has an average performance to date of 5.51 passengers per hour and 0.38 passengers per mile. It is operating with an average subsidy of $5.60 per passenger.
Extensive marketing research has been conducted in the Route 3 service area, especially in Norco, and input from various sources have revised the routing substantially improving performance. A January 1992 service change provided service to the Riverside Community College, Norco Campus. Another important change implemented for Route 3 was the extension of service to connect with Route 15 at La Sierra and Arlington, which now has a thirty-minute frequency. This has provided passengers another travel pattern through Norco and links Route 3 on the north end with the City of Riverside. The route includes destinations, which service the Department of Motor Vehicles and the Norco junior and senior high schools. In addition, the fixed route was enhanced with the addition of another vehicle.
One of the means of inducing people to ride public transit is to make the service as attractive as possible. Often times, the paradox of public transit is that additional service is not introduced until justification can be made. Existing ridership must exceed capacity. However, potential passengers indicate their unwillingness to use
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 39
public transit services unless improved.
The RTA also provides a dial-a-ride service to the City of Norco community. This service is available on a Acall and responses method. Riders call a number requesting the time of pickup and destination desired. This service is offered currently at $1.25 per ride, and $0.60 for senior citizens and handicapped persons. Through February 1998, dial-a-ride had a monthly average of 1,312 passengers, for a daily average ridership of 44 passengers. Dial-a-ride has an average performance to date of 2.58 passengers per hour and 0.14 passengers per mile.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER JURISDICTIONS/PLANS
RIVERSIDE COUNTY
The area north of the City is unincorporated, under the administration of Riverside County. Currently, the area is within the boundaries of the Jurupa Community Plan, but is more generally known as Eastvale and as of December 1999 is part of the developing Eastvale Community Plan (ECP) that will replace the Jurupa Community Plan for this area of the county. Adoption of the ECP should occur sometime during 2000-2001. A traffic study has been prepared as part of the EIR process for the community plan, and although the EIR has not yet been certified, the traffic study is being used here for comparison purposes.
For existing conditions, there is some disparity between the ECP traffic counts and the latest traffic counts performed for the City of Norco. One reason for the discrepancy is the fact that the ECP study was completed in 1999, while the Norco study was completed in 1998 so the ECP numbers are generally higher near the river crossings:
	Norco	ECP
Hamner Ave. north of River Dr.	6,111	9,100
River Rd. north of Corydon Ave.	7,231	9,400
There is a greater discrepancy between the two studies when comparing future buildout traffic numbers. The Norco study shows a buildout condition of 11,000 ADT on River Road in the year 2010, while the study from the ECP indicates that that number will be 20,400. Likewise, for Hamner Avenue the Norco study indicated 11,100 ADT while the ECP study showed 42,000. The primary difference between the two numbers is that the ECP study was prepared taking into consideration the higher density housing that is being proposed and built north of the river, which numbers had not been determined when the Norco study was completed.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 40
Previously, the land use density for future traffic determinations north of the river was three dwelling units per acre. Most of the tracts that are being approved range from 4 dwelling units per acre and up. The result is many more trips than what had been calculated when “future conditions” in the Norco study were determined.
The impact of this increase in numbers is the expanded road infrastructure that will be required to accommodate the traffic numbers. On Hamner Avenue, the County is considering a designation of “Major Urban Arterial” with a right-of-way section of 152’ and three lanes of travel in each direction (with an option for 4). The buildout width of Hamner Avenue in the Norco Circulation Element is 110’, and it also will accommodate three travel lanes in each direction; but there would not be enough right-of-way for any additional lanes without the City having to obtain more right-of-way. If Hamner Avenue were widened to its ultimate optional potential width of four lanes in each direction, there would have to be a transition to three lanes in the vicinity of the bridge and may result in congested conditions south and/or north of the bridge.
152’
21 ’	 10'  12'	 12'	 14'	 14'	. .	14’	 12’	 12’	 10' . .2£
PARKWAY		I	1	*	RAISED MEDIAN	t	T	t		PARKWAY
HAMNER AVENUE-R			VERS	DE COUNTY MAJOR U			RBAN ARTERIAL, 152’ ROW			
110’
12’ 	13’	11'	12’	 14’	 12’	11’	13’	. 12’
PARK	1	J.	I	RAISED MEDIAN	T	t	T	PARK
WAY								WAY
HAMNER AVENUE-NORCO CITY MAJOR, 110’ ROW
For River Road, the discrepancy is more of a concern. Under the existing Jurupa Community Plan, Archibald Avenue is designated as an ’’Arterial” with an ultimate right-of-way width of 110’ with the possibility of two travel lanes in each direction. The buildout width now being considered by Riverside County in the ECP is 152’ with three travel lanes in each direction and the possibility for four.
Archibald Avenue becomes River Road after is crosses the Santa Ana River. The ultimate width for River Road in the Norco General Plan is 100’ with only two travel lanes in each direction. Under buildout conditions there would have to be a transition from three lanes to two lanes north of the bridge, and could result in
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 41
congestion in the vicinity of, and south of the bridge. Of concern also is that River Road is partly within the jurisdiction of the City of Corona. Those standards are addressed in the following seciton.
◄-------------------------------------------------------------------------------►
134’
1 10’ r PARK WAY	< 8’.	12’ 1'	14’ n 12’ rn 14’ RAISED ^MEDIA^I	12’ ' T	8’>	1 10’ r PARK WAY
RIVE		R-NORCO CITY COLLECTOR, 100’ ROW				
1 10’ r	10’ r	12’ T	14’ 1	18’ 7	' RAISED MEDIAN	14' T	12’ 't ’	1 10’ r	10’ f
RIVER-CORONA CITY COLLECTOR, 110’ ROW
3.3.2	CITY OF CORONA
The area to the south and southwest of the City is located in the City of Corona. The Circulation Element of the Corona General Plan shows ultimate widths for roads but does not contain any future traffic projections. For projected traffic volumes, a traffic study that was prepared for the Main Street Specific Plan was used. The specific plan is located at the south end of Hamner Avenue where it enters the City of Corona and becomes Main Street.
The primary traffic connections between the City of Norco and the City of Corona are: Hamner Avenue - Main Street; River Road which runs generally parallel to the City Boundary running alternately in and out of the two cities until it enters County jurisdiction on the north; and Hidden Valley - McKinley which is the City boundary eastward to Norco Hills Road. Secondary traffic connections occur along Norco Hills Road which also is the City boundary; Parkridge - El Paso; Lincoln - Pacific -First; and Second - Country Club.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 42
Hamner Avenue - Main Street: Hamner Avenue has an ultimate right-of-way width of 110' with three travel lanes in each direction while Main Street has an ultimate right-of-way width of 100’, that can also accommodate six travel lanes.
◄-----------------------------------------------------------►
MAINSTREET-CORONA CITY MAJOR, 100’ ROW
Lincoln Avenue - First Street: This intersection is currently being reconfigured so that First Street in Norco will tie directly into Lincoln Avenue in Corona. The current configuration is an off-site five-point intersection with First Street terminating at Pacific Avenue just north of its intersection with Parkridge Avenue and Lincoln Avenue. In the new configuration, Pacific Avenue will end in a cul-de-sac, and First Street will be re-aligned so as to intersect Parkridge Avenue directly across from Lincoln Avenue. Both First Street and Lincoln Avenue are 84 foot right-of-ways where they will intersect Parkridge avenue which allows four travel lanes.
Corydon Avenue: Northeast of River Road, Corydon Avenue is in Norco, and southeast it is in Corona. In both jurisdictions, the right-of-way is 88 feet which allows four travel lanes. The remaining primary connections between the cities of Norco and Corona occur along streets that also serve as the boundaries between the two cities (i.e. Hidden Valley Parkway and Norco Hills Road).
3.3.3	CITY OF RIVERSIDE
The City of Norco shares a common boundary with the City of Riverside on the east. Most of the boundary follows the ridgeline where there are no road connections. The only direct road connection between the two cities is North Drive/Arlington Avenue in the northeast corner of the city. As has been noted,
________the combination of Arlington Avenue, North Drive, California Avenue, and Sixth
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 43
Street serves as an alternate/short-cut route between Riverside and the 1-15 Freeway. Arlington Avenue is designated as an “arterial’ in the City of Riverside General Plan within a buildout right-of-way width of 110 feet that accommodates two through lanes in each direction. In Norco, North Drive is categorized as a “Major-4E” class roadway with an ultimate width of 100’ and four travel lanes.
12’ PARK WAY	8'	12’ V	14’	18’	_	14’ H_T|	12’ Y	8’	12’ PARK WAY
AR	LINGTON-RIVERSIDE CITY ARTERIAL, 11				0’ ROW	
12’	« 6’ i	14’	12’	12’	12’	14’	. 6’	12’
TRAIL			J.'	PNTD. MEDIAN		' t ‘		TRAIL
NO	RTH	DR.-NORCO CITY M			AJOR (4E), 100’ ROW			
3.3.4	RIVERSIDE COUNTY TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
In 1990 the State Legislation required each metropolitan county in the state to prepare a “Congestion Management Program” and authorized each county to designate a “Congestion Management Agency” (CMA). The Riverside County Transportation Commission was designated as the CMA for Riverside County. Specifically the “Congestion Management Program” (CMP) is an effort to directly link land use, transportation, and air quality issues to determine reasonable growth management programs and to effectively use transportation funds.
The designation of the CMP system of highways and roadways is based on a set of optional criteria as follows:
•	All state highway facilities (including interstates) in Riverside County
•	Routes identified on CALTRANS’ “Functional Classification System” maps as “Principal Arterials”
•	Designated expressways
•	Facilities linking cities/communities and major activity centers (shopping malls, industrial/business parks, stadiums, etc.)
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 44
The only roadway within the City limits that is included in the Riverside County CMP system of highways and roadways is Interstate 15 which is not under jurisdiction of the Norco General Plan.
Part of the CMP is the incorporation of a “trip reduction and travel demand element” that promotes alternative transportation methods” implemented through Transportation Demand Management (TDM) projects. The CMA has facilitated a number of TDM projects through the use of Measure “A” Commuter Assistance Program funds and through cooperative projects involving CALTRANS and local jurisdictions. These projects are anticipated to include park-n-ride lots, commuter stations, rail and feeder service. In addition, each agency was required to adopt its own TDM ordinance. The City of Norco adopted a TDM ordinance on February 3, 1993. That ordinance incorporated as Section 18.54 of the Zoning Code encourages ride-sharing for large employers, and the incorporation of trip reducing elements into project design such as bicycle racks, bus turnouts, on-site amenities, etc.
Since there are no roads under jurisdiction of the City of Norco that are included in the County system of highways and roadways, compliance with the CMP is limited to implementation of the City’s TDM Ordinance. That ordinance was formulated after a sample ordinance that had been supplied at the time by the Western Riverside Council of Governments and was in accordance with South Coast Air Quality Management District and CMP policies. For large employer’s where ride-sharing is encouraged, compliance has been self-regulated thus far with the individual employers reporting directly to the South Coast Air Quality Management District. During the project review process for new projects, the City incorporates as feasible, design elements to encourage the use of mass transit and alternate forms of transportation.
INFRASTRUCTURE NETWORK
WATER SYSTEM
The City of Norco has completed a Water Master Plan since the last update of the Circulation Element in 1992. All distribution lines for water service in the City are existing and available. Domestic and irrigation services are provided through the City's Water Department. The City uses the following sources for its water supply:
■	Wells owned by the City in both the Chino and Temescal basins. Water from these sources is treated in the City before it goes directly into the City’s water supply system;
■	On-going water agreement with the City of Corona to have their water fed into the City’s system in times of need and demand;
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 45
■	Agreement with the City of Corona to provide water to portions of the Norco Hills Specific Plan until such time as there is replacement water from the City’s system;
■	On-going water agreement with the Jurupa Community Services District to have their water fed into the City’s system in times of need and demand.
The City is exploring alternative sources of potable water to mitigate State concerns and continue to improve overall quality.
■	Water from the Chino de-salter located at the terminus of Pedley Avenue which draws water right out of the river basin and treats it there. This water is available but needs to be pumped up to the City’s water line. The City anticipates taking water from this de-salter beginning in June 2000.
■	Water from wells located in the California Rehabilitation Center (CRC) that are currently owned by the CRC and which may be transferred to the City wherein the City would then be responsible for providing water to CRC.
■	The City is hoping to adjust our existing arrangement with the City of Corona that requires a 24-hour notification before water is provided so that a certain volume of water would be available on demand at all times without notification.
■	An option for the future, but which is not feasible at this point, is to provide reclaimed water infrastructure to deliver reclaimed water that is now available to various public areas for landscape watering (i.e. parks and golf course)
3.4.2	SEWAGE SYSTEM
Sewer service for the City is provided through the Public Works Department. The entire City with the exception of a small number of residences have a sewer main from which a feeder line can be extended to the house. The only exception is the California Rehabilitation Center which connects directly into the Santa Ana River Intercept (SARI) line. Sewage in that line is directed to a treatment facility in Orange County. Otherwise, all new and existing development, whether commercial or residential, must connect into the City sewer where it is conveyed to a treatment center. City sewage is treated at the Archibald Treatment Plant located north of the Santa Ana River in which the City is part owner.
For residences that are not currently connected to the sewer, the residents have the responsibility of paying for the connecting feeder lines, however, an assistance
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 46
program is available for qualifying lower income homes.. The majority of the City is hooked-up to the public sewer system. On-site septic systems are being phased out as redevelopment occurs and as property sales occur. Existing residences still on septic systems are required to hook up to the sewer system before a sale of the residence can occur.
3.4.3	STORM DRAIN
The City of Norco Master Drainage Plan consists of two major components, the first is the Master-Planned storm drainage facilities which are designed by the Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District (RCFD), and incorporated into the City’s plan; the second is the underground storm drain system for nuisance run-off maintained by the City. Regional facilities are approved and maintained by RCFD and are constructed in conjunction with the City. The City Public Works Department maintains the run-off storm drains that take normal surface nuisance run-off and convey it to County maintained facilities (flood channels, retention basins, etc.). The City’s Master Drainage Plan also establishes a program for the payment of drainage impact fees for new development.
Because of the rural nature of the City of Norco and the fact that many of the original streets were constructed without any curb and gutter, there is potential for storm runoff to collect and run uncontrolled across street pavement and trails. In new tracts this is controlled with rolled curbs that are required with street improvements. These are designed to collect surface run-off under ordinary storm situations. For a heavier storm (the worst storm that can be anticipated in 10 years) the newer streets are designed so that the run-off is contained within the top of curbline on each side of the street. For the worst storm that could be anticipated in 100 years, the newer streets are designed so that run-off is contained between the two street right-of-way lines. In areas where there has not been curb and gutter improvements,these runoff amounts are not directed or controlled within the streets. The result is the potential for erosion damage to streets and trails.
The installation of rolled curb and gutter (the Norco standard) is typically the responsibility of the property owner; or it can be accomplished through the establishment of an area-wide assessment district. Currently the City does not have an assessment district for the installation of curb and gutter on developed streets. The current city policy for public expenditure to install curb and gutter is that funds only be appropriated in situations that are determined to be of critical importance to imminent public health, safety and welfare; and only as funds become available.
The City does not have a designated fund for the on-going installation of curbs and gutters. A new city policy and funding mechanism would have to be implemented to have a City program for this type of public improvement.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 47
4.	IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
The City’s Circulation Element addressed a range of circulation-related issues including the provision of a safe and efficient street system, adequate off-street parking, truck circulation routes, pedestrian, equestrian, and bicycle considerations, and public infrastructure associated with water, sewer, and storm drain systems. Implementation measures are summarized as follows:
4.1	MASTER PLAN OF STREETS
4.1.1	CITY/REGIONAL CIRCULATION: Arterial streets within the planned street system will be constructed and maintained according to the Circulation Plan based on standards related to their function and traffic capacity.
Responsible Agency: Public Works/City Engineer/Department of Planning
Funding Source: Development Fees/Exactions, City Capital Improvements Program, Maintenance Program, and available State and Federal funding.
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Circulation Element Policies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9
4.1.2	TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM MANAGEMENT (TSM): To maximize the capacity of the existing and planned traffic system, capital improvements such as restriping, spot widening, and traffic signal coordination will be made.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department
Funding Source: Development Fees/Exactions, City Capital Improvements Program, Maintenance Program, and available State and Federal funding.
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Circulation Element Policies: 1.7
4.1.3	TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM): Following the Air Quality Management Plan for the South Coast Air Basin, employers of over 100 employees will be involved in a program aimed at reducing the number of vehicles using the roadway system during peak hours through van-pooling, ridesharing, staggered work hours and other methods.
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 48
Responsible Agency: SCAQMD/City of Norco
Funding Source: Development Fees/Exactions, City Capital Improvements Program, Maintenance Program, and available State and Federal funding.
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Circulation Element Policies: 1.11 and 1.12
4.2	PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION PLAN
4.2.1	BUS SERVICE: The Riverside Transit District (RTD) will offer fixed route service on local and express routes. Park-and-ride facilities will be provided to promote additional express bus service along the freeway corridor.
Responsible Agency: Riverside Transit District/Caltrans
Funding Source: RTD/Caltrans Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Circulation Element Policies: 2.2, 2.3, 2.4
4.3	NON-MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION
4.3.1	PEDESTRIAN/EQUESTRIAN CIRCULATION: Pedestrian/Equestrian Trails exist along most City arterial streets and will be constructed as part of the improvements to new arterial roadways to facilitate safe and convenient pedestrian/equestrian movement. In addition, improvements to the equestrian trail system will be implemented according to the Norco Master Plan for Parks, Recreation & Open Space.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department
Funding Source: Development Fees/Exactions, City Capital Improvements Program, Maintenance Program, and available State and Federal funding.
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Circulation Element Policies: 2.1, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 49
4.3.2	BICYCLE FACILITIES: A bicycle trail plan shall be established utilizing existing street pavements in conjunction with the proposed Crest to Coast Trail along the Santa Ana River. Bikeways will be maintained and provided within the City pursuant to that plan to promote the use of bicycles. These bikeways will be integrated into the overall County bikeway system.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department
Funding Source: Development Fees/Exactions, City Capital Improvements Program, Maintenance Program, and available State and Federal funding.
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Circulation Element Policies: 2.5, 2.6
4.4	PARKING
4.4.1	OFF-STREET REQUIREMENTS: The City’s Zoning Ordinance includes off-street parking requirements for various types of developments and allowances for joint use of parking facilities where an appropriate mix of uses exists.
Responsible Agency: Department of Planning and Community Development/Public Works Department.
Funding Source: Development Fees/Exactions
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Circulation Element Policies: 4.1, 4.2
4.5	TRUCK ROUTES
4.5.1	TRUCK ROUTE DESIGNATION: Planned primary truck routes will be identified, signed and improved to accommodate truck travel.
Responsible Agency: Department of Planning and Community Development/Public Works Department
Funding Source: City Capital Improvements Program and Maintenance Program/Development Fees/Exactions Time Frame: Ongoing
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 50
Related Circulation Element Policies: 3.2
4.6	INFRASTRUCTURE
4.6.1	WATER SYSTEM: The City’s Water Department provides domestic and irrigation services.
Responsible Agency/Department: City Water Department
Funding Source: User Fees/Development Fees
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Circulation Element Policies: None
4.6.2	SEWAGE SYSTEM: The City provides sewage collection and conveyance service for processing at the Joint Powers Archibald facility.
Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works Department
Funding Source: User Fees/Development Fees Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Circulation Element Policies: None
4.6.3	STORM DRAIN SYSTEM: The Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District is responsible for storm drain master planned facilities. The City’s Public Works Department maintains non-master planned facilities.
Responsible Agency/Department: Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District/City Public Works Department Funding Source: Drainage Fees
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Circulation Element Policies: None
Norco
General Plan Circulation Element 51﻿GENERAL FLAN
CONSERVATION ELEMENT
X
UPDATE ADOPTION DATE: December 17, 2014
NORCO
CONSERVATION ELEMENT
2014 UPDATE
ADOPTED BY CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION NO. 2014-71
December 17, 2014
CITY COUNCIL
Herb Higgins, Mayor Kevin Bash, Mayor Pro Tem Kathy Azevedo Berwin Hanna Greg Newton
PLANNING COMMISSION
Robert Leonard, Chair Theodore Hoffman, Vice Chair Pat Hedges Phil Jaffarian John Rigler
STAFF
Andy Okoro, City Manager Cheryl Link, City Clerk Steve King, Planning Director Alma Robles, Senior Planner
TABLE OF CONTENTS:
TITLE
PAGE NUMBER
1.0 INTRODUCTION TO THE CONSERVATION ELEMENT..........................1
1.1	Purpose of the Conservation Element........................1
1.2	Scope and Format of Element................................1
2.0 CONSERVATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES.............................1
2.1 Conservation Issues and Problems...............................1
Adequate and Potable Water Supply Energy Supply Wildlife Protection Climate Change
2.2	Water Resources Quality Goal...........................................2
(Goals and Policies)
2.3	Water Resources Supply Goal............................................4
(Goals and Policies)
2.4	Water Resources, Public Awareness Goal.................................5
(Goals and Policies)
2.5	Use of Energy Resources Goal...........................................5
(Goals and Policies)
2.6	Development of Energy Resources Goal...................................6
(Goals and Policies)
2.7	Soil Resources Goal....................................................6
(Goals and Policies)
2.8	Wildlife Resources Goal................................................7
(Goals and Policies)
2.9	Climate Action Plan/Sustainability Community Strategy Goal.............8
(Goals and Policies)
3.0
THE CONSERVATION PLAN......................................
3.1	Water Master Plan....................................
3.1.1	Existing Setting...............................
3.1.2	Regional Setting...............................
3.1.3	Existing Facilities............................
3.1.4	Water Resources................................
3.1.5	Existing Water Quality.........................
3.1.6	Utilization of Water Resources.................
3.1.7	Conservation of Water Resources................
3.1.8	Development of New Water Resources.............
3.1.9	Other Water Resources..........................
3.2	Energy Resources.....................................
3.2.1	Conservation of Energy Resources...............
3.2.2	Utilization of Energy Resources, Direct and Indirect
3.2.3	Source and Supply of Energy Resources..........
11
11
11
11
13
14 16
17
18 18 18
20
20
21
21
3.2.4 Development of Energy Resources, Renewable and Non-
renewable....................................................23
3.2.5	Potential New Energy Sources.................................23
3.3	Soil and Mineral Resources.........................................24
3.3.1	Soil Resources...............................................24
3.3.2	Conservation of Soil Resources...............................25
3.3.3	Mineral Resources............................................25
3.4	Wildlife Resources.................................................30
3.4.1	Existing Setting for Resources...............................30
3.4.2	Special Status Species.......................................30
3.4.3	Hillside Habitat Resources...................................32
3.4.4	Lake Norconian Habitat Area..................................36
3.4.5	Santa Ana River Habitat Area.................................37
3.5	Climate Action Plan/Sustainable Community Plan.....................39
3.5.1	Jurisdictional Settings for Action...........................39
3.5.2	Legislative Mandates.........................................40
3.5.3	Anticipated Climate Impacts..................................40
3.5.4	Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory...........................40
4.0 IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES................................................43
4.1	Reclaimed Water Program.........................................43
4.2	Xeriscape.......................................................43
4.3	Water Quality Reports...........................................43
4.4	Water Quality Management........................................43
4.5	Public Water Information Programs...............................44
4.6	Manure to Energy Conversion.....................................44
4.7	Multi-species Habitat Protection Program........................44
4.8	Open Space Conservation.........................................44
4.9	Climate Action Plan/Sustainability Community Strategy...........44
5.0 GLOSSARY OF TERMS	.. .	..45
LIST OF EXHIBITS:
EXHIBIT	PAGE NUMBER
3.1	Water Master Plan........................................................12
3.2	Water Resources-2001.....................................................14
3.3	Water Resources-2005.....................................................15
3.4	Project Water Resources-Buildout.........................................16
3.5	California Electricity Sources...........................................22
3.6	Soil Classifications.....................................................28
3.7	Mineral Resource Zones...................................................29
3.8	Wildlife Resources.......................................................31
3.9	Components of Greenhouse Gas	Emission....................................42
3.10	WRCOG Emissions Reduction Target Plan 2020...............................43
LIST OF TABLES:
TABLE	PAGE NUMBER
3.1	Water Quality.............................................................17
3.2	Electricity Sources For California, 2013..................................22
3.3	Special	Status Species-Birds.............................................33
3.4	Special	Status Species-Mammals...........................................34
3.5	Special	Status Species-Reptiles..........................................34
3.6	Special	Status Species-Fish and Amphibians...............................35
3.7	Special	Status Species-Plants............................................35
3.8	Human	Activity and Greenhouse Gases....................................41
1.0 INTRODUCTION TO THE CONSERVATION ELEMENT
The City of Norco was incorporated to preserve a small plot agricultural/animal keeping/equestrian lifestyle. Primary to this goal is the maintenance of residential lots that will accommodate and encourage animal keeping and agriculture at a family scale, a concept that dates back to early colonial times. The Land Use Element establishes the primary goal of the community, which is the maintenance of that kind of lifestyle. All other elements of the General Plan must be consistent. The Conservation Element works in conjunction with the Land Use Element in providing the life quality standards that will sustain the community, and support the preservation of small plot agriculture/animal keeping/equestrian lifestyle as a viable overall land use. In an urban setting, the City of Norco provides a unique opportunity to maintain this lifestyle that is not readily available elsewhere in the region.
1.1	PURPOSE OF THE CONSERVATION ELEMENT
The purpose of the Conservation Element is to provide direction to the City regarding the preservation, development, and utilization of natural resources. The State has mandated that the General Plan provide for the conservation of natural resources for the use and enjoyment of future generations. Natural resources discussed in this element include water, energy, soils, minerals, and wildlife. For issues regarding land resources and use, see the Land Use Element.
1.2	SCOPE AND FORMAT OF ELEMENT
The element is composed of four sections. The first section includes a description of the Element’s purpose and background for inclusion in the General Plan. The second section contains the City’s goals and policy statements for the conservation of its resources including water, energy, soil, and wildlife. The third section is the Conservation Plan defining what the City needs to achieve with respect to its resources. The fourth section of the Conservation Element contains the implementation measures to accomplish the stated goals and policies.
2.0 CONSERVATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
2.1	CONSERVATION ISSUES AND PROBLEMS
2.1.1	ADEQUATE AND POTABLE WATER SUPPLY: The City’s average annual water production requirement is projected to increase from 6,000 acre-feet in 2014 to approximately 9,000 acre-feet when the City will be nearing build-out conditions. The Temescal Basin is the City’s primary source for water because of quality and the comparatively low cost of extraction. The City’s safe yield from that basin has been estimated to be 5,000 acre-feet necessitating the need to continue to find additional sources of water.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 1
2.1.2	ENERGY SUPPLY: Since the City does not produce any of its own electrical power, the City is subject to market conditions that it has only minimal influence on. If there is a protracted downturn in power availability, or some other factor produces prolonged increases in the cost of energy, the City becomes vulnerable to maintaining its lifestyle. In addition, this places the City’s potential to attract new development and jobs at a disadvantage to cities that supply their own electricity (i.e. Riverside) and may be able to weather market conditions better.
2.1.3	WILDLIFE PROTECTION: The City recognizes that the protection of wildlife resources and open space is an integral part of maintaining the City’s small plot agriculture/animal keeping/equestrian lifestyle and rural image.
Inherent to this is the protection of the primary vegetative/habitat communities that support the species endemic to the Norco area. The hillside areas as are one of the primary undisturbed habitat areas and a large amount of acreage has been preserved in open space to achieve that objective.
The Santa Ana River, is also already primarily preserved in open space, but the status of its native habitat is in a state of flux as officials work to supplant arundo with native habitat species. Arundo is a non-native plant that invaded many of the river and stream beds in the ecoregion systematically supplanting native vegetation. Continued removal of the arundo will ensure that the Santa Ana River can once again be a sustainable habitat area for native species.
2.1.4	WASTE MANAGEMENT: Because of the small plot agricultural, animal-keeping, and equestrian nature of the community there is the issue of manure management that is unique to Norco from the other cities in the western Riverside County area. The current practice of having the manure transported to drying beds outside of the City is a short-term solution.
A long-term solution needs to be developed for the City to maintain its animalkeeping lifestyle. The development of a manure-to-energy plant either for the City by itself or as part of a regional plant that can serve the needs of rural areas in Riverside County and surrounding counties is a long-term solution that needs to be pursued diligently.
2.2 WATER RESOURCES QUALITY GOAL-CONTINUOUSLY MAINTAIN AN ADEQUATE WATER SUPPLY THAT EXCEEDS MINIMUM STATE AND FEDERAL WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
2.2.1	WATER SUPPLY POLICY: The City will continue to seek ways to increase the available water resources through the preservation of existing resources, and the development of new ones.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 2
Policy 2.2.1a. Continue to promote water conservation through the use of xeriscape designs in new development. Additionally, public spaces shall incorporate xerixcape landscaping where feasible.
Policy 2.2.1b. Continue to provide information to the public on ways to conserve water and reduce consumption. Water conservation measures shall be specific to the type of user (i.e. residential, animal-keeping, and commercial).
Policy 2.2.1c. The City, along with other member agencies of the Western Riverside County Regional Wastewater Authority, should monitor the demand for reclaimed water, and then file Petitions of Change with the Regional Water Quality Control Board on an as-needed basis to reduce the amount of reclaimed water that is discharged into the Santa Ana River from the Archibald Treatment Facility. That water could then be available for transmission into the City’s reclaimed water infrastructure system already in place to deliver water for park irrigation and other future facilities. New projects (both public and private) should include as part of each project the installation of infrastructure for reclaimed water where the installation for future use is feasible.
Policy 2.2.1d. Insure that there are adequate increases in water production and distribution capabilities to meet future growth demands.
POTABLE WATER QUALITY POLICY: Continue to monitor water quality and use the different available resources for water supply to insure that the City has an uninterrupted supply of potable and aesthetic water.
Policy 2.2.2a. Develop and maintain inter-agency agreements and infrastructure improvements to have back-up water supply sources from adjoining water districts during times of emergencies and system maintenance requirements.
REGIONAL WATER QUALITY POLICY: Continue regional cooperative agreements and actions for the protection of regional water resources.
Policy 2.2.3a. Protect water resources from pollutants through enforcement of the the Clean Water Act with the issuance of National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits for new development, as applicable, including Storm Water Pollution Protection Plans (SWPPP) during construction, and Water Quality Management Plans (WQMP) post construction.
Policy 2.2.3b. Ensure through continuing public information campaigns that all residents with large animals are aware that manure spreading as a means of disposal is strictly prohibited to prevent contamination to ground water supplies, and that only temporary storage is allowed until collection by a City-approved waste hauler. In conjunction with Goal 2.6 (Development of Energy Resources) the City should seek financing opportunities for the development of a manure to
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 3
energy processing facility now that the feasibility of such an operation for this area has been demonstrated.
Policy 2.2.3c. The City, in cooperation with the Riverside County Department of Environmental Health, should vigorously enforce regulations regarding the dumping of commercial and industrial hazardous wastes to prevent contamination to groundwater supplies.
Policy 2.2.3d. Continue partnering with the Regional Water Quality Control Board and neighboring water agencies for regional solutions to long range water quality issues.
Policy 2.2.3e. Continue monitoring water quality and implement measures as needed to maintain the aesthetic quality of the water as well as the potability.
WATER RESOURCES SUPPLY GOAL- PRESERVE RESOURCES BY REDUCING THE DEMAND FOR WATER IN CITY FACILITIES, AND IN PRIVATE DOMESTIC USE.
PUBLIC WATER CONSERVATION POLICY: The City should reduce demand for water in City facilities including parks, landscaped areas, and public buildings.
Policy 2.3.1a. Implement as feasible computer monitoring and soil sensors to control landscape watering.
Policy 2.3.1b. Watering of public landscaped areas should occur during early morning and/or late evening hours to minimize water loss from evaporation.
Policy 2.3.1c. Water storage facilities should be constructed as feasible for the purpose of storing run-off water to recharge groundwater supplies.
PRIVATE DOMESTIC WATER CONSERVATION POLICY:
Policy 2.3.2a. Require the installation of flow restriction fixtures in all new development.
Policy 2.3.2b. Promote public awareness programs of methods to preserve water resources including making available lists of feasible planting materials that are drought tolerant and/or low water users.
Policy 2.3.2c. Establish an emergency conservation plan to include public agencies, businesses, and residences for times when water supplies are particularly low so as to maintain water supplies to maintain animal keeping.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 4
Policy 2.3.2d. Encourage the installation of the latest technology available for animal keeping watering systems that can reduce the overall amount of water being used.
2.4	WATER RESOURCES, PUBLIC AWARENESS GOAL- MAINTAIN PUBLIC AWARENESS OF WATER QUALITY ISSUES AND INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITIES AS RESIDENTS
2.4.1	WATER CONTAMINATION POLICY
Policy 2.4.1a. Continue public awareness programs of water quality management requirements and best management practices pertaining to animal-keeping to reduce run-off contaminants to the Santa Ana River.
2.5	USE OF ENERGY RESOURCES GOAL-ENCOURAGE THE EFFICIENT USE OF ENERGY RESOURCES.
2.5.1	RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL POLICY.
Policy 2.5.1a. Encourage new construction and project design that uses, or takes advantage of renewable energy resources, including but not limited to solar energy design.
Policy 2.5.1b. Provide updated energy information documents for builders as needed to reflect the most recent Title 24 energy efficiency requirements and standards and other applicable new laws, requirements, and feasible building standards as may be available.
Policy 2.5.1c. Update requirements and policies as necessary to reflect the most cost effective advances in energy production and conservation.
2.5.2	CITY POLICY.
Policy 2.5.2a. Use the most energy efficient designs for City facilities and equipment as feasible to achieve energy conservation.
Policy 2.5.2b. Conduct periodic energy audits as needed to analyze efficiency of heating, cooling, lighting, and water delivery in City facilities; the operation efficiency of city vehicles; and the modes of transportation being used by City employees to determine if savings can be made with reasonable adjustments.
Policy 2.5.2c. I Work towards greater energy efficiency by minimizing dependence on energy from non-renewable resources, replacing it with energy from renewable resources.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 5
Policy 2.5.2d. Support the development of non-polluting renewable energy resources through public education, and incentive programs where such incentives are feasible.
Policy 2.5.2f. Support alternative modes of transportation as feasible including the equestrian trail system, public transportation, bicycles, etc. to reduce the demand on non-renewable energy resources.
Policy 2.5.2g. Continue to investigate opportunities and options for the ultimate development of a manure waste-to-energy processing plant.
Policy 2.5.2i. Continuously review new and emerging technologies for the conservation and generation of electricity, and shall update policies as feasible and applicable.
DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGY RESOURCES GOAL- SEEK OPPORTUNITIES TO DEVELOP AND PROMOTE RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCES.
Policy 2.6.1a. Now that the feasibility of a manure-to-energy processing facility has been demonstrated for this area, seek funding opportunities for the development of such a facility.
Policy 2.6.1b. Research and promote where feasible the production of energy with other alternative renewable resources.
Policy 2.6.1c. Monitor opportunities_for government grants to participate in innovative renewable energy resource programs that can benefit residences and businesses.
SOIL RESOURCES GOAL- ENCOURAGE OWNERS AND DEVELOPERS TO IMPLEMENT POLICIES AND IMPROVEMENTS TO REDUCE SOIL EROSION.
VACANT PROPERTY POLICY
Policy 2.7.1a. Encourage property owners of vacant land to provide windbreaks in the form of trees and shrubs to minimize wind erosion where blowing dust is a constant and continual problem.
Policy 2.7.1b. Existing vegetative cover that does not present a fire hazard should be maintained to reduce wind and storm run-off erosion. Where the maintenance of existing vegetation presents a fire hazard encourage wildflower seeding, or other ground cover, that can help preserve topsoil.
Policy 2.7.1c. Encourage the construction of strategically-placed on-site drainage swales for storm water retention that can help replenish groundwater resources
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 6
and reduce the amount of run-off leaving a site that has the potential to carry away topsoil.
2.7.2	DEVEOPMENT PROPERTY POLICY
Policy 2.7.2a. Require all new development to be in compliance with its respective National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit and corresponding Water Quality Management Plan as applicable, and to not create a situation that would cause a violation of the City of Norco NPDES Permit.
Policy 2.7.2b. On property that has been graded for construction but is not scheduled for immediate construction, require wildflower seeding or other appropriate and aesthetic ground cover to maintain soil resources.
Policy 2.7c. Require approved development plans prior to the issuance of grading permits on commercial, industrial, and multi-unit residential sites.
Require the submittal of a first draft of plan check plans for a building permit application prior to the issuance of a grading permit for a single-family home or an accessory building to a single-family home.
2.8 WILDLIFE RESOURCES GOAL- CONSERVE AND PROTECT NATURAL
PLANT AND ANIMAL COMMUNITIES, AS WELL AS CRITICAL HABITATS FOR ENDANGERED SPECIES.
2.8.1	LOCALIZED WILDLIFE PROTECTION POLICY: For project sites with isolated wildlife features not subject to protection by the MSHCP (Section 2.8.4) including ponds, tree groves, vegetated groves, vegetated drainage swales, etc., conserve and protect such areas as much as feasibly possible in open space areas as part of an overall landscaping plan.
2.8.2	BIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT POLICY: As part of the development review process for all development proposals, the City should require habitat and biological assessments in areas expected to contain significant or important plant and wildlife communities identifying species types and locations.
2.8.3	WILDLIFE IMPACT MITIGATION POLICY: The City should require development that has been found to have a potential adverse impact on sensitive species habitat to mitigate the potential impacts of proposed habitat changes.
2.8.4	REGIONAL HABITAT PROTECTION POLICY: Maintain membership and active participation in the Multi-Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP) of the Riverside Conservation Authority.
Policy 2.8.4a. Implement the requirements of the MSHCP for public and private development projects including the collection of mitigation fees.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 7
Policy 2.8.4b. Comply with the “Other Plan Requirements” of the MSHCP including requirements for: Riparian/Riverine and Fairy Shrimp Habitat; Narrow Endemic Plants; Criteria Area Survey Species; and Urban/Wildlife Interface Guidelines.
Policy 2.8.4c. Employ Best Management Practices of the MSHCP in project siting and design for both public and private development projects.
Policy 2.8.4d. For projects within a Criteria Cell, transmit project information to the Riverside Conservation Authority for a Joint Project Review.
2.8.5	PUBLIC LANDS POLICY: Support programs to consolidate public lands as well as programs to acquire private open space as a means of preserving existing viable habitats areas not already protected through the MSHCP (2.8.4
Policy 2.8.5a. Seek future opportunities for joint use/maintenance, or ownership of Lake Norconian to provide protection to habitat that has established itself there.
Policy 2.8.5b. Maintain as open space the open habitat areas dedicated with the development of Norco Ridge Ranch and Norco Hills Specific Plans.
Policy 2.8.5c. Implement the Preservation and Development (PAD) zone with the first goal of preserving from development those areas with significant biological or geographical features or those open areas that help establish the identity of the community and preserve open habitat areas.
2.8.6	NATURAL VEGETATION POLICY: Review all new development so as to remove only the minimal amount of natural vegetation as possible, and require revegetation of graded areas with native plant species consistent with public safety requirements.
2.8.7	WILDLIFE MIGRATORY CORRIDOR POLICY: Protect and enhance known wildlife migratory corridors and help create new corridors whenever possible.
2.8.8	SANTA ANA RIVER POLICY: Continue to cooperate in the removal and eradication of the Arundo plant community in the Santa Ana River area, along with efforts to reestablish native vegetation again.
2.9 CLIMATE ACTION PLANZSUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY GOAL-DEVELOP
AND MAINTAIN NORCO AND ITS SMALL-PLOT AGRICULTURAL, ANIMAL KEEPING, AND EQUESTRIAN, LIFESTYLE AS A COMMUNITY THAT IS ECONOMICALLY, SOCIALLY, AND ENVIRONMENTALLY SUSTAINABLE.
2.9.1	WRCOG SUBREGIONAL CLIMATE ACTION PLAN: As one of the 12 cities that are part of the Western Riverside County Council of Governments (WRCOG)
______Climate Action Plan (CAP), be an active participant in the Subregional CAP
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 8
emissions reduction target measures and action steps, to achieve compliance with the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32). Consider adoption of the WRCOG CAP as the City’s CAP.
2.9.2	2012-2035 REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION PLAN/SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES STRATEGY: Implement the applicable local strategies as feasible from the RTP/SCS 2012-2035.
2.9.3	ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION POLICY: Increase opportunities and accessibility for trail riding, cycling, and walking. These can include more hitching posts and bike storage facilities at commercial sites, and more interior-block pedestrian paths that are in addition to street-side sidewalks and connect commercial, office, and public building sites in a more functional pedestrian circulation system (see related policies in the Circulation Element).
2.9.4	MASS TRANSPORTATION POLICY: Work directly with the Riverside Transit Agency to maintain adequate bus service including adequate frequency of buses coverage of high traffic routes and points in the City, and adequate options for those with limited mobility.
2.9.5	TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT POLICY: Encourage, and as appropriate require, car share or ride sharing programs with new developments anticipated to have one or more large employers. Encourage multiple-site transportation demand management programs (see related policies in the Circulation Element).
2.9.6	TRANSPORTATION NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICAL POLICY: Implement facility development to accommodate regional NEV routes.
2.9.7	TRANSPORTATION SIGNAL COORDINATION POLICY: Incorporate technology to synchronize traffic signals along the City's primary travel routes.
2.9.8	ALTERNATIVE FUEL POLICY: Continually work to identify and remove as feasible any City barriers to the expanded use of low-carbon vehicles including the establishment of new energy/fuel stations within existing and new development projects, and the use of state and federal funds for the construction of other new stations as funds may become available.
2.9.9	LAND USE GREEN SPACE POLICY: Expand the community tree canopy and reduce the urban heat island effect by developing tree preservation and tree establishment programs. Programs could include the protection of signature trees or vegetative stands with project development and other programs to plant and maintain new trees community-wide, both public and private (see related policies in the Land Use Element).
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 9
2.9.10	LAND USE AGRICULTURAL POLICY: Encourage local production of food consistent with the City’s small plot agricultural lifestyle and zoning. Establish a local farmers market to help in the distribution of goods that are produced here.
2.9.11	LAND USE PARKING MANAGEMENT POLICY: Encourage shared parking and pedestrian access between adjacent similar land uses to encourage walking while at the same time discouraging short vehicle trips between close destinations.
2.9.12	LAND USE MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT POLICY: Encourage a mix of land uses around high-density projects to encourage walking for convenience items as opposed to vehicle trips.
2.9.13	ENERGY ACTION PLAN POLICY: Adopt a Local Energy Action Plan for community-wide energy efficiency.
2.9.14	PUBLIC UTILITY EFFICIENCY POLICY: Replace traffic and street lights with high efficiency bulbs.
2.9.15	BUILDING UTILITY EFFICIENCY POLICY: In addition to compliance with the California Green Building Code requirements, encourage innovation in residential and non-residential design to further minimize ultimate consumption of energy and water resources including the development of green roofs.
2.9.16	BUILDING RESOURCE CONSERVATION POLICY: Adopt and revise regulations as needed to promote graywater and stormwater collection and storage systems for on-site use. Adopt and revise regulations as needed to promote the development of solar energy systems. Increase energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy resources in public buildings.
2.9.17	CONSTRUCTION WASTE REDUCTION POLICY: Incorporate standards in addition to the California Green Building Code that maximize the recycling of construction materials and construction debris to save landfill capacity.
2.9.18	WASTE SOURCE REDUCTION POLICY: Encourage on-site composting and recycling of food scrap and paper waste materials for diversion from landfills.
2.9.19	YARD WASTE REDUCTION POLICY: Expand green-waste collection bins community-wide for diversion from landfills that will help avoid methane production and provide the materials for composting and mulching.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 10
3.0 THE CONSERVAIIONPLAN
3.1	WATER MASTER PLAN
The Water Resource Master Plan of the Conservation Element contains information regarding the conservation, utilization, and development of water resources and is based on the projections of the Water Facilities Master Plan, August 2001. The first Master Water Plan was created in 1975. A new one replaced it in 1985. A Water Supply Study was prepared in 1996 and is the basis for the last Water Master Plan created in 2001. Current and future water sources; and overall supply, quantity, and quality are discussed.
The City of Norco provides its own water through a division of the Public Works Department.
3.1.1	EXISTING SETTING
The Water Division encompasses a service area of approximately 9,808 acres, of which approximately 56% are zoned residential and small plot agriculture/animal keeping/equestrian residential land uses. Of the remaining land area, 6% is zoned commercial, 3% industrial, 9% mixed-use commercial and preservation, and 26% is zoned for other uses (i.e. open space, streets, and freeway). In 2014 the City provides service to 27,160 people through 7,500 domestic water service connections.
3.1.2	REGIONAL SETTING
In California water resources are controlled by regional water quality control boards (RWQCB) that are appointed by the State. A RWQCB is charged with the responsibilities of protecting waters from pollution, and protecting rights to that water. The RWQCB controls the discharge of pollutants to groundwater resources and controls where and how agencies can dig wells. The City of Norco is located in the Basin Plan for the Santa Ana Region which encompasses the drainage area of the Santa Ana River. The drainage area is about 2,000 square miles beginning at the headwaters of the river in the San Bernardino Mountains running down to the river’s outlet at the coast. The RWQCB-8 controls both surface waters and groundwater basins.
Groundwater basins are underground bodies of water suspended in layers of sand/gravel that are confined by impermeable geologic structures such as upthrusts of subterranean bedrock and mountain ranges. Groundwater basin boundaries correspond roughly to river basin boundaries though they do not necessarily have to be coterminous. Groundwater basins work much the same way as a series of dams do along a river. Within the larger ground water basin, there are smaller sub-basins created by natural subterranean barriers. The groundwater descends through these subterranean “steps” as it descends towards the ocean. The basins are separate bodies of
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 11
LEGEND	
	LINE PRESSURE ZONES Pressure Zone 1230'
I	Pressure Zone 1080'
□	Pressure Zone 1020'
□	Pressure Zone 857'
ITIIIWIIW	MAIN DISTRIBUTION LINES 24-lnch Line
	18-Inch Line
	16-lnch Line
	14-lnch Line
	12-lnch Line
	10-lnch Line
■■■■■■■■	Proposed 20-lnch Line
•	All other water hues are 8’ or less Existing Reservioir
o	Proposed Reservoir
EXHIBIT 3.1
WATER MASTER PLAN
water but each are interrelated to one another through overflow and sharing within the same overall basin water supply.
Overdraft and pollution in one sub-basin can affect water quality in downstream sub-basins. One of the primary purposes of the RWQCB-SAR is to first prevent the pollution from entering the groundwater flow and then to prevent the flow and expansion of pollutants that already exist. There are two of these sub-basins that serve the Norco area. The Temescal Basin is the area south of the river and west of Norco hills. The Chino basin includes the area from the Santa Ana River north. The Santa Ana River as the southern boundary of the Chino basin is an adjudicated boundary as opposed to a physical barrier between two sub-basins.
3.1.3	EXISTING FACILITIES
The existing system (Exhibit 3.1, Water Master Plan) consists of six groundwater wells (four active in the Temescal groundwater basin and two currently inactive in the Chino groundwater basin), that have a combined capacity of 5,000 gallons per minute (GPM). The City also has back-up connections to the Jurupa Community Services District (JCSD) and to the City of Corona with capacity for 620 gpm and 4,000 gpm respectively.
The City imports water from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWDSC) that is purchased through the Western Municipal Water District (WMWD) and supplied from the MWDSC Henry J. Mills Treatment Facility in Corona. In addition the City is a member agency of the Chino Desalter Authority with an annual obligation to purchase 1,000 acre feet of treated groundwater water from that facility; and has entered into a purchase agreement with WMWD for 4,400 acre feet of treated groundwater annually from the Arlington Desalter.
The water from both desalter facilities is treated through reverse osmosis to make it potable. The treated water from these two facilities accounts for roughly 68% of the City’s annual water demand in 2014.
The City has seven potable water reservoirs with a capacity of 12.0 MG. The City operates two blending stations that blend high nitrate water from the Temescal basin with imported water and treated water from the Arlington Deslater. As various areas of the City develop and system improvements are made, the Master Water Plan should be re-analyzed to insure that facilities are being constructed as required to meet the City’s water demand.
The specific capacity for wells decreases over time. Well site 11 has decreased approximately 5% since 2000. Well site 12 has decreased approximately 10% since 2000. Well site 13 has increased 10% because of rehabilitation in 2004. Well site 14 has decreased approximately 10% since 1995. The specific capacity of a well degenerates over time as fine waterborne material gets lodged in the aquifer zone near the well’s gravel pack. Wells can be rehabilitated to
_______improve specific capacity, but not totally restored.
Norco
VLjZX General Plan Conservation Element 13
Well sites can ultimately be abandoned because the level of ground water has receded to a point where the cost of digging deeper is prohibitive compared to finding other resources; and/or when the level of contaminants has grown to a point that it becomes too costly to treat the water as compared to obtaining new resources. Overdraft of the ground water basin (see “Definitions”, Safe Yield-Overdraft) combined with uncontrolled pollution discharge affects the ground water basin and the life of the wells that pump therefrom.
3.1.4	WATER RESOURCES
There are several potential sources for the City’s water supply that have been investigated and evaluated:
Temescal groundwater basin
Chino groundwater basin
Jurupa Community Services District connection City of Corona connection WMWD connection for imported water WMWD connection to Arlington desalter WMWD connection to Chino west desalter WMWD connection to Chino east desalter City of Riverside connection
EXHIBIT 3.2
WATER RESOURCES - 2001
The feasibility of any water resource is a combination of the availability and the cost of extraction and/or treatment. The least expensive source for the City is the Temescal basin; however, the City’s portion of the basin’s safe yield is not
_______enough water to meet all of the City’s needs for the future.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 14
In 2001 the City of Norco’s main source of water was wells in the Temescal groundwater basin representing about sixty-six percent (66%) of the water supply (Exhibit 3.2, Water Resources - 2001). Water taken from the Western Municipal Water District Chino Desalter is used to mix with the well water taken from the Temescal and Chino basins. Additionally, the City has backup connections to JCSD and the City of Corona to insure that maximum levels of salt containment are not exceeded for the City’s potable water supply.
In 2015 the City is expected to use 8,700 acre feet of water, 30% of which will come from the Temescal Basin. It is anticipated that the biggest source of water will be the Arlington desalter going forward rather than the Temescal basin. The City phased out any need to have to buy water from the City of Corona and/or JCSD except in emergency situations through a mutual-aid agreement. (Exhibit 3.3, Water Resources - 2005)
EXHIBIT 3.3
WATER RESOURCES - 2005
When buildout of the City occurs, it is estimated that the City will use 10,100 acre feet of water. Forty percent (40%) of the water will come from the Temescal ground water basin and forty-one percent (41%) from the Arlington desalter.
Nine percent (9%) will come from the Chino desalter and ten percent (10%) from the Chino ground water basin. (Exhibit 3.4, Project Water Resources - Buildout, 2010).
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 15
EXHIBIT 3.4
PROJECTED WATER RESOURCES - BUILDOUT
3.1.5	EXISTING WATER QUALITY
Well water for potable water supplies in this region is generally well below maximum containment levels for salts, and is safe to drink. The City has connections with the City of Corona and JCSD for peak periods when the City may not have adequate capacity to meet daily demand, and also meet fire and emergency demands. When the City approaches peak demands the City must draw water from wells that exceed maximum containment levels for nitrates. Back-up water supplies from either Corona or JCSD are used to mix with well water to bring salt containment below maximum levels.
Salts, such as nitrates, are minute particles suspended in water that once they reach certain levels are considered a contaminant to the water supply. All of the wells produce water with moderate levels of nitrates that vary within a range. There are rare situations where water from certain wells can exceed maximum state containment levels for nitrates. The level of nitrates in the water supplies in this area occurs because of previous contamination from extensive dairy farming Polluted runoff from increased urbanization also increases potential contamination to groundwater supplies.
Groundwater quality is an important concern to the City. The City will continue to rely on groundwater resources in the future. The city continually tests wells for contamination and overall water quality to ensure that the best possible drinking water for the community is available. The quality of water in Norco currently meets or exceeds all state and federal water quality standards (Table 3.1, Water Quality Report).
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 16
In 1987, tests were done on four wells owned by the California Rehabilitation Center located southeasterly of Bluff Street. The shallower wells showed high concentrations of manganese with moderate concentrations of nitrates and total dissolved solids (TDS), while the lower well showed high concentrations of flouride. Since 1988, the nitrate levels have steadily increased. The latest test of the City’s wells showed similar results. All of the five operating wells showed moderately high concentrations of nitrates and TDS. The two lower wells also had concentrations of flouride. While the Chino basin wells have a higher potential for nitrate concentration, the City has other water sources to mix in so that the ultimate water supply exceeds all state and federal requirements.
3.1.6	UTILIZATION OF WATER RESOURCES
The residential and small plot agricultural land uses in the City represent the highest demand for water. It is estimated that the trend will continue with residential/small plot agriculture having the highest utilization demands for water in the future. The City needs to have storage requirements to cover day to day delivery demands and also to cover emergency requirements. Emergency storage is required to maintain service in the event of regional power outages or massive concurrent pumping plant failures.
TABLE 3.1
WATER QUALITY
(parts per million unless otherwise noted)
PRIMARY HEALTH RELATED STANDARDS	STATE MCL*	STATE PHG*	NORCO STATISTICS	
			AVERAGE	RANGE
Microbiological	5%	0	<1%	<1%
Total Trihalomethanes	.1	NA	.031	.002 - .074
Tetrachloroethane	.005	0	ND	ND - .001
Trichloroethylene	.005	0	.001	ND - .033
Nitrate	45	45	11.3	ND -59.9
Flouride	2	1	1.6	1.29-4.03
Arsenic	.05	NS	.0067	ND - .038
Aluminum	1	NS	0	ND - .008
Barium	1	2	.03	ND - .114
Gross Alpha (pico curies/liter)	15	NS	1.17	ND -4.51
Uranium (pico curies/liter)	20	NS	1.0	ND-5.1
Lead	.015	NS	< .015	<.015-.0456
Copper	1.3	NS	<1.3	ND - .679
Chloride	500	NS	134.5	39 - 227
Sulfate	500	NS	69.3	17 -148
Total Dissolved Solids (TDS)	1,000	NS	511.3	331 - 663
There are time-of-use storage amounts that are necessary to maintain service during peak power periods when pumping plants are shut down in compliance
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 17
with TOU operating schedules. Time-of-use is a process where pumping and filling of reservoirs are done at times when energy costs are lower. This requires additional storage requirements.
In addition, the City needs to have adequate storage requirements for fire protection. In the 857 pressure zone, the storage requirement is 4,000 gpm for four hours. In the 1021 pressure zone, the requirement is 3,500 gpm for four hours (Exhibit 3.5, Water Pressure Zones). The recommended storage requirement for the 857 pressure zone is 7.7 million gallons for current conditions and 10.1 million gallons for ultimate development. The requirements in the 1,021 north and 1150 pressure zones are 1.6 million gallons and 1.8 million gallons respectively. When the area of the 1021 south pressure zone is developed, the recommended storage requirement is 1.8 million gallons per day.
Currently the City has a storage capacity of 9 million gallons per day in six storage reservoirs and a recommended storage requirement of 9.3 million gallons per day. For ultimate development, the recommended storage requirement will be 13.7 million gallons per day (not including any time-of-use storage requirements). Ultimately there may be a reservoir constructed on the Wyle Laboratories property, the size of which is not known.
3.1.7	CONSERVATION OF WATER RESOURCES
The City has enacted codes such as the Water Conservation Section of the Norco Municipal Code, to encourage conservation of this vital resource. The City will continue to update the Code as needed to help meet the goal of conserving water. Additionally, the City provides public service pamphlets to the community on how to protect and preserve water, including information on how to prevent water contamination and pollution. The City will continue on an annual basis to inform and educate the community on water issues in efforts to conserve and protect the water for existing needs and future generations.
Also, the City has adopted requirements via the Planning, Engineering, and Building and Safety Divisions to conserve water. Such programs include xeriscape landscaping, the use of reclaim water, the use of low flow plumbing fixtures, and other conservation programs to protect and preserve the City’s water resources.
3.1.8	DEVELOPMENT OF NEW WATER RESOURCES
To meet existing requirements, the City has constructed two new wells since 2001 and has purchased 4,400 acre feet of additional water from the Arlington Desalter. The City will continue to maintain and improve its current infrastructure in order to provide water for existing and future use.
3.1.9	OTHER WATER RESOURCES
There are two water bodies in the City which are not utilized for consumption and ______are categorized as “other resources”, Lake Norconian (man made) and the
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 18
Santa Ana River. They both are surface waters and are used primarily for aesthetic and recreational purposes. Lake Norconian is located at the Nava! Warfare Assessment Center (NWAC) which is primarily off-limits to the public, and the Santa Ana River runs along the northern boundary of the City.
Lake Norconian is a manmade lake that was created for recreational purposes with the Norconian Hotel back in the 1920’s. When the hotel closed, the property was ultimately split between the NWAC and the State. The State converted the hotel building into a drug rehabilitation incarceration center (building now closed) and since that time, the lake has had little public use. Some fishing still occurs with a local fishing license obtained at the NWAC facilities office. Fish species consist of bass and catfish left over from previous years of stocking. The NWAC promotes a policy of catch and release since they do not re-stock the lake anymore. The City is now responsible for maintaining the lake level and wells that were owned and maintained by NWAC have been transferred to the City.
Over the years the lake has become an important riparian habitat for birds. Each year the Audobon Society counts that number of species and individual birds that are found at the lake on a particular day, generally sometime in December.
Some of the species that have been found are land birds and others are migratory. The limitation of the observation to one day per year makes it difficult to determine how critical the lake is to either of these types of species. Until 2000, the count consisted of a total number only, without any breakdown as to what type of species made up the total. There has not been any consistent effort to monitor specific species from year to year.
The Santa Ana River forms the northern boundary of the City and is a naturally occurring element in the landscape, though it has been changed greatly through human intervention. The river itself in a natural condition has a high flow season in early spring and a low flow season in late fall. In a natural state, the river could at times be dry toward the end of summer during times of drought. The river now has flow in it year-round from treatment plant effluent that is continuously put into the river channel. The river itself is not used for potable water supplies but serves an important function in the re-generation of ground water aquifers, especially in Orange County. The function of the river for recreational purposes is limited to the aesthetic values for riverside trails (equestrian, pedestrian, and bicycle) and parks. Swimming is not permitted in the river because of the treatment plant effluent.
As a riparian habitat, the river supports numerous species including plants, animals, fish, and foul both for habitat and foraging. While the river does not directly supply potable water, as a resource to wildlife it needs to be preserved and enhanced wherever possible. These issues and opportunities are discussed in more detail in Section 3.5, Wildlife Resources
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 19
3.2	ENERGY RESOURCES
The Energy Resource Plan of the Conservation Element provides information regarding the conservation, utilization, and development of energy resources. Also, current and future resources are discussed.
The City of Norco is serviced by Southern California Edison (SCE). SCE is a regional power broker that provides much of the electricity for residents in Southern California that do not live in municipalities or districts that provide their own electricity.
3.2.1 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY RESOURCES
Energy is a basic and essential resource to maintain the livability of Norco as an animal keeping/equestrian community. The generation of energy requires ongoing depletion of non-renewable resources, the costly extraction and transport of these resources, and the cost of transmission facilities. Currently, Norco’s electrical energy is primarily from nonrenewable resources as provided by the power generating companies. The concept of non-renewable resources combined with the overall cost of delivering electrical power, means that conservation of energy is an important piece in the energy puzzle for the sustainability of Norco’s lifestyle.
The City recognizes the importance of energy conservation and has taken proactive measures to reduce its energy consumption. Some of the steps City government has taken to conserve electrical power include:
Public Buildings:
1.	) Thermostats set at 68 degrees in the winter and 75 degrees in
the summer.
2.	) Occupancy sensors installed in non-office rooms.
3.	) Overhead lighting reduced.
4.	) Tinted building windows with full southern exposure.
5.	) Reduced hours and days of ball field lighting.
The City recognizes that the cost and supply of energy resources can become a serious concern for Norco businesses and residents as a result of business decisions that the City has no control over. In order to address this concern, the Planning Commission has expressed interest in establishing a “Blue Ribbon Committee” to explore alternate means for energy conservation and local production. The City may also want to consider the designation of an energy coordinator that could oversee all energy conservation issues as they pertain to the different city departments.
Because of its unique equestrian lifestyle, Norco offers opportunities to conserve energy by encouraging alternative modes of transportation. Although the City is only 14 square miles, there are over 80 miles of designated equestrian trails providing equestrian access to all parts of the City. The City should continue
(O?) Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 20
encouraging businesses to provide hitching posts and watering facilities adjacent to trails. All new residential developments are required to include an equestrian trail on at least one side of the street. Trails on both sides should be required where appropriate. In addition the City should continue actively encouraging the completion of the Coast to Crest Trail along the Santa Ana River. This will be a multi-purpose trail accommodating equestrians, bicyclists and hikers that could provide intra-city transport exclusive of automobiles.
3.2.2	UTILIZATION OF ENERGY RESOURCES, DIRECT AND INDIRECT
Ample and reasonably priced energy is crucial to everyday living, and a thriving community. Energy allows residents to work, play, produce, and meet day to day essential living needs. Energy is used in both a direct and indirect manner. Examples of direct uses of energy are transportation, lighting, heating or cooling structures, and for the operation of machinery and appliances. Direct energy use is easy to identify, affect, and promote energy conservation.
Indirect energy use is more difficult to identify as it is the energy embodied in the production of materials or goods. For example, the construction of a new school embodies all of the energy that went into the process of making the school, i.e., transportation of the materials to the site; the energy required to produce the lumber, glass, nails, and all other materials; and the energy consumed on the construction site. Conservation of indirect energy resources is more difficult due to the large geographic area and multiple levels of participation involved. It requires the cooperation and coordination between government and businesses.
3.2.3	SOURCE AND SUPPLY OF ENERGY RESOURCES
Energy is regulated via the California Public Utilities Commission, the California Energy Commission, and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the three of which play an important role in the source and supply of energy we receive. In the past a single utility company based on a geographic area, was responsible for all stages of energy production and delivery: generation (producing electricity by transforming other forms of energy), transmission (transporting that electricity from generation point to the Electric Service Provider or ESP) and distribution (from the provider to the customer).
Most of Norco’s electrical consumption is imported and derived from nonrenewable resources. Nonrenewable resources are finite, necessitating the need to continuously find and extract new scarce resources. Fossil fuels provide much of the resource for power generation as can be seen in Table 3.2 (Electricity Sources for California). The production of energy is done regionally and controlled by state regulations. The immediate options that citizens of Norco have to reduce dependence on imported electricity are to conserve first, and then take advantage of technology that allows for on-site generation for individual consumption (e.g. solar, wind, etc.). The City for its part needs to continue to push for the conversion of manure to energy, whether it ultimately is a City facility or the City is part of a regional facility.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 21
The state is looking at renewable energy development to help alleviate energy shortages, provide clean air, reduce greenhouse gases, lower rates, and stimulate technological advances. A blue-ribbon committee could keep abreast of available programs that could assist Norco in its efforts to improve its own energy program.
TABLE 3.2
ELECTRICITY SOURCES FOR CALIFORNIA 2013
Resource Type	Gigawatt-Hours	Percentage
Large Hydro	20,754	10.39
Nuclear	17,860	8.94
Coal	1,018	.51
Oil	38	.02
Natural Gas	120,863	60.5
Renewables	39,236	19.64
Small Hydro		1.67
Geothermal	12,485	6.25
Biomass	6,423	3.21
Wind	12,694	6.35
Solar	4291	2.15
Imports - Northwest	35,036	11.83
Imports - Southwest	61,759	20.82
TOTAL	296,628	100.00
Source: California Energy Commission (2011)		
EXHIBIT 3.5
CALIFORNIA ELECTRICITY SOURCES
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 22
3.2.4	DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGY RESOURCES, RENEWABLE -v- NONRENEWABLE
Norco can both decrease its dependence on outside energy sources and decrease the consumption of nonrenewable resources by developing renewable energy resources within the city. The City of Norco is located in climate ten (10), which has medium to warm weather. The location, climate, and lifestyle of Norco lends itself well to the potential development and use of renewable energy such as solar, biomass, and wind resources.
3.2.5	POTENTIAL NEW ENERGY SOURCES
There are emerging technologies that could provide alternate sources for electricity that are not widely used in Norco. One potential source could come from the use of windmill technology. The California Energy Commission has mapped the areas of the state that are considered good wind resource areas. These areas are so designated because of the high number of days per year when wind levels are high enough to move the machines and provide a fairly continual resource. The City of Norco does not lie within such an area since winds here are only seasonal. The best opportunity for Norco to take advantage of this resource would be on an individual user basis as a supplemental energy supply.
Solar energy is another resource, and is one that has broader applications than windmill technology. Commercial development of processed solar energy is restricted because of the large amounts of open areas that are currently required for photovoltaic module array fields. Photovoltaic technology, however, has applications that make it usable for individual customers to augment their own energy supply. Also, the State has programs that encourage the use of solar technology to make it more cost affective to individual customers.
In addition to wind and solar generated energy, other new technologies that may be applicable to individual users include the use of small turbine engines that are powered by natural gas, or the use of fuel cell technology. Both of these are relatively new and may be too expensive for wide-spread application at this point.
The City needs to continually review new and emerging technologies with regards to the generation and conservation of energy resources. With current technologies the viability of any alternative energy resource is directly related to the commodity price of fossil fuels. When fuel costs are high, the use of alternative fuel sources becomes more attractive. Conversely when fuel costs are relatively low, there is little interest in making investments into alternative fuel equipment without government subsidy.
An alternative energy source that the City needs to continue investigating until funding and/or technology make it feasible is the conversion of manure into energy resources.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 23
3.3 SOIL AND MINERAL RESOURCES
Pursuant to Government Code Section 65302 (d) a city’s Conservation Element should include discussion of the conservation, development, and utilization of soil and mineral resources. Specifically, cities should discuss each, as they are relevant to their jurisdiction.
3.3.1 SOIL RESOURCES
Soil resources become important in areas of high agricultural production, or areas that have the potential for agricultural production. Classification of soils are important in determining irrigation, planting, and farming of various crops; and also for determining appropriate areas for wildlife habitat, and land use planning. However, the main function of soil data is for agricultural purposes.
Due to the fact that Norco is primarily built out, and is not a community based on large agri-businesses, general soils data is provided, but no general plan goals or policies have been included for the conservation of soils as they relate to the maintenance and development of large-scale agriculture. Goals and policies as they pertain to the control of soil erosion have been included.
The State Department of Conservation through the Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program (FMMP) publishes an “Important Farmland Map” for each county that categorizes farmland for its significance, or potential significance, to the State’s agricultural industry. The FMMP is not a regulatory program but is used by the state and counties to monitor the loss of farmland acreage. There are four categories, in descending importance, into which farmland is categorized. The four categories are Prime Farmland, Farmland of Statewide Importance, Unique Farmland, and Farmland of Local Importance.
The City of Norco has two small areas that are designated on the Riverside County Important Farmland Map. The first is designated as “Locally Important” and is located on the northeast side of River Road at Bluff Street. The second which is designated Unique Farmland is located in the City’s Sphere of Influence northerly of Arlington Avenue on the east side of Pedley Substation Road (Exhibit 3.6, Soil Classifications).
Locally Important Farmland is determined by the County Board of Supervisors based on input from a local advisory committee and maps are updated after every two year field study. The property at Bluff Street and River Road was historically used for dairy farming which was the reason for the “Locally Important” designation. The dairy farm has ceased operation so it is unlikely that the property will maintain that designation in future field studies because of surrounding development. However, the zoning of the property will still allow small-plot agriculture consistent with the Land Use Element and consistent with Goals of the Conservation Element for a more sustainable community in the future.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 24
Unique Farmland is farmland of lesser quality soils that is used for the production of the state’s leading agricultural crops. To have this designation the land must have been cropped some time during the two update cycles prior to the mapping date which for Riverside County is 2010. The property has historically and is currently being used for a nursery operation.
In addition the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is mapping the entire nation showing the suitability of soils for the purpose of agricultural production. The mapping for the Norco area was completed in 1917 but the current status is “Update Needed.” The USDA has identified over 40 different soil types within the City of Norco alone. A listing of all the different soil types is not included here but can be found in the documents from the USDA’s office (Soil Survey of Western Riverside Area, California, Nov. 1971). The USDA’s report also groups the different soil types according to similar qualities and characteristics. Exhibit 3.2 shows how the soils in Norco are grouped and how suitable they are for agricultural purposes.
CONSERVATION OF SOIL RESOURCES
As future development of Norco occurs, soils will be exposed during grading operations. During this time, soils may become susceptible to water and wind erosion. The extent that erosion would occur depends on the particular soil, the extent of area being exposed, the slope, the time of year grading operations occur and erosion control methods that are used.
Historically the most immediate threat to community safety was the threat of erosion along the Santa Ana River bluff areas. The main cause of the erosion was due to scouring on the undersides of the bluffs when the Santa Ana River became engorged with winter storm run-off. The first phase of a bluff stabilization program has been implemented by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers that resolved the problem where the threat was greatest.
Erosion escalates downstream soil deposition behind Prado Dam reducing the effectiveness of that facility. The Orange County Water District is in the initial stages of developing a Prado Basin Sediment Management Plan that will remove sediments deposited behind the dam to re-entrain them into the river channel below the dam to allow restoration of habitats and beaches downstream.
MINERAL RESOURCES
The California Department of Conservation also has a classification system for soils based on the suitability of the soils for mining and extraction of resources (Exhibit 3.7, Mineral Resource Zones). The objective of classification and designation processes is to ensure, through local jurisdictions, that mineral deposits of statewide or of regional significance are available when needed.
Rapid urban expansion in areas with mineral resources can cause these areas to be committed to irreversible land uses prior to the resources being extracted,
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 25
thereby precluding any future extraction when marketability of the resources is more favorable.
The Department of Conservation has established a hierarchy of mineral resource zones as follows:
MRZ-1 Areas where geologic information indicates no significant mineral deposits are present.
MRZ-2 Areas that contain identified mineral resources.
MRZ-2a Areas underlain by mineral deposits where geologic data show that significant measured or indicated resources are present.
MRZ-2b Areas underlain by mineral deposits where geologic information indicates that significant inferred resources are present.
MRZ-3 Areas of undetermined resource significance.
MRZ-3a Areas containing known mineral deposits that may qualify as mineral resources. MRZ-3b Areas containing inferred mineral deposits that may qualify as mineral resources. MRZ-4 Areas where geologic information does not rule either the presence or absence of
mineral resources (no known mineral resources).
The City of Norco only has two mineral resource zoning designations within the city limits and most of it is in the MRZ-3a Zone. The zoning designations are from surveys done for State Report 165 “Mineral Land Classification of the Temescal Valley Area’ that also covered the Norco area. As indicated above, the MRZ-3a Zone is an area that has known deposits that may qualify as a “mineral resource”. The resource in this case is crushed rock for construction-related purposes and is primarily associated with Norco Hills and the hills and slopes around Lake Norconian, including Beacon Hill.
With residential development already approved for many of the hillsides, most of the area in question will not be available for any type of future extraction. The hillside areas not designated for residential development are more valuable to the City as an open space resource than as a potential mineral resource. In terms of importance to the state, it is the City’s opinion that there are more suitable areas (i.e. Temescal Canyon) where there is more construction material available en masse, and where it is more accessible and marketable for longterm extraction. Like the classifications for agriculture suitability, the classifications for mineral resources serve as an information source to local jurisdictions to help in determining long-range land use decisions. The State does not require or recommend any implementation measures.
The only other resource zone within City limits is an MRZ-2b Zone located at the very edge of the City near the intersection of Hamner Avenue and Parkridge Street. This is just the edge of a much larger zone that extends into the City of Corona along the Temescal Wash. The primary resource in this zone is “sand and gravel”, again for construction purposes. The small portion that is within the City of Norco has some development already over it, and the remaining portion
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 26
does not constitute enough feasible land area to warrant any type of preservation for future mineral extraction. Based on the above assessment information, no goals or policies are included that encourage or preserve opportunities for mineral extraction. This is consistent with the City’s adopted Land use Plan.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 27
EXHIBIT 3.6
SOIL CLASSIFICATIONS
LEGEND	
	MRZ-3a Zone
■i	MRZ-2b Zone
	No Zoning Classification
EXHIBIT 3.7
MINERAL RESOURCE ZONES
3.4 WILDLIFE RESOURCES
The General Plan is premised on the recognition that plant and wildlife resources are important natural resources that should be conserved and protected. Plant and wildlife resources are important to preserve species diversity, the vitality of the particular ecosystems in which they live, and the maintenance of the ecological balance in the City and regional natural areas. The wildlife resources goals and policies support other goals and policies of the General Plan, such as preventing degradation of the natural environment, preserving prime plant and wildlife habitat, and protecting rare and endangered species. Exhibit 3.8 illustrates the City’s most important wildlife and open area resources.
3.4.1	EXISTING SETTING FOR RESOURCES
The City is a mixture of small plot agriculture, commercial and industrial development, along with several natural areas containing biological habitats.
The primary habitats exist among the hillside areas along the east City boundary and in the Santa Ana River forming the northern boundary of the community. Other biological habitats are isolated and would consist of Lake Norconian, and small separate riparian areas within the hillsides. Biological information for the community has been obtained primarily from environmental assessments that have been prepared for the community.
3.4.2	SPECIAL STATUS SPECIES (rare, threatened, or endangered)
Plant and wildlife resources within the City include native vegetation such as the inland sage scrub and riparian areas, as well as rare, threatened or endangered plant and animal species. The Federal Government lists the Stephen’s Kangaroo Rat (Dipodomys stephensi) as an Endangered Species. Originally the Stephen’s Kangaroo Rat was not felt to have habitat within the City; however, the species was discovered with a biological assessment required by the City with recent development that has occurred and been proposed in the eastern hillside area of the community.
Tables 3.3 through 3.7 list sensitive species that may exist within the community. Preservation of these species depends on the preservation of natural habitats, including any viable inland sage scrub, wetlands and riparian areas. Both the size of individual habitat areas and the connectivity between these areas can directly affect the ability of these habitats to support viable populations of sensitive species. In order to mitigate the impacts caused by new development in the City and throughout the County, the City is cooperating with the Western Riverside Council of Governments in the development of a Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Program (MSHCP).
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 30
EXHIBIT 3.8
WILDLIFE RESOURCES
(Vegetation Communities)
The MSHCP is a coordinated planning effort involving western county cities and Riverside County to preserve and promote the viability and recovery of western Riverside County ecosystems and habitats. The program is intended to protect existing sensitive species and to further the goal of reducing the need to list additional species in the future. Critical to the preservation of Norco’s unique lifestyle is a balance between the needs for species and habitat conservation and the needs for continuing recreational opportunities including equestrian, bicycling, and hiking.
3.4.3	HILLSIDE HABITAT RESOURCES
The City has approved low-density residential development for much of the hillside areas, however, approximately 425 acres of open space will also be dedicated to the City for permanent open space.
There have been biological surveys within the hillside areas of the community that together have covered an extensive botanical and wildlife inventory. The hillside areas are comprised of low rolling hills and a large central valley. The soils are comprised of a mixture of decomposed granite and large boulders. The surrounding area is characterized primarily by flat open space to the north and northwest, rolling hills to the south, and two larger hills: one to the west along the central portion of the site and one located to the southeast. The hillside area includes several dry drainage ravines created by erosion that lead to the Hidden Valley Golf Course and off-site. The different plant communities are as follows:
Plant Communities
The hillside areas are comprised of a combination of plant communities depending on topography and historical use of the land, including Riversidean sage scrub, non-native grassland, riparian vegetation in dry season drainage ravines, and bare disturbed ground.
Wildlife surveys in the hillside areas have focused on the Stephen’s kangaroo rat, California gnatcatcher and the several wetland areas. Habitat for the quino checkerspot butterfly and the least Bell’s vireo has not been found there even though wildlife has been observed in all parts of the hillsides, with the greatest activity in lowland areas. Wildlife is less common on the higher slopes. The following wildlife has been observed in the hillside areas:
Birds
Birds are the conspicuous wildlife observed and include species such as house finch, California quail, mourning dove, European starling, crow and red-tailed hawk.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 32
TABLE 3.3
SPECIAL STATUS SPECIES-BIRDS
SPECIES (common name)	STATUS Explanations at bottom	TYPE OF HABITAT PRESENT & SPECIES OCCURANCE (Italics) Explanations at bottom	
		SANTA ANA RIVER/BLUFFS	NORCO HILLS
least Bell’s vireo	FE, SE	breeding (NP)	no habitat (NP)
southwestern willow flycatcher	FE, SE	breeding (NP)	no habitat (NP)
southern bald eagle	former FT	marginal (NP)	no habitat (NP)
Peregrine falcon	former FE	foraging (OP)	no habitat (NP)
coastal California gnatcatcher	FT	no habitat (NP)	breeding (NP)
golden eagle	no status	no habitat (NP)	foraging (NP)
western burrowing owl	SSC	no habitat (E?)	foraging (NP)
western yellow-billed cuckoo	SE	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
Swainson’s hawk	SE	foraging (NP)	no habitat (NP)
double-crested cormorant	SSC	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
western least bittern	SSC	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
white-faced ibis	SSC	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
osprey	SSC	foraging (OP)	no habitat (NP)
sharp-shinned hawk	SSC	foraging (OP)	no habitat (NP)
Cooper’s hawk	SSC	breeding (OP)	no habitat (NP)
ferruginous hawk	SSC	foraging (OP)	no habitat (NP)
merlin	SSC	foraging (OP)	no habitat (NP)
prairie falcon	SSC	foraging (OP)	no habitat (NP)
long-billed curlew	SSC	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
long-eared owl	SSC	breeding (PP)	no habitat (NP)
loggerhead shrike	SSC	breeding (P)	no habitat (NP)
California horned lark	SSC	foraging (OP)	no habitat (NP)
cactus wren	SSC	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
yellow warbler	SSC	breeding (P)	no habitat (NP)
yellow-breasted chat	SSC	breeding (P)	no habitat (NP)
So. Calif, rufous-crowned sparrow	SSC	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
tricolored blackbird	SSC	foraging (OP)	no habitat (NP)
white-tailed kite	FP	breeding (P)	no habitat (NP)
TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE TABLE
STATUS
FE- Fed. Endangered; FT-Fed. Threatened; SE-State Endangered; SSC-California Species of Special Concern; FP-California Fully Protected
Breeding - habitat suitable for breeding of a certain species; Foraging - habitat suitable for foraging of a certain species; No habitat - no habitat that is suitable for the species.
TYPES OF HABITATS
P-Present in the area; OP-Occasionally Present; PP-Potentially Present but not Documented; NP-Not Present; E-Extirpated from the Area
SPECIES OCCURANCE
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 33
TABLE 3.4
SPECIAL STATUS SPECIES-MAMMALS
SPECIES (common name)		STATUS Explanations at bottom	TYPE OF HABITAT PRESENT & SPECIES OCCURANCE (Italics) Explanations at bottom	
			SANTA ANA RIVER/BLUFFS	NORCO HILLS
California mastiff bat		ssc	foraging (PP)	foraging (PP)
pallid bat		ssc	foraging (PP)	no habitat (NP)
pale big-eared bat		ssc	foraging (PP)	no habitat (NP)
San Diego black-tailed jackrabbit		ssc	breeding (P)	no habitat (NP)
nw. San Diego pocket mouse		ssc	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
southern grasshopper mouse		ssc	breeding? (PP)	no habitat (NP)
San Diego desert woodrat		ssc	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
Stephen’s kangaroo rat		FE	no habitat (NP)	breeding (P)
TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS USE		D IN THE TABLE		
STATUS	FE- Fed. Endangered; FT-Fed. Threatened; SE-State Endangered; SSC-California Species of Special Concern; FP-California Fully Protected			
TYPES OF HABITAT	Breeding - habitat suitable for breeding of a certain species; Foraging - habitat suitable for foraging of certain species; No habitat - no habitat that is suitable for the species.			
SPECIES OCCURANCE	P-Present in the area; OP-Occasionally Present; PP-Potentially Present but not Documented; NP-Not Present; E-Extirpated from the Area			
TABLE 3.5
SPECIAL STA1		rus spec	ES-REPTILES	
SPECIES (common name)		STATUS Explanations at bottom	TYPE OF HABITAT PRESENT & SPECIES OCCURANCE (Italics) Explanations at bottom	
			SANTA ANA RIVER/BLUFFS	NORCO HILLS
southwestern pond turtle		SSC	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
San Diego horned lizard		ssc	marginal (PP)	breeding (PP)
orange-throated whiptail		ssc	no habitat (NP)	breeding (PP)
silvery legless lizard		ssc	breeding (PP)	no habitat (NP)
coast patch-nosed snake		ssc	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
Two-striped garter snake		ssc	marginal (PP)	no habitat (NP)
northern red diamond rattlesnake		ssc	no habitat (NP)	breeding (P)
TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS USE		D IN THE TABLE		
STATUS	FE- Fed. Endangered; FT-Fed. Threatened; SE-State Endangered; SSC-California Species of Special Concern; FP-California Fully Protected			
TYPES OF HABITAT	Breeding - habitat suitable for breeding of a certain species; Foraging - habitat suitable for foraging of certain species; No habitat - no habitat that is suitable for the species.			
SPECIES OCCURANCE	P-Present in the area; OP-Occasionally Present; PP-Potentially Present but not Documented; NP-Not Present; E-Extirpated from the Area			
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 34
TABLE 3.6
SPECIAL STATUS SPECIES-FISH AND AMPHIBIANS
SPECIES (common name)		STATUS Explanations at bottom	TYPE OF HABITAT PRESENT & SPECIES OCCURANCE (Italics) Explanations at bottom	
			SANTA ANA RIVER/BLUFFS	NORCO HILLS
arroyo southwestern toad		FE	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
California red-legged frog		FT	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
Santa Ana sucker		FT	nursery (NP)	no habitat (NP)
arroyo chub		SSC	spawning (P)	no habitat (NP)
western spadefoot toad		SSC	breeding (E?)	no habitat (NP)
Santa Ana River woollystar		FE	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS USE		D IN THE TABLE		
STATUS	FE- Fed. Endangered; FT-Fed. Threatened; SE-State Endangered; SSC-California Species of Special Concern; FP-California Fully Protected			
TYPES OF HABITAT	Breeding - habitat suitable for breeding of a certain species; Foraging - habitat suitable for foraging of certain species; No habitat - no habitat that is suitable for the species.			
SPECIES OCCURANCE	P-Present in the area; OP-Occasionally Present; PP-Potentially Present but not Documented; NP-Not Present; E-Extirpated from the Area			
TABLE 3.7
SPECIAL STATUS SPECIES-PLANTS
SPECIES (common name)		STATUS Explanations at bottom	TYPE OF HABITAT PRESENT & SPECIES OCCURANCE (Italics) Explanations at bottom	
			SANTA ANA RIVER/BLUFFS	NORCO HILLS
many-stemmed dudleya		1b	no habitat (NP)	potential (NP)
Munz’s onion		FE	no habitat (NP)	potential (NP)
Plummer’s mariposa lily		no status	no habitat (NP)	potential (NP)
intermediate mariposa lily		no status	no habitat (NP)	potential (NP)
Payson’s jewel-flower		no status	no habitat (NP)	potential (NP)
Parry’s spineflower		no status	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
Palmer’s grapplinghook		no status	no habitat (NP)	potential (NP)
Braunton’s milk-vetch		FE	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
long-spined spineflower		no status	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
Coulter’s goldfields		no status	no habitat (NP)	no habitat (NP)
TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS USE		D IN THE TABLE		
STATUS	FE- Fed. Endangered; FT-Fed. Threatened; SE-State Endangered; SSC-California Species of Special Concern; FP-Calif. Fully Protected; 1 b-Calif. Nat. PI. Soc. Endangered			
TYPES OF HABITAT	Breeding - habitat suitable for breeding of a certain species; Foraging - habitat suitable for foraging of certain species; No habitat - no habitat that is suitable for the species.			
SPECIES OCCURANCE	P-Present in the area; OP-Occasionally Present; PP-Potentially Present but not Documented; NP-Not Present; E-Extirpated from the Area			
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 35
Mammals
Mammal species that have been observed include coyote, black-tailed jackrabbit, pocket gopher, Pacific kangaroo rat, Stephen’s Kangaroo rat, and California ground squirrel.
Reptiles
Reptiles found include the side-blotched lizard, western fence lizard, granite spiny lizard, coachwhip snake, western whiptail, western diamondback rattlesnake, and red-diamondback rattlesnake.
Amphibians
The only amphibian observed in the hillside area is the pacific tree frog.
Fish
No hillside riparian areas are large enough to support any fish species.
No sensitive plants, birds, reptiles have been found or observed in the hillside areas, although potential habitat for several sensitive species is present. The only mammal found within the hillside areas is the Stephen’s kangaroo rat; a federal endangered species and a state threatened species. A large amount of Riversidean sage scrub is present on the hillside areas, which normally would support a variety of sensitive species. However, the quality of the Riversidean sage scrub is poor, or is either dying or already dead.
Several drainages are present in the hillside areas and fall under the regulatory authority of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. These drainages are considered “Waters of the U.S.” and are located in several small canyons where seasonal drainage occurs during the wet season. Within these drainages there is a small amount of wetlands. Some riparian habitat occurs within these areas, which is under the authority of the California Department of Fish and Game (Exhibit 3. , Wildlife Resources).
3.4.4	LAKE NORCONIAN HABITAT AREA
As indicated in the Water Resources section of the element, Lake Norconian is a man-made lake that was developed for recreational purposes with the Norconian Hotel in the 1920’s. The lake is located on property owned by the Federal Government developed and used by the Naval Surface Warfare Center (NSWC).
The lake has become an important riparian habitat for birds and has historically been a depository for stocked fish. Fish species consist of bass and catfish that are a result of prior years of stocking. The NSWC, as indicated, promotes a policy of catch and release, as re-stocking of the lake does not occur any longer.
As Lake Norconian is a restricted access area on Federal property, a full assessment of the habitat resources has not been made. Each year the
______Audubon Society counts the number and species that are found at the lake. This
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 36
usually occurs in the winter months, when migratory and land birds use the lake. The limitation of the observation and counting to a single day makes it difficult to determine whether the lake is a significant habitat for any specific species of bird.
3.4.5	SANTA ANA RIVER HABITAT AREA
The Santa Ana River, in natural condition, is heavily vegetated with a willow-cottonwood riparian habitat. Much of the river is dominated, or becoming dominated by arundo, an invasive non-native giant reed that recovers quickly from disturbance. As such it can overtake native riparian willow and cottonwood habitat areas that do not recover as quickly. While there are remaining dense stands of riparian willows and cottonwoods, many areas that were also once considered densely populated by these species are now completely populated by arundo. The river is fed by the year-round flow from a watershed that extends to the San Gabriel and San Bernardino Mountains.
Because the arundo plant re-seeds and regenerates even after having been removed from an area, it is necessary that the plant be eliminated completely from the entire length of the river. If any healthy arundo plants exist upstream from a cleared area, the seeds will travel down and re-establish new plants before any of the native plants have a chance to get re-established. A consortium of agencies along the length of the Santa Ana River have started a “Team Arundo” that is run through the Santa Ana Watershed Project Authority (SAWPA) for the purpose of doing a systematic eradication starting at the highest headwaters where the plant is found. In addition, both Riverside and San Bernardino Counties and the Nature Conservancy continue localized eradication that has successfully eliminated many acres of arundo within headwater and tributary streams.
The Santa Ana River is habitat for a diverse base of plant and wildlife. Several of these plants and wildlife are listed as sensitive, and portions of the river are categorized as “critical habitat” for the least Bell’s vireo. Listed below is a brief summary of the diverse plant and wildlife found (or with the potential to be found) in the portion of the Santa Ana River adjoining the City.
Plant Communities:
The floodplain of the Santa Ana River is dominated by lush cottonwood-willow riparian vegetation interspersed with small to very extensive areas of invasive Arundo scrub. The Santa Ana River along the Norco reach is characterized by the following eight plant communities: cottonwood-willow riparian forest, cottonwood-willow riparian forest with significant Arundo scrub, Arundo scrub, sand bar and sandy wash, marsh, arrow weed scrub, ornamental and ruderal vegetation, and open water. The Arundo is an invasive species that is increasingly displacing native riparian vegetation in the Santa Ana floodplain. Large expanses of the floodplain along the
____________Norco reach are occupied by Arundo scrub.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 37
The federal government has noted the potential occurrence of two sensitive plant species in the Prado Basin. These are the Santa Ana River woolystar (federally listed as endangered), and the many-stemmed dudleya (listed as sensitive). However, neither of these specimens has been found in the area. The following is a listing of the wildlife observed along the Norco stretch of the Santa Ana River including the Prado Basin:
Birds
A total of 208 species of birds have been recorded within the Prado Basin, including six species federally- or state-listed as endangered or threatened, and four others regarded as sensitive. Of particular interest is the least Bell’s vireo. This portion of the Santa Ana River lies within the boundaries of “critical habitat” for the least Bell’s vireo as defined by the federal Endangered Species Act of 1973.
Mammals
Four species of mammals, regarded as sensitive, are present in the Prado Basin and could be found in the Santa Ana River adjacent to the City. The species are the San Diego black-tailed jackrabbit, the San Diego desert wood rat, Los Angeles little pocket mouse, and the grasshopper mouse.
Amphibians
Seven amphibians have been confirmed by the federal government as being present in the Prado Basin, and would likely be found to have habitat in the Norco portion of the Santa Ana River. All of these amphibians have been listed as sensitive. No amphibians have been found in any of the recent studies for the Norco stretch of the Santa Ana River, however, the Pacific tree frog and the non-native bullfrog are common along the river and should occur somewhere along the Norco stretch of the river.
Reptiles
Several species of reptiles have been documented in the Prado Basin. Important species would include the southwestern pond turtle (a candidate for federal listing); the coastal western whiptail and the San Diego horned lizard (both regarded as sensitive species.
Fish
Eleven species offish have been documented in the Prado Basin, eight of which have been introduced. There are three native fish, the Santa Ana sucker, speckled dace, and arroyo chub (all listed as sensitive), known to be present in the Santa Ana River north and south of the Norco reach. As a result there is the potential for all fish to be in the Norco reach of the Santa Ana River.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 38
3.5	CLIMATE ACTION PLAN/SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY PLAN
The Climate Action Plan provides the guidelines for the City of Norco and its citizens to work with other jurisdictions in the state and all citizens of California to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by the year 2020. The accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is seen by many to be a precursor to climate change with the potential for significant environmental impact in the next decades. Human technological advances over the last decades have led to this steady increase in greenhouse gases with the potential for future long-term impact.
The Climate Action Plan is the local response to a potential global threat that combined with the Climate Action Plans from throughout the state should produce measurable reductions in the level of greenhouse gases statewide and keep California in the forefront of environmental innovation. The primary purpose is to reduce the environmental footprint of a community by: using local resources more effectively: reduce the demand for resources from outside the region, reduce the reliance on energy from non-renewable resources, reduce the amount of waste not being recycled, and increase local production of food and other resources as feasible. In the Conservation Element, the goals of the Climate Action Plan are combined with goals of a Sustainable Community Strategy which has the same overriding goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions, but with the focus on coordinated transportation and land use planning.
3.5.1	JURISDICTIONAL SETTINGS FOR ACTIONS
The reduction of greenhouse gases will be achieved through a combination of measures to be accomplished by all levels of government. Federal and state programs will mostly be accomplished through emission reduction regulations of industries. These will be achieved independent of local action measures. Some state and federal programs will require local implementation such as the California Green Building Code and Urban Water Management Plans. Regional plans will be developed and monitored by regional agencies that operate below state levels but above local levels.
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG), of which Norco is a member agency, adopted the 2012-2035 Regional Transportation Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategies (RTP/SCS) in 2012. It addresses regional transportation goals and improvements to reduce greenhouse gases. For its part the City is recommended to implement the local measures from that Plan so that the region as a whole meets the reduction deadlines.
The Western Riverside Council of Governments (WRCOG) is a sub-regional government organization that represents the interests of cities in western Riverside County to regional agencies including SCAG which is the federally designated Metropolitan Planning Organization for this area. WRCOG has
______developed the Climate Action Plan for western Riverside County cities which the
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 39
City can adopt on its own at a future date. The goals and policies in Section 2.9 of the Conservation Element are the goals that would be included in a Climate Action Plan and are similar to those contained in the WRCOG CAP.
3.5.2	LEGISLATIVE MANDATES
Assembly Bill (AB) 32 also known as the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 was signed into law by the Governor in September 2006. AB 32 establishes a comprehensive statewide program to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from all sources throughout the state. The California Air Resources Board (CARB) was charged with developing the Climate Change Scoping Plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2020 representing a 15% reduction from the levels that would exist under a “business as usual” scenario (Exhibit 3.10).
The target reduction in greenhouse gas levels to achieve by 2020 is 427 million metric tons statewide. The Scoping Plan recognized that local governments were best equipped to address the issues and implement policy changes to achieve reductions. While there is no specific mandate that a City have a Climate Action Plan, lawsuits filed against agencies for not adequately addressing climate change in their General Plans and environmental review processes are increasing.
In 2008 the Governor signed Senate Bill (SB) 375 otherwise known as the Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act of 2008. SB 375 specifically targets a reduction of greenhouse gases from motorized vehicles since they account for roughly 30% of total greenhouse gas emissions. SB 375 was introduced as a measure to meet the reduction target deadlines established with AB 32. CARB was directed to set regional emissions reduction targets region by region and then oversee the preparation of a RTP/SCS by each of the 18 MPO's in the state. Local development of the SCS would mean local implementation measures best suited for that region to meet its reduction targets from vehicles. The SCS integrates transportation, land use, and housing policies to reduce overall vehicle miles being traveled.
3.5.3	ANTICIPATED CLIMATE IMPACTS
The anticipated effects of climate change would vary region to region but overall global effects are anticipated to be higher maximum temperatures with more hot days, higher minimum temperatures with fewer cold days, and precipitation events with greater intensity. Secondary effects especially in California are anticipated to be longer and more severe droughts, more forest fires, loss of snow pack, rising sea levels, and more flooding at lower elevations.
3.5.4	GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS INVENTORY
Atmospheric gases trap infrared radiation that is reflecting off the earth's surface to keep the blanket of air around the planet at temperatures that can sustain life.
______The process is known as the greenhouse effect. The increase in level of certain
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 40
types of these greenhouse gases from human activity is thought to be a factor causing more radiation to be trapped thereby increasing the surface temperature.
The biggest contributing atmospheric gas is carbon dioxide (CO2) created primarily from burning fossil fuels which represents about 84% of greenhouse gas emissions in the U.S. The burning of fossil fuels also produces methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) which, combined with CO2 represent about 98% of the human-caused increase of greenhouse gases. The other greenhouse gases that are increasing due to human activity are hydroflourocarbons (HFCs), perflourocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur hexaflouride (SFe).
TABLE 3.8
HUMAN ACTIVITY AND GREENHOUSE GASES
HUMAN ACTIVITY	GREENHOUSE GASES PRODUCED
Fossil fuel combustion	CO2, N2O, CH4
Agriculture	N2O, CH4
Composting and landfill gases	ch4
Refrigeration/cooling	HFCs
Manufacturing (various products)	PFCs, SFe, CO2
These are the six greenhouse gases targeted for regulation and reduction under AB 32.
The Subregional CAP prepared by WRCOG establishes the baseline greenhouse gas inventories for each participating jurisdiction based on community and government operations for that jurisdiction. The emissions inventory was developed using the Local Government Operations Protocol and the U.S. Community Protocol for Accounting and Reporting of GHG Emissions.
2010 is the baseline year for the WRCOG CAP. The 12 participating cities, including Norco, emitted approximately 5,834,400 metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions in that year from the following sources: transportation 57%, commercial/industrial energy 21%, residential energy 20%, waste 2%, and wastewater less than 1%. The emissions per category resulted from motor vehicles, consumption of electricity and natural gas, waste generated, water consumed, and wastewater treated.
For the City of Norco, the emissions breakdown per category is: transportation 65%, residential energy 18%, commercial/industrial energy 13%, waste 3%, and
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 41
wastewater less than 1%. The primary differences from the rest of the WRCOG region can be attributed to the greater need of Norco residents to have to travel farther for services and goods that are more readily available in higher density areas and the higher amount of trash per capita because of the number of residences that require manure removal. It is appropriate that reduction measures for Norco reflect the greater amount of greenhouse gas emissions from these two categories over other jurisdictions in the WRCOG region.
EXHIBIT 3.9
COMPONENTS OF GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
WRCOG
i COMMERCIAL/ INDUS
RESIDENTIAL
ENERGY
NORCO
By 2020 the amount of emissions from the WRCOG region will be 7,289,887 metric tons under a business-as-usual scenario. To be compliant with AB 32 the amount of emissions will need to be reduced to 4,959,240 metric tons for the 12 participating cities.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 42
EXHIBIT 3.10
WRCOG EMISSIONS REDUCTION TARGET PLAN 2020
4.0 IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
4.1	RECLAIMED WATER PROGRAM
The City is in the process of providing backbone infrastructure to bring reclaimed water from the Archibald Treatment Plant for use in public landscaped areas. As funding permits, infrastructure lines will be extended providing for the opportunity to use reclaimed water to irrigate public landscaping in additional areas of the City.
4.2	XERISCAPE LANDSCAPING
The City Municipal Code encourages the use of xeriscape landscaping on all new development to reduce the overall amount of water that is ultimately directed toward the watering of landscaping.
4.3	WATER QUALITY REPORTS
The City Public Works Department publishes annual reports concerning the quality of the City’s water supply and identifies any trends in the local supply that need to be corrected before overall quality is impacted.
4.4	WATER QUALITY MANANGEMENT
For all new development and grading over one-half acre the is required to have an approved water quality management plan that will outline the best
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 43
management practices to be implemented with project development to prevent contaminated run-off from entering the city’s storm drain system.
4.5	PUBLIC WATER INFORMATION PROGRAMS
The City provides public information describing methods of water conservation and the protection of the City’s and the region’s water quality.
4.6	MANURE TO ENERGY CONVERSION
The City commissioned a feasibility study by Chevron Energy Solutions that was completed in December of 2011. The study concluded that a manure-to-energy conversion plant could be feasible in or near Norco. The feasibility study site was the Western Riverside County Regional Wastewater Authority Archibald Treatment and Reclamation Plant located at 14634 River Road in the City of Eastvale, but other sites were identified as alternatives also.
A Draft Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) was prepared based on the feasibility concept and which was a requirement of the grant money that was used to fund the feasibility study. Because there were no project specifics the DEIR was not certified. A “Leads on Manure to Energy Issues Committee” has been set up to investigate ways to go forward with the plant concept as potential funding sources or assistance may become available to construct a project.
4.7	MULTI-SPECIES HABITAT PROTECTION PROGRAM
The Western Riverside Council of Governments along with the cities of western Riverside County and the County of Riverside adopted the Western Riverside (WR) County Multi-Species Habitat Conservation Plan which is now managed by the WR Regional Conservation Authority (RCA). Upon Plan adoption the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) and the California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) (formerly the Department of Fish and Game) issued “take” permits to the County and the 14 member cities including Norco, in accordance with the Endangered Species Act and the California Natural Community Conservation Planning Act respectively. The take permits allow the planning for, and the management of, endangered species and conservation land use to be done at the local level as opposed to state and federal levels. The RCA monitors compliance with the Plan for the County, the 14 cities, and other member agencies on behalf of USFWS and CDFW.
4.8	OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION
In addition to the MSHCP, the City has established permanent open space areas to protect significant wildlife elements of the community.
4.9	CLIMATE ACTION PLAN/SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY STRATEGY The primary goals of a climate action plan along with those of a strategic community strategy have been incorporated into this Element of the General Plan. The Western Riverside Council of Governments will be adopting the
______Climate Action Plan for the western county cities and that plan will then be
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 44
available for adoption by the City of Norco if it so chooses. The City is already part of the 2012-2015 Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS) adopted by the Southern California Association of Governments from which there are measures for local implementation that mirror the goals contained in this Element. The focus of the SCS is regional transportation-related reduction measures.
5.0 GLOSSARY OF TERMS
AB 32
Acre Feet:
Assembly Bill 32, otherwise known as the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, requires California to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2020. The Western Riverside County Organization of Governments (WRCOG) is preparing the Climate Action Plan (CAP) for western Riverside County cities. Goas and policies included in the Conservation Element are similar in scope and nature to those contained in the WRCOG CAP.
Unit used to calculate water volume capacity. One Acre Foot is the equivalent of one acre covered with one foot of water, and is equal to 325,829 gallons of water.
Aquifer:
Basin (groundwater):
Basin (watershed):
Biomass:
Conservation:
A subterranean water-bearing geologic formation generally covering a large region.
Subterranean water bodies within a larger aquifer region defined and separated by geologic substructures such as uplifted bedrock, or as may be defined by adjudicated boundaries.
All of the area defined by geology that drains to a particular outlet to the ocean (in this case the Santa Ana River drainage).
Landfill gas, agricultural wastes, and other waste fuels that are used to generate electricity. This includes the by-products of small plot agriculture, animal keeping, and landscaping that can be used in conversion processes to generate electricity.
The management of natural resources to prevent destruction, waste, and neglect.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 45
Critical Habitat	The minimum amount of suitable breeding and foraging habitat occupied or potentially occupied by Threatened or Endangered Species that is deemed necessary to maintain present populations and to recover populations of the species to the point at which the species is no longer Threatened or Endangered.
Desalter:	A plant where reverse osmosis is used to make groundwater potable, a process that removes or reduces excessive amounts of minerals from the water.
Direct Energy Use	Activities that directly involve the expenditures of energy resources (i.e. lighting, transportation, power equipment, etc.).
Endangered Species	Any species that is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range.
Groundwater:	(See basin- groundwater)
Geothermal	The generation of electricity from stores of superheated subterranean water.
Greenhouse Effect:	The atmospheric phenomenon where gases trap infrared radiation that is reflecting off the earth's surface to keep the blanket of air around the planet at temperatures that can sustain life.
Greenhouse Gases:	The certain gases in the atmosphere that absorb and emit radiation which is the cause of the greenhouse effect. The primary greenhouse gases are water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and ozone.
Indirect Energy Use	The use of products for which energy resources are expended in the production process.
MCL	Maximum contaminant level
PHG	Public health goal.
Photovoltaic	Units to convert sunlight into electrical power.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 46
Reclaimed Water:
SB 375
The by-product from sewage treatment (or water treatment) that is available for non-potable re-use.
The Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act of 2008 supports the state’s climate action goals to reduce greenhouse gases (AB 32) through coordinated transportation and land use planning. Under SB 375 the state’s metropolitan planning organizations were to prepare sustainable communities strategies. The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) adopted the 2012-2035 Regional Transportation Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy in April 2012.
Species of Special Concern
Threatened Species
An informal designation used by the State for declining wildlife species that are not officially listed as Endangered, Threatened, or Rare. There is no legal protection for these species, although they are recognized as being sensitive.
Any species that is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range.
Norco
General Plan Conservation Element 47﻿GENERAL FLAN
HOUSING ELEMENT
2014-2021
UPDATE ADOPTION DATE: November 6, 2013
City of Norco
2014-2021 Housing Element
October 2013
Prepared for:
City of Norco 2870 Clark Avenue Norco, CA 92860
Prepared by:
Environmental Science Associates 626 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 1100 Los Angeles, CA 90017
[This page intentionally left blank]
Acknowledgements
City Council:
Kathy Azevedo, Mayor Berwin Hanna, Mayor Pro Tem Kevin Bash, Council Member Herb Higgins, Council Member Harvey Sullivan, Council Member
Planning Commission:
Patricia Hedges, Chair Robert Leonard, Vice Chair Dave Henderson, Commission Member Philip J affarian, Commission Member Robert Wright, Commission Member
City Manager:
Andy Okoro
Planning Division:
Steve King, Planning Director Alma Robles, Senior Planner
Consultant Team:
Alexa Washburn, Project Director Sarah Walker, Project Manager Arlene Granadosin, Project Planner
[This page intentionally left blank]
City of Norco
General Plan
Table of Contents
1.	INTRODUCTION.......................................................1
1.1	Purpose of the Housing Element.................................1
1.2	State Policy and Authority.....................................1
1.3	Consistency with State Planning Law............................2
1.4	Consistency with the Norco General Plan........................3
1.5	New State Legislation..........................................4
1.6	Public Participation...........................................4
2.	HOUSING PLAN........................................................7
3.	QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES..............................................25
4.	HOUSING NEEDS......................................................27
4.1	Population Characteristics....................................27
4.2	Housing Needs Summary.........................................27
4.3	Community Profile.............................................28
4.4	Housing Costs.................................................37
4.5	Households with Special Needs.................................41
4.6	Housing Needs.................................................49
4.7	Opportunities for Energy Conservation.........................51
5.	HOUSING CONSTRAINTS ANALYSIS.......................................53
5.1	Governmental Constraints......................................53
5.2	Housing for Persons with Disabilities.........................70
5.3	Non-Governmental Constraints..................................72
6.	HOUSING RESOURCES..................................................77
6.1	Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)......................77
6.2	Zoning Appropriate to Accommodate Lower Income Housing........77
6.3	Availability of Sites for Housing.............................79
6.4	Financial Resources...........................................97
7.	PROGRESS REPORT...................................................103
8.	DEFINITIONS.......................................................129
9.	APPENDIX A: AB 987 DATABASE.......................................135
10.	APPENDIX B: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.................................139
11.	APPENDIX C: DEFAULT DENSITY ANALYSIS.............................143
2014-2021 Housing Element
i
City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014'2021 Housing Element
ii
City of Norco
General Plan
List of Tables
Table 3-1: Quantified Objectives.................................................25
Table 4-1: Housing Assistance Needs of Income Groups by Tenure...................28
Table 4-2: Population by Age.....................................................30
Table 4-3: Race and Ethnicity....................................................30
Table 4-4: Household Types.......................................................32
Table 4-5: Household Size by Tenure..............................................32
Table 4-6: Household and Family Income...........................................33
Table 4-7: Overpaying Housing Units by Tenure....................................34
Table 4-8: Overpayment by Income Level...........................................34
Table 4-9: Housing Type..........................................................35
Table 4-10: Age of Housing Stock.................................................36
Table 4-11: Housing Prices.......................................................38
Table 4-12: Owner Occupied Housing Expenses......................................38
Table 4-13: Riverside County Fair Market Rents...................................39
Table 4-14: Housing Affordability by Tenure......................................39
Table 4-15: Housing Affordability by Income Group for Riverside County...........40
Table 4-16: Housing Assistance Needs of Lower Income Renter and Owner Households ...42
Table 4-17: Persons with Disabilities............................................43
Table 4-18: Persons with Developmental Disabilities..............................44
Table 4-19: Large Households by Tenure...........................................46
Table 4-20: Female Headed Households.............................................46
Table 4-21: Affordable Senior Housing Units......................................49
Table 4-23: RHNA 2014-2021.......................................................50
Table 5-1: Residential Land Use Zones............................................54
Table 5-2: Summary of Residential Zoning Regulations.............................56
Table 5-3: Residential Parking Requirements......................................58
Table 5-4: Planning Division Fee Schedule........................................64
Table 5-5: Development Impact Fees...............................................66
Table 5-6: Countywide Development Impact Fees....................................67
Table 5-7: Development Fees for a Typical Unit...................................68
2014-2021 Housing Element
iii
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 5-8: Disposition of Conventional Home Purchase Loan Applications........75
Table 6-1: Regional Housing Needs Allocation 2014-2021........................77
Table 6-2: Site 1	- Hamner Avenue and Fourth Street...........................85
Table 6-3: Site 2	- Hamner Avenue and Third Street............................86
Table 6-4: Site 3	- Beacon Hill...............................................87
Table 6-5: Site 4	- Fifth Street and Horseless Carriage Drive.................88
Table 6-6: Site 5	- Mountain Avenue...........................................91
Table 6-7: Residential Unit Capacity on HDO Zoned Sites.......................96
2014-2021 Housing Element
iv
City of Norco
General Plan
1.	Introduction
The Housing Element is an important tool for the City of Norco. It identifies the housing needs of the City in context of its western Riverside County and the southern California metropolitan location, as well as recommends ways to meet these housing needs while balancing other community objectives and available resources. Norco was incorporated to preserve an animal-keeping/small plot agricultural lifestyle. Hence, maintaining residential lots that will accommodate and encourage animal keeping and agriculture at a family scale is of the utmost importance to the City. The preservation of large residential lots allows Norco residents to enjoy small plot agriculture and animal-keeping.
The goal of preserving an animal-keeping/small plot agricultural lifestyle by its nature modifies the different varieties and types of housing units normally available to a city in an urban setting. The intent of the goal is to protect this unique lifestyle from development pressures and land use incompatibility issues that generally come with an increase in land use intensity on adjacent lots. It is not the intent of the Housing Element or the City General Plan to preclude any citizen an opportunity to live in the community. The goals and policies of the Housing Element are designed to work in conjunction with the Land Use Element to achieve an overall housing goal of providing housing opportunities for all citizens at all income levels.
It is important that City policies and requirements be established and maintained such that animalkeeping and agricultural land uses remain in perpetuity for all new residents to the City. It is the City’s responsibility to protect and maintain these important values. The City has an overall goal of maintaining an animal-keeping/small-plot agricultural lifestyle, which is expressed in the City’s General Plan Land Use Element and throughout each Element of the General Plan. The Housing Element balances the need to accommodate affordable housing with the City’s overall goal of maintaining the already established animal-keeping/small-plot agricultural lifestyle.
1.1	Purpose of the Housing Element
The purpose of the Housing Element as part of the Norco General Plan is to ensure the City establishes policies, procedures and incentives in its land use planning and redevelopment activities that will result in the maintenance and expansion of the housing supply to adequately accommodate households currently living and expected to live in Norco. It institutes policies that will guide City decision-making, and establishes an action program to implement housing goals through 2021.
1.2	State Policy and Authority
In accordance with State Government Code Article 10.6 (65580), the legislature has declared that the attainment of decent housing and the provision of a suitable living environment to meet the needs of all economic segments of the population are of the highest priority. The legislature also recognizes that to meet this statewide goal, cooperation between government and the private sector is necessary, and that local and State governments have a responsibility to utilize the powers vested in them to facilitate the development and improvement of housing.
2014-2021 Housing Element
1
City of Norco
General Plan
1.3	Consistency with State Planning Law
The Housing Element is one of the seven mandatory elements of the General Plan. State law requires inclusion of a Housing Element in the General Plan in recognition of the role that land use planning plays in the production of affordable housing. The Housing Element will guide city decision-making through an action program including policies, procedures, and incentives for maintaining and expanding the housing supply in the City of Norco for all income groups. The Housing Element considered the other required elements of the General Plan as well. Updates to the Housing Element and/or other General Plan elements shall continue to maintain internal consistency between all General Plan elements. Norco’s General Plan currently consists of seven Elements:
1.	Land Use
2.	Circulation
3.	Conservation
4.	Seismic/Public Safety
5.	Noise
6.	Housing
7.	Open Space
The California Legislature has declared that a decent home and suitable living environment for every resident is the primary housing goal for the State. Specifically, Section 65580 of the California Government Codes sets forth the Legislature’s findings as follow:
a.	The availability of housing is of vital statewide importance, and the early attainment of decent housing and a suitable living environment for every Californian, including farmworkers, is a priority of the highest order.
b.	The early attainment of this goal requires the cooperative participation of government and the private sector in an effort to expand housing opportunities and accommodate the housing needs of Californians of all economic levels.
c.	The provision of housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households requires the cooperation of all levels of government.
d.	Local and State governments have a responsibility to use the powers vested in them to facilitate the improvement and development of housing to make adequate provision for housing needs of all economic segments of the community.
e.	The Legislature recognizes that in carrying out this responsibility, each local government also has the responsibility to consider economic, environmental, and fiscal factors and community goals set forth in the General Plan and to cooperate with other local governments and the State in addressing regional housing needs.
Section 65581 of the California Government Code reflects the Legislative intent for mandating that each city and county prepare a Housing Element:
a.	To assure that counties and cities recognize their responsibilities in contributing to the attainment of the State housing goal.
2014-2021 Housing Element
2
City of Norco
General Plan
b.	To assure that counties and cities will prepare and implement housing elements which, along with Federal and State programs, will move toward attainment of the State housing goals.
c.	To recognize that each locality is best capable of determining what efforts are required by it to contribute to the attainment of the State housing goal, provided such a determination is compatible with the State housing goal and regional housing needs.
d.	To ensure that each local government cooperates with other local governments in order to address regional housing needs.
In order to achieve these ends, the California Government Code makes certain provisions of the Housing Element mandatory. These provisions include:
1.	Identification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs, resources and constraints.
2.	A statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives, and scheduled programs for preservation, improvement and development of housing.
3.	Identification of adequate sites for housing.
4.	Adequate provision for existing and projected needs of all economic segments of the community.
Specific requirements for data collection and analysis necessary to prepare the Housing Element are set forth in Government Code Section 65583 and are discussed later in this document. The Government Code also requires that each draft Housing Element be reviewed by the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) and that the Department’s findings be incorporated prior to adoption, or that specified findings be made in response to the Department’s comments.
As a mandatory component of the General Plan, the Housing Element should be reviewed on an annual basis in order to monitor progress in implementation of the programs identified to meet the housing needs of the community. However, the Housing Element must be revised every five years as indicated in State statute.
1.4	Consistency with the Norco General Plan
The Housing Element is one of seven elements of the Norco General Plan. The goals, policies, standards and proposals within this element relate directly to, and are consistent with, all other elements. The City’s Housing Element identifies programs and resources required for the preservation, improvement and development of housing to meet the existing and projected needs of its population. Through the regulation of the amount and variety of open space and recreation areas, acceptable noise levels in residential areas, and programs to provide for the safety of the residents, policies contained in General Plan elements directly affect the quality of life for all Norco citizens.
The Housing Element is affected by development policies contained in the Land Use Element, which establishes the location, type, intensity and distribution of land uses throughout the City, and defines the land use build-out potential. For example, the acreage designated for commercial and office uses creates employment opportunities for various income groups. The presence and
2014-2021 Housing Element
3
City of Norco
General Plan
potential for jobs affects the current and future demand for housing at the various income levels in the City.
The Circulation Element of the General Plan also affects the implementation of the Housing Element. The Circulation Element establishes policies for a balanced circulation system in the City. The element also provides policies for essential infrastructure to all developed housing units along with mitigating the effects of growth in the City.
The Housing Element utilizes the most current data available including the 2010 Census and 2007-2011 American Community Survey. All figures represented in the Housing Element are consistent with existing and projected population, employment and housing figures presented by county, State, national and non-profit agencies.
The Housing Element has been reviewed for consistency with the City’s other General Plan elements, and the policies and programs in this Element are consistent with the policy direction contained in other parts of the General Plan. As portions of the General Plan are amended in the future, the Housing Element will be reviewed to ensure that internal consistency is maintained.
1.5	New State Legislation
The Housing Element addresses new State legislation, which mandates that the following reforms be included in the Housing Element update to facilitate and expedite the construction of affordable housing:
•	AB 162: Requires the City, upon adoption of the Housing Element, to identify specific flood hazard zones in the Land Use Element and specific floodwater and groundwater recharge areas in the Conservation and Safety Elements.
•	SB 244: Requires the City, upon the adoption of a Housing Element, to update the Land Use Element to include data and analysis, goals, and implementation measures regarding unincorporated island, fringe, or legacy communities and their infrastructure needs.
•	SB 812: In addition to the existing special needs groups, the City must include an analysis of the housing needs for developmentally disabled persons.
•	AB 1867: Under certain conditions, the City can now count multi-unit homeownership units that have been converted to affordable units toward their RHNA allocation.
•	SB 375 Implications: For jurisdictions that do not submit their adopted 2014-2021 housing element update within 120 days of the October 2013 deadline, their housing element updates revert to a four-year cycle.
1.6	Public Participation
California Government Code requires that local governments make a diligent effort to achieve public participation from all economic segments of the community in the development of the housing element. In the preparation of the Housing Element Update, a number of organizations and agencies that provide housing, or housing related services, were contacted. Stakeholder groups that have been identified as influential to the development of housing and the provision of sendees in the community include, but are not limited to:
2014-2021 Housing Element
4
City of Norco
General Plan
•	Norco Senior Citizens Center
•	Inland Regional Center
•	Abode Communities
•	Affirmed Housing Group
•	California Housing Partnership Corporation
•	Coachella Valley Housing Coalition
•	US Veterans Affairs Department
•	Fair Housing Council of Riverside
•	Housing and Homeless Coalition for Riverside County
•	Jamboree Housing Corporation
•	National Community Renaissance (CORE)
•	Neighborhood Housing Services of the Inland Empire, Inc
•	Riverside County Economic Development Agency
•	Riverside County Housing Authority
•	Riverside County Office on Aging
•	Safe Alternatives for Everyone
The City held one workshop meeting prior to the submittal of this Housing Element draft to HCD for review. This meeting took place at City Hall in Conference rooms A & B on July 31, 2013 and was intended to provide stakeholders, elected officials, and the public with general information regarding the Housing Element (i.e. contents, process and information on the RHNA). Meeting attendees asked about available funding mechanisms to assist in the development of affordable housing in light of the dissolution of redevelopment. They also expressed their concern about a broader discussion on participating in future attempts for Housing Element law reform to address uncertainties about how unique communities like Norco can appropriately address their future housing needs. Attendees also expressed that the Housing Development Overlay created as part of the 2008-2014 Housing Element update has provided the opportunity for innovative housing products that address the need for affordable housing while maintaining Norco’s unique animaTkeeping and equestrian community. This meeting was noticed on the City’s website, at City Hall, and in other public places such as the Senior Center. Stakeholder groups were also identified and a flyer and letter invitation to the meetings was distributed several weeks before the first workshop. Informational materials for the workshop are presented in Appendix B.
On October 1, 2013, the State Department of Housing and Community Development issued confirmation that the Housing Element was found to be in compliance with State law. The City held another workshop with the Planning Commission on October 9, 2013 to review and approve the final draft.
On Month, day, 2013, the Planning Commission recommended the Housing Element be presented to City Council and on Month, day, 2013, the City Council considered the Housing Element for adoption. These meetings were noticed and open for public comment on the final Housing Element draft. After adoption, the Final Housing Element was sent to the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) for final State certification.
2014-2021 Housing Element
5
City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014-2021 Housing Element
6
City of Norco
General Plan
2.	Housing Plan
The Housing Plan includes goals, policies, and actions related to housing and are presented in this section. The policies are established to guide the development and preservation of a balanced inventory of housing to meet the needs of present and future residents of the City. While the City has a goal of preserving an animal-keeping/small-plot agricultural lifestyle, the City also strives to ensure that all residents have decent, safe, sanitary, and affordable housing regardless of income. This section includes goals that are intended to help accommodate and facilitate the development and maintenance of affordable housing. The specific goals, policies, and actions detailed in this section provide the framework for the City’s overall housing program. Specific policies included in this element are intended to provide a wide variety of programs and tools to implement the City’s General Plan goals. Actual programs will be implemented at the discretion of the City in order to meet established objectives.
Goal 1: Promote and maintain the City’s small-plot agricultural and animalkeeping lifestyle while ensuring that all residents have decent, safe, sanitary, and affordable housing regardless of income.
Policy 1.1:	Animal-Keeping Policy: Housing programs and subsequent projects and regulations
will be evaluated on the basis of protecting and enhancing an animal-keeping and small-plot agricultural lifestyle.
Policy 1.2:	Public Service Policy: Ensure that the level of public services to residential areas of the
City is based on anticipated population projections with the goal of protecting the environment.
Programs:
Action 1.1 Agricultural and Animal Keeping Development Program. To preserve the animalkeeping and small-plot agricultural character of the existing community, the City will use land use regulations to guide new growth into focused areas, allowing for the preservation of lower density neighborhoods. To maintain the unique character of the city, all new single-family subdivisions shall have a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet. Similarly all new residential lots, shall have minimum lot depths of 200 feet to allow appropriate yard area for the keeping of large animals and small plot agriculture. With the adoption of a specific plan, primary animal keeping areas can be established on each individual lot in place of requiring the standard 200 foot lot depth, so as to still encourage the small-plot agricultural lifestyle.
Responsible Agency: City of Norco Planning Division Timeframe: Ongoing, 2014'2021.
Possible Funding Source:General Fund Objectives:
• Ensure that detached residential units constructed during the planning period, permit residents to practice small plot agriculture and to maintain the semLrural lifestyle, as identified in the Land Use Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
7
City of Norco
General Plan
• Ensure that detached residential units constructed during the planning period arc built to encourage a family based agricultural lifestyle that also helps to maintain animal-keeping in the community. This policy is established to promote housing that is consistent with the Land Use Element.
Action 1.2 Public Services Program. To encourage the expansion of existing public services and to ensure that all residential development is adequately served, all new residential construction shall include the necessary infrastructure to provide services concurrent with City standards, including a lateral connection to the City's sewer system for each single lot that is developed with a home. Additionally, any residential units not currently hooked up to the sewer system shall be required to install a lateral sewer line connection to the system upon sale of the property in question where a sewer main exists near the property.
Responsible Agency.City of Norco Engineering Division Timeframe:Ongoing 2014-2021.
Possible Funding Source: General Fund Objectives:
•	Connection to all residential properties to the City sewer system, with the eventual elimination of all
septic systems.
2014-2021 Housing Element
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 2: Remove or reduce constraints on the development of housing.
Policy 2.1:	Remove or mitigate constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of
affordable housing as is feasible and in conjunction with the Land Use Element of the General Plan, and the goals of the community.
Policy 2.2:	Ensure that water and sewer providers are aware of the City’s intentions for residential
development throughout the City.
Policy 2.3:	Provide developer incentives, such as a density bonus or flexibility in development
standards, to facilitate the development of quality housing that is affordable to lower and moderate-income households.
Policy 2.4:	Periodically review and revise the City’s development standards, if necessary, to facilitate
quality housing that is affordable to all income levels.
Policy 2.5:	When feasible, consider reducing, subsidizing, or deferring development fees and
offering faster permitting time periods to facilitate the provision of affordable housing.
Policy 2.6:	Support innovative public, private and non-profit partnership efforts for the
development of affordable housing.
Programs:
Action 2.1 Development Standard Review. City staff will specifically review the development standards for the residential zones to identify standards that may constrain the development of affordable housing and housing for special groups such as disabled individuals. The City of Norco is flexible and is committed to working with developers to build affordable units, which may require modifications to constraining standards. The City will further review any standards identified in Chapter 5 of the Housing Element as a constraint and alter them as necessary7 to ensure that affordable housing can be developed. In the interim, staff will, on a case by case basis, identify ways that standards can be relaxed if it is determined that such requirements are in any way impeding the development of affordable housing or housing for disabled residents. The City will also continue to provide development standard modifications, streamlined permit processing for applications related to the creation of affordable housing, and will offer fee modifications, when feasible, for projects including affordable units that are required to apply for variations to the existing development standards. Incentives for extremely low income housing will be encouraged to prioritize the development of units for this income group.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division Timeframe. Annually, 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. Departmental budget Objectives.
• Review development standards on an annual basis to identify constraints and remove or offset constraints where possible.
2014-2021 Housing Element
9
City of Norco
General Plan
Action 2.2
Action 2.3
Action 2.4
Streamlined Permit Processing. The City shall prioritize development processing time of applications for new construction or rehabilitation of housing for lower and moderate'-income households and seniors. Applications for housing development that is appropriate to accommodate extremely low income households will be given priority over all other income groups.
Responsible Agency: City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe: Ongoi ng 2014^2021.
Potential Funding Source: Departmental budget
Objectives:
• Provide information about permit streamlining at City Hall, on the City's website and in other public places to increase awareness.
Second Unit Development. The City recognizes that second units provide a unique opportunity to create affordable units in residential areas particularly for elderly residents. Consequently, during the 2008^2014 planning period, Staff reviewed and updated the second unit ordinance to comply with State law and to ensure that no constraints exist to the development of second units in the City. The City will administer their updated second unit ordinance and will promote the ordinance online and at City Hall.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe. Ongoing 2014'202l.
Potential Funding Source. Departmental budget
Objectives:
•	Monitor the number of second units built on an annual basis.
•	Provide information about second unit development at City Hall, on the City’s website and in other public places to increase awareness.
Fee Subsidies for Extremely Low--Income Households. If and when funding becomes available in the future, the City shall consider the establishment of a program to help subsidize a portion of the application processing fees for developments in which five percent of units are affordable to extremely lowTncome households. To be eligible for this fee subsidy, the units shall be affordable by affordability covenant (no less than 45 years for owner'occupied units and not less than 55 years for rental units). As the City had previously utilized redevelopment set' aside funds, there is not currently a permanent funding source for this program. For the 2014'2021 planning period the City will investigate new funding opportunities and administer funds as they become available. The City shall promote the benefits of such a program to the development community by posting information on its web page and creating a handout to be distributed with land development applications, once funding is available.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe. Ongoing 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. Departmental budget, Additional funding sources needed.
Objectives:
2014'2021 Housing Element
10
City of Norco
General Plan
•	Provide information about fee subsidies for projects that include units affordable to ELI households
at City Hall, on the City’s website and in other public places, and by creating a handout to be distributed with land development applications.
Action 2.5 Water and Sewer Providers. In accordance with Government Code Section 65589.7 as revised in 2005, immediately following City Council adoption, the City must deliver a copy of the 2014-2021 Housing Element to all City Departments, other public agencies or private entities that provide water or sewer services to properties within the City of Norco.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division Timeframe. By October 2015.
Potential Funding Source. General Fund Objectives.
• Ensure that water and sewer providers are aware of the City's intentions for residential development.
Action 2.6 Flood Management. In accordance with Government Code Section 65302, as part of the current General Plan update process the City reviewed and revised the Conservation and Safety Elements to consider flood risks as they relate to future land use decisions. The Conservation Element has been updated to identify rivers, creeks, streams, flood corridors, riparian habitats, and land that may accommodate floodwater for purposes of groundwater recharge and storm water management. Additionally, the Safety Element identifies information regarding flood hazards, including, but not limited to flood hazard zones, National Flood Insurance Program maps published by FEMA, information about flood hazards, designated floodway maps, dam failure inundation maps, areas subject to inundation in the event of the failure of levees or floodwalls, etc. as listed in Section 65302(g)(2) and establish a set of comprehensive goals, policies, and objectives for the protection of the community from the unreasonable risks of flooding. The City will continue to utilize information from the General Plan and consider flood risks in all future land use decisions.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division Timeframe. Ongoing, 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. General Fund Objectives.
• Ensure that flood risks are considered when making land use decisions.
2014-2021 Housing Element
11
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 3: Preserve and improve the City’s existing housing stock.
Policy 3.1:	Monitor and enforce building and property maintenance code standards in residential
neighborhoods.
Policy 3.2:	Seek methods of preserving and enhancing existing neighborhoods within the City
through capital improvement planning and development programs.
Policy 3.3:	Using all available funds, continue and/or create programs to maintain or improve the
character and quality of existing housing and neighborhood environments.
Policy 3.4:	Encourage property owners to maintain and make improvements to their properties by
taking advantage of programs offered by the City and County.
Policy 3.4:	Assist in the preservation of all units “at-risk” of converting from affordable housing to
market rate.
Policy 3.5:	Encourage energy efficient design in existing and new residential units and promote
sustainability upgrades in existing and proposed residential complexes.
Programs:
Action 3.1 Code Enforcement Program. As the housing stock continues to age, the enforcement of existing property maintenance codes is a primary means to preserve housing and the quality of neighborhoods. The Code Enforcement Division is responsible for enforcing City ordinances affecting property maintenance, building conditions, and other housing and neighborhood issues as identified by citizens and inter-department staff.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division, and Building Division Timeframe. Ongoing 2014'2021.
Potential Funding Source. Departmental budgets Objectives.
•	Continue to conduct inspections on a complaint basis.
Action 3.2 Home Rehabilitation Program. To assist with the preservation of older housing units, the former City Redevelopment Agency established the Home Rehabilitation Program. This program provided loans and one-time grants to qualified lower income homeowners to repair or improve their homes, including improvements to the exterior appearance of their home or to make exterior and interior repairs. Eligible repairs include: exterior painting, landscape improvements, repair of code violations and substandard conditions, roof repairs, plumbing repairs, electrical works repairs to heating, cooling, and ventilation systems, sewer hook-ups or septic work, and access modifications are eligible. To be eligible, participants had to own and occupy the residence to be rehabilitated; and additionally must qualify as very-low income. Funding was prioritized for elderly residents and disabled residents of any age.
Unfortunately, the elimination of the City’s Redevelopment Agency during the 2008-2014 planning period resulted in the loss of a direct funding source for this program.
2014-2021 Housing Element
12
City of Norco
General Plan
Consequently, for the 2014-2021 planning period, the City will investigate new funding opportunities and administer funds as they become available. If and when a permanent funding source is identified, the City will provide information about the program at City Hall, on the City’s website and in other public places to increase awareness.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division, and Building Division
Timeframe. Ongoing 2014-2021. Investigate funding opportunities annually.
Potential Funding Source. General fund, Additional funding sources needed.
Objectives.
•	Investigate new funding opportunities on an annual basis and administer funds as they become available.
•	If and when, a permanent funding source is identified, the City will provide information at City Hall, on the City’s website and in other public places to increase awareness.
Action 3.3
Action 3.4
Monitor Affordable Units. The City of Norco currently has three affordable rental housing complexes, with 166 deed restricted units that do not expire until after 2035. To determine how effective the City’s housing programs have been in the development and maintenance of affordable housing, the City will monitor these affordable units to ensure that the rent payments charged are consistent with levels appropriate for the identified income category. The City has posted their AB 987 Affordable Housing Database on its website and will continue to track affordable housing units citywide through the annual certification process. In addition, as the City develops additional affordable units these properties will be added to the table and will be monitored annually to ensure they meet affordability requirements.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco and Planning Division
Timeframe. Ongoing 2014-2021. Update the AB 987 table on an annual basis.
Potential Funding Source. Departmental Budget
Objectives:
• Maintain a list of affordable units throughout the City including affordability information to ensure property owners are compliant with deed restrictions and to preserve affordable units.
Riverside County Partnership Program. As a means of further leveraging housing assistance, the City will cooperate with the Riverside County Economic Development Agency (EDA) and Riverside County Housing Authority to promote resident awareness and application for County run housing assistance programs. These programs include:
•	Home Repair Program,
•	Senior Home Repair Program,
•	Home Weatherization Program,
•	First-time Home Buyer Down Payment Assistance Program, and
•	Mortgage Credit Certificate Program.
The County offers a variety of housing assistance programs that can supplement future City housing programs as they become available. As the City has little control
2014-2021 Housing Element
13
City of Norco
General Plan
over how the County’s programs are administered the City will be responsible for providing program information on the City’s website and at City Hall.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe'. Ongoing 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. General Fund
Objectives:
• Increase resident awareness about housing programs offered by the County by providing information at City Hall and on the City's website.
Action 3.5 Capital Improvement Program. Identify capital improvements citywide, including maintenance and improvement of streets and trails, to preserve and enhance the identity of each of the City's neighborhoods.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division and Engineering Division Timeframe. Ongoing, 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. Departmental budget Objectives.
• Preseiwe the character of existing neighborhoods while ensuring adequate circulation and infrastructure are available.
2014-2021 Housing Element
14
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 4: Provide adequate housing in the City for all economic segments of the community.
Policy 4.1:	Identify and monitor suitable sites to accommodate the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA
allocation and encourage the construction of new affordable housing by advertising vacant and underdeveloped parcels to developers.
Policy 4.2:	Encourage public/private sector partnerships and cooperation in developing and
implementing solutions to affordable housing, and special housing needs.
Policy 4.3:	Seek any federal, state, and local funding to help provide and subsidize low-cost housing.
Policy 4.4:	Ensure that environmental, public infrastructure and traffic constraints are adequately
addressed with regard to new residential development.
Policy 4.5:	Support innovative public, private and non-profit partnership efforts for the
development of affordable housing.
Policy 4.6:	Provide developer incentives, such as a density bonus or flexibility in development
standards, to facilitate the development of quality housing that is affordable to lower and moderate-income households.
Policy 4.7:	Encourage residential infill within existing neighborhoods to better utilize existing
services and utilities and to reduce infrastructure development costs.
Programs:
Action 4.1 Housing Opportunity Sites. The Norco Land Use Element and Zoning Code provide for a variety of residential land uses to accommodate the City's 2014-2021 Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA). As shown in Section 6, Housing Resources, of the Housing Element the City has rezoned sites applying the Housing Development Overlay (HDO) zone to approximately 100 acres of underutilized and vacant land. The HDO zone requires and encourages the development of high density residential uses and allows for a mixture of residential and non-residential development. The application of the overlay zone will allow residential development at 30 dwelling units per acre on 5 sites throughout the City and will allow for development up to 35 dwelling units per acre if a density bonus is utilized. A density bonus will be awarded to developments that provide equestrian facilities or parkland/open space beyond the requirements outlined in the City’s zoning code.
Of the 101.7 acres rezoned approximately 92 acres are vacant with no development. To encourage the development of residential projects with affordable units, the City will meet with land owners to facilitate redevelopment on vacant sites and severely underutilized sites within the HDO zone. To further encourage development, the City may offer land owners a menu of incentives including: development fee modifications, fast track processing, density bonus incentives, reductions in development standards, and funding for off-site improvements, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for these regulatory and financial incentives will be provided through CDBG funds and
2014-2021 Housing Element
15
City of Norco
General Plan
other funding sources as they become available. The City will also prioritize funding for projects that incorporate units for extremely low income households.
The City has a formal monitoring program in place to ensure sufficient residential capacity to accommodate the identified regional need for lower-income households is maintained within the HDO zone. The program provides that where an approval of a development (residential, commercial or mixed-use) on an identified site results in a reduction of potential affordable units below the residential capacity assumed in Table 6-7, the City will identify and designate additional sites for rezoning to ensure that no net loss occurs. This means that if any one of the identified sites is not developed in accordance with the development requirements outlined for the HDO zone, an alternative site or sites must be identified and rezoned to maintain the overall affordable unit capacity.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe. Ongoing, 2014-2021. Monitor sites as development is proposed.
Potential Funding Source. Departmental budget
Objectives.
• Continue to provide appropriate land use designations and maintain an inventory of suitable sites for residential development. Make the vacant and underutilized residential sites inventory available on the City’s website to nonprofit and for-profit housing developers.
Action 4.2
Action 4.3
Lot Consolidation Program. Parcels identified as part of the Housing Development Overlay zone range in size from approximately 0.5 acres to 5 acres and in some cases are narrow or shallow in size, which could be seen as an additional constraint to the development of housing. To encourage the development of residential and mixed-use projects, the City will establish a lot consolidation program is needed, which can offer incentives such as a reduction in development standards (i.e. lot size, parking, and open space requirements) to merge adjacent lots. The City, budget allowing, may also offer to subsidize a portion of development fees to encourage lot consolidation and to promote more intense residential and mixed use development on vacant and underutilized sites within the Gateway Specific Plan area. The City will promote the program at City Hall, on its website and will evaluate requests for funding on a case by case basis.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe: Ongoing 2014-2021.
Funding Source: General Fund
Objectives.
•	Encourage lot consolidation of smaller parcels to accommodate projects including a minimum of 16
units at a density of at least 30 dwelling units per acre or higher.
Land Use Database. Throughout the City of Norco there are a number of vacant parcels ranging in size that provide opportunities for the development of affordable and market rate housing. The former City of Norco Redevelopment Agency had established an Infill Housing Program to maintain a comprehensive land use database identifying parcels and/or structures suitable for residential development and/or redevelopment at costs below market rate. In many instances there sites were in addition to the sites identified in the Housing Resources section of the Housing Element. As the Redevelopment
2014-2021 Housing Element
16
City of Norco
General Plan
Agency provided staff and funds to maintain this program, the City will continue to monitor funding opportunities to re-establish a similar program in the future.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe. Ongoing 2014-2021
Potential Funding Source. CDBG, General Fund
Objectives.
•	Identify potential sites for infill development.
•	Provide information on development opportunities to interested developers online, at City Hall and in other public places.
Action 4.4 Density Bonus Program. During the 2008-2014 planning period, the City of Norco revised their density bonus ordinance to be consistent with State law, which includes decreasing the number of affordable units a developer must provide to receive a density bonus and allowing up to three regulatory concessions. The revised ordinance is intended to facilitate the development of housing for low and very low-income households that is restricted for a period of no less than 45-55 years. The City will promote the use of the density bonus ordinance in conjunction with the Housing Development Overlay zone, mixed-use projects, senior housing, and within Specific Plans. Information on the ordinance will be provided at City Hall and online at the City’s website to promote the application of ordinance for the development of affordable units.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division Timeframe. Ongoing, 201F2021.
Potential Funding Source. Departmental budget Objectives.
• Provide information on development opportunities to interested developers online, at City Hall and in other public places.
2014-2021 Housing Element
17
City of Norco
General Plan
Action 4.5
Action 4.6
First Time Homebuyer Program. To provide additional assistance for low and moderate-income households the former Redevelopment Agency established the First Time Homebuyer Program. This down-payment assistance program was available to eligible moderate-income families or individuals seeking to purchase a home in Norco. The maximum amount of assistance offered was $80,000 and assumed a loan term of 30 years and 3 percent interest.
Unfortunately, the elimination of the City’s Redevelopment Agency during the 2008-2014 planning period resulted in the loss of a direct funding source for this program. Consequently, for the 2014-2021 planning period, the City will investigate new funding opportunities annually and administer funds as they become available. If, and when, a permanent funding source is identified, the City will provide information about the program at City Hall, on the City’s website and in other public places to increase awareness.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe. Ongoing 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. CDBG, Additional funding sources needed.
Objectives:
•	Investigate new funding opportunities on an annual basis and administer funds as they become available.
•	If and when, a permanent funding source is identified, the City will provide information at City Hall, on the City's website and in other public places to increase awareness.
Affordable Housing Financing Program. The City of Norco recognizes that the availability of financing is crucial to the development of affordable housing. To assist with the provision of funding and financing, the City will facilitate discussions between developers and local banks to meet their obligations pursuant to the California Community Reinvestment Act (CCRA) providing favorable financing to developers involved in projects designed to provide lower and moderate-income housing opportunities. Similarly, the City will maintain a list of mortgage lenders participating in the California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) program and refer the program to builders or corporations interested in developing housing in the City. Whenever feasible the City will offer funds, including HOME and CDBG funds, as well as any awarded grant funds, to assist developers with the construction of new single family and multifamily homes for sale or rent that are affordable to very low, low and moderate income households. The City shall promote use of the residential density bonus and other incentives through public outreach materials such as informational packets and web-based postings to assist private developers in constructing affordable housing units.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe. Ongoing 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. General Fund, CDBG Funds
Objectives:
• Facilitate discussions between developers and local banks to meet their obligations pursuant to the California Community Reinvestment Act (CCRA) providing favorable financing to developers involved in projects designed to provide lower and moderate-income housing opportunities.
2014-2021 Housing Element
18
City of Norco
General Plan
• Maintain the list of mortgage lenders participating in the California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) program and refer the program to builders or corporations interested in developing housing in the City.
Action 4.7
Action 4.8
Developer Partnership Program. The City shall encourage development of moderate and lower-income housing units by private, public and non-profit developers during the planning period. To achieve this, the City will explore funding opportunities, such as HOME funds, California Housing Finance Agency single-family and multi-family programs, HUD Section 208/811 loans, and HOPE 11 and III Homeownership programs to stimulate private developer and non-profit entity efforts in the development and financing of housing for lower and moderate-income households. The City will also continue to seek additional opportunities to work with Habitat for Humanity, and other private or public agencies, for the development of low income housing units, especially through the Infill Housing Program.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe. Ongoing 2008-2014
Potential Funding Source. CDBG, Departmental budget
Objectives
•	Identify two homes to be assisted through Habitat for Humanity during the planning period.
•	Hold periodic meetings with developers to discuss residential development opportunities in the City,
Incentives for Large Multifamily Units. It is crucial that affordable units constructed in the City are available for families, as well as other special needs groups; however, larger units are often more costly to develop. The City will prioritize incentives for developers to encourage the inclusion of units with three or more bedrooms to accommodate low-income large family households. Incentives may include, but are not limited to; (1) Regulatory7 concessions/waivers; (2) Fee waivers/financial assistance; (3) streamlined entitlement review/approvals; (4) Technical assistance for financing/funding of development projects. Individual projects will be evaluated to determine if they qualify for any incentives on a case by case basis by the Planning and Building Division. As funding to assist projects is limited, given the elimination of the Redevelopment Agency, the City will investigate other funding opportunities to work with developers to incentivize large units.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe. Ongoing 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. General Fund, CDBG, HOME, additional funding sources needed.
Objectives.
• Encourage private development of housing units with three or more units that can accommodate large households. Advertise on City Hall information about available development incentives, and any	available	funding	sources.
2014-2021 Housing Element
19
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 5: Provide equal housing opportunities for all residents of the community.
Policy 5.1:	Promote equal housing opportunities that do not discriminate against any person due to
age, race, sex, marital status, ethnic background, income, or any other arbitrary factors.
Policy 5.2:	Cooperate with the Fair Housing Council in the enforcement of fair housing laws and in
the review of violations of applicable Federal and State fair housing laws
Policy 5.3:	Comply with the requirements of the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair
Employment and Housing Act to provide for reasonable accommodation in the zoning code and other land use regulations to provide housing for persons with disabilities.
Programs:
Action 5.1 Fair Housing Program. The Fair Housing Council of Riverside County, Inc., implements the policies and practices for fair housing in Norco and takes action on any circumstances that affect equal housing opportunities. The City refers all inquiries for these services to the Fair Housing Council and also maintains literature and informational brochures at City Hall that are available for public distribution. The City will also continue to refer inquires to the Fair Housing Council for the provision of fair housing assistance including landlord/tenant counseling, homebuyer assistance, and amelioration or removal of identified impediments. The City will provide informational materials on fair housing practices at a variety of public locations throughout the City.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division Timeframe. Ongoing 2014'2021.
Potential Funding Source. General Fund, CDBG Funds.
Objectives.
• Continue to assist households through the Fair Housing Foundation, and continue to refer fair housing complaints to the Fair Housing Foundation.
Action 5.2 Reasonable Accommodation Program. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65583, the City of Norco is obligated to remove potential and actual governmental constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income levels and for persons with disabilities. The Fair Housing Act, as amended in 1988, requires that cities and counties provide reasonable accommodation to rules, policies, practices, and procedures where such accommodation may be necessary to afford individuals with disabilities equal housing opportunities. Reasonable accommodation provides a basis for residents with disabilities to request flexibility in the application of land use and zoning regulations or, in some instances, even a waiver of certain restrictions or requirements from the local government to ensure equal access to housing opportunities. Cities and counties are required to consider requests for accommodations related to housing for people with disabilities and provide the accommodation when it is determined to be “reasonable” based on fair housing laws and case law interpreting the statutes. The City
2014-2021 Housing Element
20
City of Norco
General Plan
of Norco encourages and promotes accessible housing for persons with disabilities. This includes the retrofitting of existing dwelling units and enforcement of the State accessibility standards for new residential construction.
The City is committed to assisting residents in need of reasonable accommodation and will continue investigating opportunities to offer financial assistance though the Home Rehabilitation Program, and will continue to direct eligible residents to apply for funds. Applicants can apply for grants or a rebate to complete improvement projects that remove constraints to their living facilities. In general, City Staff takes into consideration the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in the review and approval of housing projects and grants modifications and deviations from the Municipal Code to accommodate the needs of persons with disabilities. During the 2008-2014 planning period, the City established formal reasonable accommodations which are advertised on the City website, at City Hall and in other public places.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe. Ongoing 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. General Fund
Objectives.
• Advertise the City's reasonable accommodation procedures as veil as applicable funding sources to complete home modifications on the City’s website and in other public places.
Action 5.3
Housing for Developmentally Disabled Persons Program. The housing needs of persons with disabilities, including persons with developmental disabilities are typically not addressed by Title 24 Regulations. The housing needs of persons with disabilities, in addition to basic affordability, range from slightly modifying existing units to requiring a varying range of supportive housing facilities. To accommodate residents with developmental disabilities the City will seek State and Federal monies, as funding becomes available, in support of housing construction and rehabilitation targeted for persons with disabilities, including developmental disabilities. Norco will also provide regulatory incentives, such as expedited permit processing and fee waivers and deferrals, budget permitting, to projects targeted for persons with disabilities, including persons with developmental disabilities. To further facilitate the development of units to accommodate persons with developmental disabilities, the City shall reach out annually to developers of supportive housing to encourage development of projects targeted for special needs groups. Finally, as housing is developed or identified, Norco will work with the Inland Regional Center to implement an outreach program informing families within the City of housing and services available for persons with developmental disabilities. Information will be made available on the City's website.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division
Timeframe. Ongoing 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. General Fund
Objectives.
•	Offer specific regulatoiy incentives throughout the planning period, when funding is available, and apply for funding at least twice during the planning period to encourage development of unit specifically for persons with disabilities, will reach out annually to developers.
•	Initiate a cooperative outreach program with the Regional Center by 2014.
2014-2021 Housing Element
21

City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 6: Encourage energy conservation activities in all residential development.
Policy 6.1:	Provide an adequate supply of housing will ensure sufficient affordable housing for full
range of income groups reducing long commutes in search of affordable housing.
Policy 6.2:	Adopt higher densities and promote infill and compact development patterns to
encourage housing affordability, maximize existing land resources, reduce pressure to convert agricultural resources, and conserve habitat and environmentally sensitive areas.
Policy 6.3:	Promote renewable energy generation and water conservation and efficiency in new
development of housing.
Policy 6.4:	Promote and support State and local programs for energy conservation and renewable
energy system installation in existing homes.
Policy 6.5:	Encourage new residential development to include energy efficiency measures beyond
the minimum standards of Title 24.
Policy 6.6 Encourage the use of active and passive solar energy systems in residential developments and enforce energy standards required by the State Energy Building Regulations for residential development.
Programs:
Action 6.1 Sustainable Land Use Planning. The City of Norco recognizes that long term planning efforts should focus on sustainability and the reduction of greenhouse gases. To progress towards these goals the City understands that it must provide an adequate supply of housing that is sufficient for a range of income groups thereby reducing long commutes in search of affordable housing. This requires planning for sufficient housing supply in the right locations - close to jobs, sendees, and amenities - which will in turn reduce congestion and long commutes. To achieve this, the City will promote infill and compact development patterns, has adopted higher densities in the Housing Development Overlay zone and will conserve habitat and environmentally sensitive areas including residential lots that are appropriate for animal keeping and agricultural uses.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division Timeframe. Ongoing 2014^2021.
Potential Funding Source. Departmental Budget Objectives:
•	Identify and advertise development opportunities within the Housing Development Overlay zone at City Hall, on its website to encourage compact development in key growth areas.
•	Promote use of the Multi family Green Building Guidelines.
•	Investigate opportunities to reduce fees and provide priority processing for residential development to promote development within specific growth opportunity areas.
2014"2021 Housing Element
22
City of Norco
General Plan

Action 6.2 Energy Efficient Design. The City will review ordinances and recommend changes where necessary to encourage energy efficient housing design and practices that are consistent with state regulations. The City will periodically distribute literature or post information on their website regarding energy conservation, including solar power, energy efficient insulation, and subsidies available from utility companies, and encourage homeowners and landlords to incorporate these features into construction and remodeling projects. When possible the City will encourage energy conservation devices including, but not limited to lighting, water heater treatments, and solar energy systems for all residential projects. The Planning division will encourage maximum utilization of Federal, State, and local government programs, such as the County of Riverside Home Weatherization Program, that assist homeowners in providing energy conservation measures.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division Timeframe. Ongoing 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. Departmental Budget Objectives:
• Promote opportunities for energy efficient design and related funding available at City Half on its website and will periodically review ordinances and recommend changes where necessary to encourage energy efficient housing design and practices that arc consistent with state regulations
Action 6.3 Energy Conservation Program. During the planning period, the City will seek out and pursue, in conjunction with local partners, funding for and development of programs for new construction and rehabilitation to promote energy conservation efforts. The City will assist residents in conserving resources and lowering utility costs by partnering with the utilities, including Southern California Edison, to conduct energy audits, and other measures to identify and to eliminate unnecessary or wasteful resource consumption. The City will also actively coordinate with Southern California Edison to ensure that the public is informed of all available programs providing incentives for the installation of energy conserving measures, including the California Alternate Rates for Energy program and the Family Electric Rate Assistance program.
Responsible Agency. City of Norco Planning Division Timeframe. Ongoing 2014-2021.
Potential Funding Source. General Fund Objectives:
•	Assist residents in conserving resources and lowering utility costs by working with the utilities and local partners to conduct energy audits other measures to identify and eliminate unnecessary or wasteful resource consumption.
•	Reduce electricity and natural gas demands by promoting the use of renewable energy technologies in residential and mixed-use projects.
•	Strongly promote solar energy generation, use of solar water heaters, and passive solar design in new housing and, especially, multi-family and farm-worker housing both prior to and during project review.
2014-2021 Housing Element
23
City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014-2021 Housing Element
24
City of Norco
General Plan
3.	Quantified Objectives
State Housing Law requires that each jurisdiction establish the maximum number of housing units that will be constructed, rehabilitated, and preserved over the planning period. The Quantified Objectives for the Housing Element reflect the planning period from January 2014 to October 2021.
It is important to note that while the Quantified Objectives of the RHNA are required to be part of the Housing Element and the City will strive to obtain these objectives, Norco cannot guarantee that these needs will be met given limited financial resources, land available for new construction and the increasing gap in affordability of housing resources and incomes. Satisfaction of the City’s regional housing needs will partially depend on the cooperation of private funding sources and resources of the federal, state, and county programs that are used to support the needs of the very low-, low- and moderate-income households. Additionally, outside economic forces heavily influence the housing market. State law recognizes that a locality may not be able to accommodate its regional fair share housing need.
The Quantified Objectives assume optimum conditions for the production of housing. However, environmental, physical, and market conditions influence the timing, type, and cost of housing production in a community. Also, given the primary goal of Norco is to provide a small-plot agriculture/animal-keeping lifestyle, new development must conform to maintain this lifestyle. Below is an estimate of quantified objectives for the number of housing units, broken down by income category, over the 2014-2021 timeframe.
Table 3-1: Quantified Objectives
	Extremely Low	Very Low(d)	Low	Moderate	Above Moderate	Total
Construction (a)	102	103	136	151	326	818
Rehabilitation (b)	—	-	-	-	-	0
Conservation/ Preservation (c)	-	-	-	-	-	0
Total	102	103	136	151	326	818
Notes:
(a)	Construction objectives represent the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA allocation and represent the City’s best effort to facilitate and encourage the development of a variety of housing types.
(b)	As the former Redevelopment Agency provided funding for all rehabilitation programs, the City does not have permanent funding to support this objective.
(c)	Since housing units in Norco do not have expiring affordability covenants in the upcoming planning period (refer to the Assisted Housing At-Risk of Conversion to Market Rate Housing Section), preserved housing unit objectives do not have to be quantified.
(d)	In accordance with State law, the City has determined that approximately fifty percent of its very' low-income units (102 units) are designated to accommodate the need of extremely low-income households.
2014-2021 Housing Element
25
City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014'2021 Housing Element
26
City of Norco
General Plan
4.	Housing Needs
4.1	Population Characteristics
Data sources used in this needs assessment include the United States Census (2000 and 2010 Censuses), American Community Survey (ACS) 3-Year Estimates, and various other sources. For demographic data, estimates are used to show changes in conditions since the 2010 U.S. Census. The ACS estimates are based on data collected over a 3-year time period. The estimates represent the average characteristics of population and housing between 2009 and 2011 and do not represent a single point in time.
Additional information has been drawn from the Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), which is drawn from Census 2010 data. CHAS data is based on special tabulations for the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) from sample Census data. Thus, the number of households in each category often deviates slightly from the 100 percent count due to extrapolations to the total household level. Because of this, interpretations of CHAS data should focus on proportions and percentages, rather than on precise numbers.
Most data contained in tables is derived from Census data Summary File 1 (SF-T). Summary File 1 contains the lOO^percent data, which is the information compiled from the questions asked of all people and about every housing unit.
4.2	Housing Needs Summary
Table 44 below summarizes the housing assistance needs of all households (categorized by income percentage of the Riverside County Median Family Income) in Norco by household tenure (renter/owner), household type, and “housing problems.” This count of households with “housing problems” includes those who: 1) occupy units with physical defects (lacking complete kitchen or bathroom); 2) live in overcrowded conditions (housing units with more than one person per room); 3) have a housing cost burden exceeding 30 percent of gross income; or 4) have a severe housing cost burden exceeding 50 percent of gross income.
2014'2021 Housing Element
27
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 4-1: Housing Assistance Needs of Income Groups by Tenure
Household Type	Total Renters	Total Owners	Total Households
Extremely Low-Income (0-30% MFI)	250	300	550
Percent with any housing problems	62.0%	95.0%	80.0%
Percent with cost burden >30%	6.0%	13.3%	10.0%
Percent with cost burden >50%	54.0%	81.7%	69.1%
Very Low-Income (31-50% MFI)	110	315	425
Percent with any housing problems	45.4%	65.1%	60.0%
Percent with cost burden >30%	0.0%	3.2%	2.3%
Percent with cost burden >50%	45.4%	58.7%	55.3%
Low-Income (51-80% MFI)	155	630	785
Percent with any housing problems	100.0%	62.7%	70.1%
Percent with cost burden >30%	87.1%	25.4%	37.6%
Percent with cost burden >50%	9.7%	37.3%	31.8%
Moderate-Income (80-120% MFI)	185	460	645
Percent with any housing problems	70.3%	65.2%	66.7%
Percent with cost burden >30%	56.8%	42.4%	46.5%
Percent with cost burden >50%	13.5%	22.8%	20.1%
Total Households	1,325	5,765	7,090
Percent with any housing problems	37.0%	20.5%	23.6%
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) Databook
According to the CHAS Databook, nearly 24 percent of all households in the City of Norco experienced some form of housing problem. The percentage of total households that experienced some type of housing problem was greater among renters than owners. This is because there are more singleTamily homes than multi-family units in the City. The statistics as identified in Table 4-1 indicate that housing cost burden is a contributing factor to housing problems.
4.3	Community Profile
According to the DOF 2008 Population and Housing Estimates, the population of Norco is 22,632 persons. Between 2000 and 2008, the City population increased by 3,302 residents; an increase of 14.5 percent. Norco represents 1.3 percent of the total population for Riverside County, which was estimated by the California Department of Finance to be 2,088,322 persons in January 2008.
2014-2021 Housing Element
28
City of Norco
General Plan
Figure 4-1: Historical and Projected Population Growth
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2010 Census SF 1, Riverside County Center for Demographic Research
Unlike many cities in Riverside County, Norco has not seen significant population growth in the past 20 years. Reasons for this may include the limited amount of available land for new residential construction, as well as the historically above average median home prices. As Figure 4-1 shows, population totals have gradually increased with the largest population increase occurring between 1970 and 1980. After 1980, the population growth leveled off and has increased at a gradual pace of approximately 3,000 residents every ten years. Future projections for the City also indicate a continued steady increase in the population of around 275 residents annually.
In addition to the overall growth that has occurred in the City, the composition of the population also changed, which can affect the future housing needs of a community. The traditional assumption is that in many communities, young adults tend to prefer apartments, low- to moderate-cost condominiums, and smaller or more affordable single-family units, while adults provide the market for moderate- to high-end condominiums and single-family homes. The senior population (65 years and older) tends to generate demand for low- to moderate-cost apartments and condominiums, community residential settings, and mobile homes.
Riverside County as a whole can be characterized as having a young population (33.7 years old); with Norco having a higher median age (39.5 years old). In Norco, adults between the ages of 25 and 44 comprised 36.2 percent of the population. Although residents 65 years old and older make up approximately 8 percent of the total population, the large proportion of adults over 45 years of age is indicative of the aging baby boomer population that will likely change the demographic and economic dynamic of the City over the next 15 to 20 years. Table 4-2 presents the number of residents by age group in 2010.
2014-2021 Housing Element
29
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 4-2: Population by Age
Age Groups	20	10
	Riverside County	Norco
	Percentage	Percentage
Under 5 years	7.4%	4.5%
5-19 years	24.2%	18.8%
20-24 years	7.1%	7.2%
25-34 years	12.9%	13.1%
35-44 years	13.4%	15.9%
45-64 years	23.1%	30.7%
65-74 years	6.4%	6.4%
75 + years	5.4%	3.3%
Total	100%	100%
Median Age	33.7	39.5
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2010 Census SF 1
4.3.1	Race and Ethnicity
From 2009-2011, most residents in Norco were either White or Hispanic; constituting 74.9 percent and 26.9 percent of the population, respectively. The population characteristics in Norco have remained relatively unchanged since the 2000 Census. Generally since 2000, the White population has continued to decline while the Hispanic population has continued to increase. Table 4-3 presents the racial composition of the City according to the 2000 Census as compared to the 2009-2011 American Community Survey.
Table 4-3: Race and Ethnicity
Race and Ethnicities	2000	2009-2011
White	82.4%	74.9%
African American	6.2%	6.1%
Asian	1.2%	3.2%
American Indian and Alaskan Native	0.7%	1.2%
Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander	0.1%	0.1%
Some Other Race	6.3%	9.8%
Two or More Races	3.1%	4.7%
Total	100%	100%
Hispanic or Latino1	22.9%	26.9%
Notes:
1 Those reporting that they are of Hispanic origin may be of any race and are, therefore, included in one of the race categories.
Source: Census 2000 Summary File 3 (SF 3) - Sample Data; 2009-2011 American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates
2014-2021 Housing Element
30
City of Norco
General Plan
4.3.2	Employment Characteristics
Norco residents are employed in diverse industries, with the largest percentage (16.6 percent) of the population employed in the educational and health sendees industry. Construction ranks second, with 12.6 percent. In Riverside County, the unemployment rate was estimated at 7.2 percent in 2009-2011. Norco’s unemployment rate is lower than that of Riverside County, estimated at 9.5 percent by the 2009-2011 American Community Sun^ey. Figure 4-2 shows the percentage of residents employed by sector according to the 2009-2011 American Community Survey.
Figure 4-2: Employment by Industry in Years 2009-2011
Educational & Healt Services 16.6%
Professional & Sendees 10.6%
Public Administration
Other Sendees 5.6%
Leisure & Hospitality. 6.8%
Construction
12.6%
Finance & Insurance 7.1%
Information
1.3%
Wholesale trade 3.4%
Manufacturing
10.8%
trade 11.8%
Transportation, Warehousing & Utilities 4.8%
Source: 2009-2011 American Community Surv'ey 3-Year Estimates
4.3.3	Household Characteristics
A household is defined by the Census as all persons occupying a housing unit. Families are a subset of households and include all persons living together who are related by blood, marriage, or adoption. Single households include persons living alone in housing units, but do not include persons in group quarters such as convalescent homes, dormitories, or rehabilitation facilities. Other households are unrelated people living together, such as roommates.
The 2009-2011 ACS estimated that Norco had 7,056 households. The distribution of households shows that the majority of households in Norco are comprised of families. Non-family households made up 18.2 percent of all households.
2014-2021 Housing Element
31
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 4-4: Household Types
Household Type	Number
Families	
Married couples	4,701
Male-headed households	152
Female-headed households	836
Total	5,689
Non-Families	
Singles	928
Other	436
Total	1,367
Total Households	7,506
Average Household Size	3.34
Average Family Size	3.71
Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates
Household composition and size are often two interrelated factors. Communities with a large proportion of families with children tend to have a larger average household size. Such communities have a greater need for larger units with adequate open space and recreational opportunities for children. Household size in Norco remains higher than that of Riverside County, with the 2009-2011 ACS reporting an average household size for the County at 3.21 persons per household.
43.4	Tenure
Tenure in the housing industry refers to the occupancy of a housing unit based on whether the unit is owner-occupied or renter-occupied. Tenure preferences are typically related to household income, composition, and age of the householder. Residential mobility is often influenced by tenure with ownership housing typically experiencing a lower turnover rate than rental housing.
The 2009-2011 ACS indicated the City had a total of 7,520 housing units out of which 7,506 were occupied. Of these occupied units, 5,598 housing units were owner-occupied and 1,458 housing units were renter-occupied. Table 4-5 shows the tenure of the City's occupied housing stock. As shown in Table 4-5, the Norco housing stock is predominantly owner-occupied.
Table 4-5: Household Size by Tenure
Tenure	Estimate	Percentage
Owner-occupied	5,598	79.3%
Renter-occupied	1,458	20.7%
Total	7,056	100%
Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates
2014-2021 Housing Element
32
City of Norco
General Plan
4.3.5 Household Income
The Census Bureau defines household and family incomes differently. Household income assumes two income earners combining their income, while family income specifically takes into account households with two or more persons combining their income that are related through blood, marriage, or adoption. Household income estimates for Norco by total households and families are found in Table 4-6. The 2009-2011 ACS 3-Year Estimates indicate that the City experiences higher household and family median incomes of $79,279 and $88,711 respectively, than the Riverside County medians of $55,729 and $62,381.
Table 4"6: Household and Family Income
Income	Households	% of Total Households	Families	% of Total Families
$0-$14,999	436	6.2%	350	6.2%
$15,000-$34,999	1,070	15.2%	545	9.6%
$35,000-$49,999	663	9.4%	554	9.7
$50,000-$74,999	1,189	16.9%	926	16.31
$75,000-$99,999	1,121	15.9%	962	16.9
$100,000-$149,000	1,075	15.2%	994	17.4
$150,000 +	1,502	21.3%	1,358	23.9
Total	7,056	100%	5,689	100%
Median Household Income=$79,279		Median	Family Income=$88,711	
Source: 2009'2011 American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates
Lower income households may require housing with rents or mortgage payments lower than market rates. Often, payment assistance is needed from local, state, or federal government agencies to assist these households in securing adequate housing. The City as the successor to the City of Norco Redevelopment Agency (RDA) assists residents through the following programs: Norco First-Time Homebuyer Program, Home Improvement Program, and Sewer Connection/Rebate Programs. The City will continue to utilize available programs administered through the County (Mortgage Credit Certificate Program) and in conjunction with non-profit organizations (such as Habitat for Humanity) to provide residents with affordable housing. The City can also utilize federal programs (Community Development Block Grant, HUD 202 Grant) and State Programs (Home Mortgage Purchase Program, Low-Income Housing Tax Credits) to further implement affordable housing in the City.
4.3.6 Overpaying Households
Overpayment refers to renters and homeowners who pay more than 30 percent of their gross incomes for housing and related expenses. A high cost of housing eventually causes households living on a fixed-income, such as the elderly or lower income families, to use a disproportionate percentage of their income for housing.
State housing policy recognizes that cooperative participation of the private and public sectors are necessary' to expand housing opportunities to all economic segments of the
2014-2021 Housing Element
33
City of Norco
General Plan
community. A primary State goal is the provision of decent housing and a suitable living environment for Californians of all economic levels.
Consistent with HUD’s “threshold of overpayment” definition, California’s housing administration has determined that, “affordable housing costs with respect to very low-, low-, and moderate-income households shall not exceed 30 percent of gross household income” (Health and Safety Code, Section 50052.9). That is, when households pay more than 30 percent of their incomes for rent or mortgage payments, they are left with insufficient funds for other necessities, such as food, health care, clothing, and utilities.
Exceeding 30 percent of income for rent or mortgage may cause a series of related financial problems, and can result in a deterioration of housing stock, because costs associated with maintenance must be sacrificed for more immediate expenses (e.g. food, clothing, medical care, and utilities). Overpayment can also encourage overcrowding as a means to meet expenses. This in turn can lead to a variety of problems, from accelerating the rate of deterioration, to children’s decreased performance in school, to code enforcement issues. HUD recognizes, however, that upper-income households are generally more able to secure housing within their budgets, and are more capable of paying a larger proportion of their income for housing. Therefore, housing overpayment estimates usually focus on lower income groups. Table 4-7 displays the total number of housing units overpaying for housing based on tenure. The majority of households overpaying (73.5 percent) were owner occupied units.
Table 4-7: Overpaying Housing Units by Tenure
Tenure	Total Overpaying
Renter	908
Owner	2,523
Total	3,431
Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates
According to the CHAS Databook, 1,225 lower income households overpaid for housing in 2006-2010. Out of this total, 435 extremely low-income households overpaid for housing. According to Table 4-8, 69 percent of owner-occupied households experienced more overpayment than renter households; the highest total occurring in low-income households.
Table 4-8: Overpayment by Income Level
Tenure by Household	Extremely Low-Income	Very Low-Income	Low- Income	Total Overpaying
Renter	150	50	150	350
Owner	285	195	395	875
Total	435	245	545	1,225
Source: HUD CHAS Databook
2014-2021 Housing Element
34
Before current housing problems can be understood and future needs anticipated, housing occupancy characteristics need to be identified in the City. The following is an analysis of household type, age of housing stock, and other household characteristics that may affect access to and demand for housing and housing programs. This section details the various household characteristics in Norco.
The Census Bureau defines a housing unit as a house, an apartment, a mobile home, a group of rooms, or a single room that is occupied (or, if vacant, is intended for occupancy) as separate living quarters. Separate living quarters are those in which the occupants live separately from any other individuals in the building and which have direct access from outside the building or through a common hall.
In 2000, the Census estimated that the City of Norco had 6,220 total housing units. Between 2000 and 2010, the total amount of housing units increased 1,145 units, or 23 percent. The majority of housing units in Norco are single family detached units. Out of the total number of units constructed between 2000 and 2010, the majority of units added to the housing stock were single family detached units.
Table 4-9: Housing Type
Housing Type	2000		2010	
	No. of Units	Percent of Total	No. of Units	Percent of Total
Single-Family				
Detached	5,849	94.0%	7,281	95%
Attached	136	2.2%	83	1.1%
Multi-Family				
2-4 Units	9	0.1%	0	0%
5+ Units	136	2.2%	268	3.5%
Mobile Homes	90	1.5%	33	0.4%
Other Unit Types	0	0.0%	0	0%
Total Housing Units	6,220	100%	7,665	100%
Vacant Units	141	2.3%	560	7.3%
Source: Census 2000 Summary File 3 (SF 3) - Sample Data, 2007-2011 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates Note:
1 This data not available in American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates 2009-2011 because the sample size was too small.
As shown in Table 4-9, multi-family housing with 5 or more units constituted 3.5 percent of total units according to the 2007-2011 American Community Survey. Singlefamily attached and other multi-unit housing (2-4 units) round out the City’s housing stock with 1.1 percent of total units in the City.
4.3.8 Vacancy Rate
Vacancy rates indicate how well the types of housing units that exist in the City meet the current market demand for housing. A low vacancy rate suggests that households may have difficulty finding a unit within their price range due to a limited supply of available housing. Low vacancy rates may also be related to overcrowding, as discussed
2014-2021 Housing Element
35
City of Norco
General Plan
in later sections. In contrast, a high vacancy rate may indicate either the existence of a high number of units undesirable for occupancy, or an oversupply of housing units. In Norco vacancies can more likely be explained by the former over the latter as the City has not added a significant number of units in recent years while the population has continued to gradually increase.
According to the Southern California Association of Governments, a vacancy rate between two percent and three percent for ownership housing and five percent to six percent for rental housing is considered a “healthy” vacancy rate. These rate limits ensure the continued upkeep of rental properties while keeping housing costs down. As shown in Table 4'9, previously, there were approximately 560 housing units that were vacant in 2010, an overall vacancy rate of 7.3 percent. By comparison, the Los Angeles County vacancy rate was 6.4 percent. The owner-occupied vacancy rate reported by the Census Bureau in 2010 was 3.1 percent, while the rental vacancy rate was 2.8 percent, indicating a tight housing market for the City.
4.3.9 Condition of Housing Stock
Most of the City’s current housing stock was constructed between 1960 and 1980 with approximately 66 percent of all housing in the City constructed prior to 1980. Since 1980, housing construction has been relatively consistent with fewer than 1,000 homes built each decade.
Table 4-10: Age of Housing Stock
Year Built	Number of Units	Percent of Units
Before 1940	312	4.1%
1940 -1949	348	4.5%
1950 -1959	983	12.8%
1960 -1969	1,347	17.6%
1970 -1979	2,271	29.6%
1980 -1989	779	10.2%
1990 -1999	505	6.6%
2000 - 2004	921	12.0%
2005- or later	199	2.6%
Total	7,665	100.0%
Source: 2007-2011 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates
Age is one measure of housing stock conditions and a factor for determining the need for rehabilitation or replacement. Without proper maintenance, housing units deteriorate over time. Units that are older are likely to be in need of repairs (e.g. a new roof or plumbing). As a general rule of thumb, houses 40 years or older are considered aged and are more likely to generate major repairs. In addition, older homes may not be built to current housing standards for fire and earthquake safety. The units of general concern are those that were constructed in 1969 and before. The 2007-2011 ACS estimated Norco to have 2,990 units built prior to 1969, or roughly 40 percent of the total housing stock.
The lack of certain infrastructure and utilities often serves as an indicator of substandard conditions. According to the 2007-2011 ACS, eight units lacked complete plumbing
2014-2021 Housing Element
36
City of Norco
General Plan
facilities and 34 units lacked complete kitchen facilities.
During the previous planning period, between 2006 and 2014, the City used redevelopment set-aside fund to assist approximately 298 households to repair or improve their homes. These households were assisted through the City’s Deferred Loan Program, Housing Accessibility Program, Senior Home Repair Program, and Sewer Installation and Expansion Programs. Of these households, 99 were very low-income, 97 low-income, and 81 were moderate-income.
43.10 Overcrowding
In response to higher housing prices, lower income households must often be satisfied with smaller, less adequate housing for their available income. This may result in overcrowding which places a strain on physical facilities and does not provide a healthy living environment.
Overcrowding is defined by the Census as a unit occupied by 1.01 persons or more per room (excluding bathrooms and kitchens). Units with more than 1.50 persons per room are considered severely overcrowded. Overcrowding is often reflective of one of three conditions:
1.	Either a family or household is living in too small a dwelling.
2.	Familial households includes extended family members (i.e. grandparents or grown children and their families living with parents, termed doubling); or
3.	A family is renting living space to non-family members.
In Norco, overcrowding affects 138 units, or 2 percent of all households in the City. According to the 2009-2011 ACS, approximately 117 were owner-occupied units and 21 were renter-occupied units were considered overcrowded and 46 owner-occupied units and 15 renter-occupied units were considered severely overcrowded. In comparison to Riverside County, overcrowding in Norco was less prevalent with 2 percent of the City’s households classified as overcrowded as compared to the County’s 7 percent. Typically, very low-income rental households experience the most overcrowding. This is because the cost of rent for a unit that provides adequate bedrooms to meet the needs of the household may exceed the occupant’s ability to pay.
4.4	Housing Costs
This section discusses new home prices and resale costs of existing housing, as well as the average rental prices in the City. The information provided was obtained from reliable real estate industry data sources, the 2010 Census, 2007-2011 ACS 5-Year Estimates, the Riverside County Center for Demographic Research, and data provided by the City. This section discusses new home prices and resale costs of existing housing, as well as the average rental prices in the City.
4.4.1	Ownership Housing
Table 4-11 lists the value of existing housing units in the City in 2011. The 2007-2011 ACS estimates a median housing unit value of $460,800 in Norco; $176,700 above the County median of $284,100 the same year. Table 4-11 also indicates that 41 percent of the houses
2014-2021 Housing Element
37
City of Norco
General Plan
were valued at more than $500,000. This is not atypical for Norco, considering housing values have been above the County average since the 1990 Census.
Table 4-11: Housing Prices
Price Range	Number of Units	Percent of Total
Less than $50,000	185	3.2%
$50,000 - $99,999	50	0.9%
$100,000 - $149,999	129	2.2%
$150,000 - $199,999	119	2.0%
$200,000 - $299,999	677	11.6%
$300,000 - $499,999	2,247	38.3%
$500,000 or more	2,454	41.8%
Total	5,861	100.0%
Median Value	$460,800	
Source: 2007-2011 American Community Survey 5'Year Estimates
As of May 2013, the median single-family home price in Orange and Los Angeles Counties was $600,000 and $423,000 respectively, as compared to Riverside County where the median home price was $251,000.' In Norco, the median single family home price was well above the County average in 2013 with a median home price of $350,000. This can be attributed to the rise in housing costs in adjacent Orange and Los Angeles counties, which is a result of Norco’s proximity to these counties, which has forced home prices to increase as well.
Table 4-12 shows the monthly house payment calculated for the average priced existing and new home. This information is useful in determining the affordability of home purchases. In calculating the payments, 10 percent down and a 30-year fixed rate mortgage were assumed. The prevailing mortgage rate of 4.36 percent was used in the calculation.
Table 4-12: Owner Occupied Housing Expenses
Interest Rate	4.36%	4.36%	4.36%
Purchase Price	$460,800.00	$500,000.00	$594,000.00
Down Payment	20%	20%	20%
Loan Amount	$368,640	$400,000.00	$475,000.00
Monthly Principal and Interest	$2,365	$2,561	$3,030
Required Monthly Income	$7,883.33	$8,536.70	$10,100
Required Yearly Income	$94,600	$102,440	$121,200
Source: Interest.com and DataQuick 2013
The costs of affording a new or existing home require an annual income that exceeds a low-income households’ ability to pay as determined by HCD 2013 California Income Limits. Existing and new housing is only affordable to above moderate-income households in Norco based on housing expenses presented above. The Norco First-Time Homebuyers Program was designed to assist households that do not exceed 120 percent of the median area income for Riverside County in the purchase of a home. This program along with other programs administered were by the former City of Norco Redevelopment Agency and could be used to assist households in affording homes;
1 DQ News, May 2013.
2014-2021 Housing Element
38
City of Norco
General Plan
however, high home prices kept many applicants from using the First-Time Homebuyers Program, coupled with the loss of RDA funding.
4.4.2	Renter Housing
According to the 2007-2011 American Community Survey, 17.5 percent of Norco households lived in rental housing. The median rent was $1,544 in 2011, a 78 percent increase from the 2000 median rent of $867. In 2000, rents that exceeded $750/month comprised 85 percent of all rental units, and rents that exceeded $l,000/month comprised 82 percent. During the last planning period, most multi-family developments completed catered to seniors and were subsidized through the City’s Redevelopment Agency and Federal programs (Section 202 and Section 811 Supportive Housing funds).
These apartment complexes, offering one and two bedroom units, are restricted to seniors (55 years or older) earning less than 50 to 60 percent of the Riverside County Median Family Income $63,300. All rents must be based on the Fair Market Rents (FMR) established by the State and HUD. The FMRs are displayed in Table 4-13.
Tabic 4-13: Riverside County Fair Market Rents
Studio	One-Bed	Two-Bed	Three-Bed	Four-Bed
$886	$974	$1,149	$1,617	$1,886
Source: HUD User 2012
A survey of homes in Norco for rent on Realtor.com revealed that home rental prices vary7 by size of the home, number of bedrooms, and location. Predominantly, three and four bedroom home rents range from $1,500 to $2,900 per month. Because four bedroom apartments do not exist in the City, many large families would need to rent a home to avoid overcrowded conditions.
4.4.3	Housing Affordability
HUD defines affordable housing costs as contract rents or mortgage payments, including taxes and insurance, but not utilities, that are equal to or less than 30 percent of the gross income of extremely low, very low, low, and moderate-income households. Households spending more than 30 percent of gross annual income on housing experience a housing cost burden. When a household spends more than 30 percent of its income on housing costs, it has less disposable income for other necessities. Lower income households with a burdensome housing cost are more likely to become homeless. Homeowners with a housing cost burden have the option of selling the homes and becoming renters. Renters, on the other hand, are vulnerable and subject to constant changes in the housing market.
Table 4-14: Housing Affordability by Tenure
Income Group	Calculation of Affordable Housing Cost for Owner	Calculation of Affordable Housing Cost for Renters
Extremely Low (0-30% MFI)	30% of 30% AMI	30% of 30% AMI
Very Low (0-50% MFI)	30% of 50% AMI	30% of 50% AMI
Lower (51-80% MFI)	30% of 70% AMI	30% of 60% AMI
Moderate (81-120% MFI)	35% of 110% AMI	30% of 110% AMI
Source: California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5
2014-2021 Housing Element
39
City of Norco
General Plan
For purposes of determining housing affordability, the California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5 provides the definitions of affordable housing cost based on the area median income (AMI), which is adjusted by family size and income level for each multifamily income (MF1) range as shown in Table 4-14. Using these affordability thresholds, current housing affordability can be estimated for the various income groups based on the Riverside County Median Family Income (MFI).
Table 4-15: Housing Affordability by Income Group for Riverside County
Income Group	AMI adjusted by size		Affordable Payment		Housing Costs		Maximum Affordable Price	
			Renter	Owner	Utilit ies	Taxes & Insuran ce	Afforda ble Home Price	Rental
Extremely Low (0-30% MFI)	30% AMI							
Two Person (1 bedroom)	$13,293		$332	$332	$50	$80	$47,112	$282
Three Person (2 bedrooms)	$15,192		$380	$380	$75	$90	$50,017	$305
Four Person (3 bedrooms)	$17,091		$427	$427	$100	$95	$54,086	$327
Five Person (4 bedrooms)	$20,509		$513	$513	$125	$100	$66,999	$388
Very Low (30-50% MFI)	50% AMI							
One Person (Studio)	$22,155		$554	$554	$50	$115	$90,550	$504
Two Person (1 bedroom)	$25,320		$633	$633	$50	$115	$108,975	$583
Three Person (2 bedrooms)	$28,485		$712	$712	$100	$130	$112,264	$612
Four Person (3 bedrooms)	$31,650		$791	$791	$125	$140	$122,538	$666
Five Person (4 bedrooms)	$34,182		$855	$855	$175	$145	$124,471	$680
Lower (50-80% MFI)	60%AMI	70%AMI						
One Person (Studio)	$26,586	$31,017	$775	$775	$48	$150	$134,571	$728
Two Person (1 bedroom)	$30,384	$35,448	$886	$886	$85	$165	$148,140	$801
Three Person (2 bedrooms)	$34,182	$39,879	$997	$997	$125	$190	$158,799	$872
Four Person (3 bedrooms)	$37,980	$44,310	$1,108	$1,108	$175	$210	$168,294	$933
Five Person (4 bedrooms)	$41,018	$47,855	$1,196	$1,196	$200	$220	$180,779	$996
Moderate Income (81-120% MFI)	110% AMI							
One Person (Studio)	$48,741		$1,219	$1,422	$135	$405	$205,285	$1,084
Two Person (1 bedroom)	$55,704		$1,393	$1,625	$135	$405	$252,575	$1,258
Three Person (2 bedrooms)	$62,667		$1,567	$1,828	$157	$475	$278,442	$1,410
Four Person (3 bedrooms)	$69,630		$1,741	$2,031	$211	$571	$290,803	$1,530
Five Person (4 bedrooms)	$75,200		$1,880	$2,193	$238	$628	$309,075	$1,642
Notes:
1.	Property taxes and insurance based on averagesfor the region.
2.	Calculation of affordable home sales prices based on a down payment of 20%, annual interest rates of 3.5%, and a 30-year mortgage term.
3.	Based on 2012 Riverside County MFI $63,300 and 2012 HCD State Income Limits
4.	Monthly affordable rent based on payments of no more than 30% of household income.
2014-2021 Housing Element
40
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 4-15 identifies maximum affordable rents and purchase prices by income category for a one person household, a small family, a four person family, and a large family. Comparing housing costs and maximum affordable prices for low-income households shows that many households are being priced out of the Riverside County rental and ownership market. Given the median home prices presented in Table 4-11, single-family home ownership is beyond the reach of all low-income and moderate-income households. For home rental, most moderate-income households may be able to afford a condominium.
Currently, the starting price for rental units in the City was around $1,500 per month for a one bedroom unit. Rental housing in the City can generally be considered affordable for those families annually earning 81 percent of the Riverside County Median Family Income ($63,300) and above.
4.5	Households with Special Needs
There are segments of the population that because of unique living conditions require focused attention in the Housing Element so as to make sure their needs are being met in the housing market. Typically, market-driven housing developments are focused towards the largest and most profitable segment of the population, so it is important that the Housing Element address the overall ratio to which these special groups have a need for units within the market and how they are being accommodated in the housing mix. Persons with disabilities (including those with developmental disabilities) have two areas of concern, the first being access in the housing unit, the second being the additional costs associated with providing physical improvements and the ongoing maintenance costs of this type of household. Another segment of the population with specific needs different from the general population are senior citizens because of their general need for smaller and more affordable units or those who own homes and need help with the upkeep. Housing for large families can be a concern for low-income families because of the high cost of providing suitable housing that is larger than the average unit size. The result can be overcrowded living conditions which can affect the overall quality of life, both for the household, and for the community.
Another segment of the population with special needs are those with females as heads of households and/or single-parent households because oftentimes there are child care needs conflicting with the need for income and a generally lower level of income that occurs in this segment of the population. Due to Norco’s emphasis on a small plot agricultural lifestyle, there is a segment of the population that works as farm and ranch hands; a few of which who live on the property in addition to a main dwelling. The housing needs for this segment of the population tend to be smaller. The last two housing categories that need to be addressed are transitory or temporary in nature and include emergency shelters for those temporarily displaced because of disasters, and temporary shelter from the elements for the homeless.
4.5.1	Special Needs Group Summary
Table 4-16 below summarizes the housing assistance needs of lower income households (less than 80 percent of MFI) for special needs groups in Norco by household tenure (renter/owner), household type (elderly, small/large families), and “housing problems.” This count of households with “housing problems” includes those who: 1) occupy units with physical defects (lacking complete kitchen or bathroom); 2) live in overcrowded conditions (housing units with more than one person per room); 3) have a housing cost
2014-2021 Housing Element
41
City of Norco
General Plan
burden exceeding 30 percent of gross income; or 4) have a severe housing cost burden exceeding 50 percent of gross income.
Table 4-16: Housing Assistance Needs of Lower Income Renter and Owner Households
Household by Type, Income, & Housing Problem	Renters			Owners		
	Elderly	Small Families	Large Families	Elderly	Small Families	Large Families
Extremely Low Income (0-30% MFI)	15	45	20	50	0	30
% with any housing problems	100%	100%	100%	100%	0%	100%
% cost burden >30%	0%	0%	0%	80%	0%	0%
% cost burden >50%	100%	100%	100%	20%	0%	100%
Very Low Income (31-50% MFI)	0	15	25	50	50	125
% with any housing problems	0%	100%	100%	50%	70%	100%
% cost burden >30%	0%	0%	0%	0%	0%	0%
% cost burden >50%	0%	100%	100%	50%	70%	88%
Low Income (51-80% MFI)	0	95	4	85	230	90
% with any housing problems	0%	100%	100%	64.7%	54.3%	77.8%
% cost burden >30%	0%	89.5%	0%	23.5%	15.2%	27.8%
% cost burden >50%	0%	10/	100%	41.2%	39.1%	44.4%
Total Households	15	170	49	185	280	245
% with any housing problems	100%	91.2%	100%	70.3%	57.1%	91.8%
Total Households (all income levels)	60	590	149	815	2,770	1,170
% with any housing problems	58.3%	58.5%	53%	28.8%	44.4%	48.7%
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) Databook
Table 4-16 displays that renters experience more housing problems than special needs groups who are homeowners. The highest percentage of lower income households experiencing housing problems were large family renter and owner households. One-hundred percent of lower income large family renter households experienced a housing problem. These percentages demonstrate that large family lower income households are at the greatest need for housing programs to assist them in rehabilitating their homes and providing rent that is affordable.
4.5.2	Households with Disabilities
Access and affordability are the two major housing needs of persons with disabilities. Access is particularly important for the persons with physical disabilities. Persons with physical disabilities often require specially designed dwellings to permit access within the unit, as well as to and from the site. The California Administrative Code Title 24 sets forth access and adaptability requirements for persons with disabilities. These regulations apply to public buildings such as factory built housing and privately funded newly constructed apartment houses containing five or more dwelling units. The regulations also require that ramp-ways, larger door widths, and restroom modifications, be designed to enable access to the handicapped. Such standards, however, are not mandatory for new single-family residential construction.
Persons with disabilities, like the elderly, have special needs with regard to location. There is typically a desire to be located near public facilities, and especially near public transportation facilities that provide sendee to those who rely on them. The needs for residents with mobility limitations are currently being met by the Riverside Transit Agency through a dial-a-ride service with specialized transportation vehicles for those
2014-2021 Housing Element
42
City of Norco
General Plan
who are not able to provide their own transportation or reach established boarding areas for the City bus routes.
Table 4-17: Persons with Disabilities
Age	Estimate
18 to 64	946
65 and over	1,098
Total Estimate	2,044
Source: 2009'2011 American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates
Table 4T7 shows that 2,044 persons 18 years and older in the City of Norco have a disability. Out of the total disabled persons, 946 people between the ages of 18 and 64 had a disability and 1,098 people over age 65 had a disability.
There is no process in place that tracks how many housing units in the City are currently equipped to handle the needs of citizens with disabilities. The City, therefore, needs to have programs to ensure that all affected households have the means to be able to provide the necessary improvements on an as-needed basis. The City, as the successor to the Redevelopment Agency, offers assistance to qualifying low-income households to provide the necessary improvements that will make them accessible as needed.
4.53 Persons with Developmental Disabilities
Section 4512 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code defines a "Developmental disability" as a disability that originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term also includes disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation or to require treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall not include other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
Many persons with developmental disabilities can live and work independently within a conventional housing environment. More individuals who are more severely disabled require a group living environment where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for persons with developmental disabilities is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
The State Department of Developmental Sendees (DDS) currently provides community based sendees to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two community-based facilities. The Inland Regional Center is one of 21 regional centers in the State of California that provides point of entry to sendees for people with developmental disabilities. The center is a private, non-profit community agency that contracts with local businesses to offer a wide range of services to individuals with developmental disabilities and their families.
2014-2021 Housing Element
43
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 4-18 provides information from the Inland Regional Center of on the number of individuals with developmental disabilities in the City of Norco. In 2013, there were approximately 168 individuals (0.6 percent of the total population) actively utilizing services at the Inland Regional Center for a developmental disability.
Table 4-18: Persons with Developmental Disabilities
Zip Code Area	Age					Estimate
	0-14	151-22	23-54	55-65	65+	
92860	54	31	71	7	5	168
Source: Inland Regional Center, 2013.
To assist in the provision of housing to needs of persons living with a developmental disability, the City will implement programs to coordinate housing activities and outreach with the Inland Regional Center. Norco will also encourage housing developers to designate a portion of new affordable housing developments for persons with disabilities, especially persons with developmental disabilities, and pursue funding sources designated for persons with special needs and disabilities.
4.5.4	Elderly
The special housing needs of the elderly are an important concern in Norco. This is especially the case since many retired persons are likely to be on fixed incomes and at greater risk of impaction, or housing overpayment if it is a low fixed-income household. In addition, the elderly maintain special needs related to housing construction and location. The elderly often require ramps, handrails, lower cupboards and counters to allow greater access and mobility. In terms of location, because of limited mobility, the elderly typically need access to public facilities (e.g. medical and shopping) and public transit facilities.
In many instances, the elderly may prefer to stay in their own dwellings rather than relocate to a retirement community, and may require assistance with home repairs and manual house/yard work. In general, every effort should be made to maintain their dignity, self-respect, and quality of life. Finding reliable means of transportation to medical appointments, senior centers, meal sites, and shopping remains a serious problem for seniors. Some seniors may lack private transportation due to physical or financial limitations. As stated previously, the Riverside Transit Agency provides a dial-a-ride shuttle sendee that can be used by the elderly for transportation as well as the City’s dial-a-ride shuttle.
As reported in the 2009-2011 ACS, 2,870 City residents, or approximately 10 percent of the total population, was 65 years or older. In terms of tenure, 1,309 owner-occupied and 276 renter-occupied units were headed by occupants 65 years old or older. In 2009-2011, 35 percent of the elderly population was disabled. Despite the large number of seniors who have disabilities, 23 percent live alone, according to the Census. However, the vast majority of elderly own their home, estimated at 46 percent in 2009-2011.
During the previous planning period, three senior apartment complexes have been constructed: Heritage Park and Clark Terrace Phase I and II. Heritage Park is an 86 unit, age-restricted (55 years or older), 1- and 2-bedroom senior apartment complex with a 55
2014-2021 Housing Element
44
City of Norco
General Plan
year affordability covenant. The second complex includes the Clark Terrace Phase I and 11 Senior Apartments, each offering 40 age-restricted units with 50 year affordability covenants. Affordability covenants ensure that units remain affordable to low- and moderate-income levels. The Clark Terrace senior apartment complex was assisted with funding from the Norco Redevelopment Agency and Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Section 202 and 811 Supportive Housing Funds. The Heritage Park senior apartment complex was assisted through the Redevelopment Agency and tax exempt financing.
Norco actively offers programs that assist seniors. The senior housing program assists senior residents by constructing or participating in private construction of affordable senior housing rental units. Between 2006 and 2007 the Norco Redevelopment Agency participated in the purchase, remodel, and rental of 86 units to senior residents over age 55 of low or very low-income. The Emergency Grant assists low-income seniors with emergency repairs to their home. The assistance is in the form of a one-time $5,000 grant. Between 2000 and 2004, 40 low-income senior residences have been assisted. It should be noted that in 2005, the Senior Home Repair Program became part of a new Home Improvement Program that offers a Home Improvement Grant for seniors up to $10,000. Both the Senior Home Repair Program and the Home Improvement Grant were funded by the former Redevelopment Agency; consequently the City will investigate other revenue sources during the planning period to fund similar programs.
4.5.5	Large Family Household Needs
The 2009-2011 American Community Survey reported 1,460 households in the City of Norco with five or more persons. Large family households require special consideration because they generally require larger dwellings with sufficient bedrooms to meet their housing needs, without overcrowding.
Difficulties in securing housing large enough to accommodate all members of a household are heightened for renters, because multi-family rental units are typically smaller than single-family units. Apartment complexes in the City offering three- and four-bedroom models do not currently exist. Large families in Norco, therefore, may satisfy their housing needs mostly through the rental and ownership of single-family units, for which there appears to be sufficient stock. However, as shown previously in the Housing Costs and Rents Section, the larger single-family rental stock is not affordable to the majority of lower income households.
Table 4-19 reveals tenure of housing units by number of persons in the unit. The table shows that there are more owner-occupied units than renter-occupied units housing large families. Owner-occupied units account for 86 percent of the large households in the City, representing about 23 percent of all owner-occupied housing. Fourteen percent of large households occupy rental units in the City. Since the overall number of rental units in Norco is low, as opposed to owner occupied units, the percentage of these units occupied by large households is relatively high.
2014-2021 Housing Element
45
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 4-19: Large Households by Tenure
Number of Persons in Unit	Owner Occupied	Renter Occupied	Total
Five	763	59	822
Six	367	133	500
Seven or More	131	7	138
Total	1,261	199	1,460
Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates
4.5.6	Female-Headed Households
Female-headed households are included as a special needs group because there often is a conflict between the economic needs of the home and the daycare needs of the family. Historically, females in this situation, without financial assistance, have fewer resources than households with two parents, restricting their ability to provide for both housing and daycare. According to the 2009-2011American Community Survey, there were 657 female-headed households in the City, of which 119 had children under the age of 18 and were below the federally established poverty level. Federal poverty level is computed using factors such as family income and household size. The Federal poverty level differs from the Riverside County Median Family Income, which is determined by the State. With existing housing programs, female-headed households can be eligible to qualify for housing assistance based on income level.
Table 4-20: Female Headed Households
Household Type	Total Below Poverty Level	Percentage of Total Households1
Female Headed Households (no children under 18)	12	0.2%
Female Headed Households with children under 18	119	1.7%
Total	131	1.8%
1 Total households = 7,105 households
Source: 2007-2011 American Community Survey 5-year Estimates (data was not available for 2009-2011 ACS 3-Year Estimates)
4.5.7	Farm and Ranch Hand Housing Needs
State housing law requires housing elements to address groups with special housing needs including migrant farmworkers. According to the 2009-2011 ACS, approximately 2.6 percent of the working population was classified as working in farming, forestry, and fishing occupations. The City does not have an additional breakdown of this number; however, given the character of the community, it is assumed that the majority of these jobs are related to animal maintenance professions. The City currently has several residential zoning classifications that include the term “agriculture” in the name, and are intended to preserve residential homes on large lots and allow for animal keeping and agricultural production at a single-family scale. However, residential lots in these zones are not typically large enough to support commercial agricultural practices. From looking at an aerial or zoning map of the City, it becomes apparent that Norco is a developed area with significant residential and commercial development and little vacant land, let alone land utilized for large scale agricultural practices. Although Norco is centered on a rural atmosphere promoting the keeping of farm animals, such as horses,
2014-2021 Housing Element
46
City of Norco
General Plan
and “small-plot” agriculture such as family gardens, these are practiced at an individual level. Therefore, the City does not anticipate a need to provide farmworker housing and thus the need has been determined to be extremely low pursuant to the State Employee Housing Act (Section 17000 of the Health and Safety Code). The City’s A-l-20,000 residential zone does permit, by right, mobile homes and trailers to be occupied by persons employed in farming operations in the area. The establishment of these structures can be temporary or permanent and cannot require compensation for the use of the space. The City’s Zoning Code also allows for caretaker units to be constructed in specific residential zones which can provide units for any animal maintenance employees working in the area.
4.5.8	Homeless Housing Needs
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development defines chronic homelessness as an unaccompanied individual with a disabling condition who has been continually homeless for one year or more; or has experienced four or more episodes of homelessness within the past three years. Furthermore, SCAG defines homelessness as:
1.	Persons who are living or staying in emergency shelters;
2.	Persons who sleep outside, in a makeshift shelter, in cars, or transportation areas such as bus or train terminals;
3.	Persons who are considered “at risk” (i.e., doubled up, in marginal circumstances, motel population with limited stay or general relief recipients whose payments have been canceled due to “no forwarding address”).
Enumerating the homeless population is difficult because of the transient nature of this population as well as the existence of hidden homeless or persons that move around in housing situations (e.g. doubling up with another household). However, according to the 2012 County of Riverside Homeless Assessment, there were an estimated 6,203 homeless persons on any given day in Riverside County. This assessment estimated 27 homeless persons in the City of Norco.
There are numerous factors that contribute to homelessness in the City of Norco and Riverside County. Difficulties in obtaining employment, insufficient education, mental illness, and substance abuse are a few of the more traditional factors. During the past 15" 20 years, new factors, however, are emerging that significantly contribute to homelessness.
The trends that are largely responsible for the rise in homelessness are a growing shortage of affordable housing, and a simultaneous growth in the population of low" income renters, which has correlated with high demand and shrinking supply. Each of these factors could potentially exacerbate any of the traditional conditions, but may increasingly become stand-alone causes of homelessness. The large numbers of homeless people, the rising cost of housing, and the number of people living in poverty combine to create a serious potential for homelessness.
During the 2014-2021 planning period the Norco Zoning Code will be amended to address transitional and emergency housing. The Zoning Code will be amended to define transitional housing and emergency shelters as a residential use, permitted by right without a conditional use permit or other discretionary action, subject to the same development standards imposed on similar residential uses within that zone. The Zoning
2014-2021 Housing Element
47
City of Norco
General Plan
Code will also be amended to permit emergency shelters, by right, in the M-l (Heavy Commercial/Light Manufacturing) zoning district There is currently a 23-acre, vacant site in the M-l zone that could accommodate an emergency shelter. This vacant site is located in the center of the City, south of Fifth Street and west of Horseless Carriage Drive. This is an ideal location for an emergency shelter as the site is located in walking distance of City Hall, the Department of Social Services, the Department of Motor Vehicles and retail, restaurant and employment opportunities.
Although no homeless shelters exist in Norco, the City provides information on local and regional resources. The City has also historically provided financial reimbursement to the Corona/Norco Settlement House to serve Norco residents. The Corona-Norco Settlement House is a non-profit provider of assistance to individuals and families in crisis or with temporary financial needs in the Corona-Norco area.
Another means of assisting the homeless is through community outreach programs sponsored by non-profit organizations. King’s Hall is a shelter for the homeless located at March Air Reserve Base approximately 20 miles from Norco. The shelter is run by the Path of Life Ministries and uses volunteers from around the County to maintain the shelter. King’s Hall is a transitional housing program for homeless women with children, single men with children, complete families, and chronic homeless women.
4.5.9	Assisted Housing At-Risk of Conversion to Market Rate Housing
A review of the assisted housing inventory maintained by HUD and the City indicates that no affordable housing units are “at-risk” of converting from affordable to market-rate housing. This includes the three senior housing complexes (Clark Terrace Phase I, Clark Terrace Phase II and Heritage Park), and the 28 affordable housing units rehabilitated or assisted through the Norco Redevelopment Agency (RDA). The 166 senior housing units in the City have affordability covenant restrictions that ensure continued affordability. Both Clark Terrace complexes have a 40-year affordability covenant restriction, while the Heritage Park complex has a 55-year affordability covenant restriction. Ownership housing substantially rehabilitated or assisted through the First-Time Homebuyers Program and Infill Housing Program has an affordability covenant restriction of 30 years. The affordability covenant restrictions for RDA rehabilitated or assisted homes are not set to expire until 2024. A list displaying all covenant restricted housing units in the City is contained in Appendix A.
The City uses various funding sources, including Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside Funds, Community Development Block Grants, and Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Section 202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly and Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities funds to preserve and increase the supply of affordable housing in the City. Financial assistance is provided to both nonprofit and for-profit housing developers.
2014-2021 Housing Element
48
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 4-21: Affordable Senior Housing Units
Address	Total Subsidize d Units	Subsidized Units by Bedroom Size		Covenant Date	Restrictions Expiration Date
		1 Bedroom	2 Bedroom		
Heritage Park 2665 Clark St.	86	64	22	5/22/2007	5/22/2062
Clark Terrace 2660 Clark St.	40	40	0	12/20/1995	12/20/2035
Clark Terrace Phase II 2680 Clark St.	40	40	0	7/26/2001	7/26/2041
As Table 4 21 displays, all senior housing has affordability covenant restrictions that will not expire in the upcoming planning period. Therefore, no further analysis of costs and programs for preserving such units is necessary7.
4.6	Housing Needs
The following is an analysis of current City housing conditions that presents the housing needs and concerns relative to various segments of the population. Several factors will influence the degree of demand, or "need," for new housing in Norco in coming years. The four major needs categories considered in this element include:
•	Housing needs resulting from population growth, both in the City and the surrounding region;
•	Housing needs resulting from the overcrowding of units;
•	Housing needs that result when households pay more than they can afford for housing; and
•	Housing needs of "special needs groups" such as elderly, large families, female-headed households, households with persons with disabilities, including persons with developmental disabilities, farmworkers, and the homeless.
In terms of specific housing needs, assistance for first time homebuyers will become critical for the low and moderate-income population in achieving home ownership. Lower income groups will need the most assistance in meeting the increasingly7 higher cost burdens associated with owning a home. However, although new homes are for the most part above the financial attainment of lower income households, there are homeownership opportunities for above moderate-income households with the City’s existing stock of older resale homes. In terms of rental households, there appears to be a need for additional rental resources with three bedrooms at rates affordable to lower income households.
2014-2021 Housing Element
49
City of Norco
General Plan
4.6.1	Regional Housing Needs Assessment
California’s Housing Element law requires that each city and county develop local housing programs designed to meet its “fair share” of existing and future housing needs for all income groups. This effort is coordinated by the jurisdiction’s Council of Governments (the City of Norco is in the Western Riverside Council of Governments) when preparing the Housing Element. This “fair share” allocation seeks to ensure that each jurisdiction accepts responsibility for the housing needs of not only its resident population, but for all households who might reasonably be expected to reside within the jurisdiction, particularly lower income households. This assumes the availability of a variety and choice of housing accommodations appropriate to their needs, as well as certain mobility among households within the regional market.
4.6.2	Overview of the RHNA Process
The RHNA process begins with the State Department of Finance’s projection of statewide housing demand for a five year period, which is then apportioned by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) among each of the State’s official regions. Please note the current planning period was extended by State law, and encompasses eight years (2014-2021). The regions are represented by an agency typically termed a Council of Government (COG). In the six county southern California regions, which include Norco, the agency responsible for assigning these fair share targets to each jurisdiction is the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG).
The new construction need must be allocated to four household income categories used in federal and State programs: Very Low; Low; Moderate; and Above Moderate Income, defined as households earning up to 50 percent, 80 percent, 120 percent, and more than 120 percent of the Riverside County median income, respectively. The allocations are further adjusted to avoid an over-concentration of lower income households in any one jurisdiction. The 2014-2021 Regional Housing Needs Allocation for the City of Norco is:
Table 4-23: RHNA 2014-2021
Income Group	Number of Units	Percentage
Extremely Low	103	13%
Very Low1	102	12%
Low	136	17%
Moderate	151	18%
Above Moderate	326	40%
Total	818	100%
Source: Regional Housing Needs Assessment, SCAG October 2012
Notes:
1 Extremely Lowdncome households are assumed to be 50 percent of the Very Lowdncome housing need= 103 units
2014-2021 Housing Element
50
City of Norco
General Plan
According to Housing Element Law Section 65583, local agencies shall calculate the subset of very low-income households that qualify as extremely low-income households (30 percent or less of the Riverside County median income) by presuming that 50 percent of the very' low-income households qualify as extremely low-income households.2 The 2014-2021 RHNA projected 205 very low-income households in the upcoming planning period. Therefore, it can be assumed 50 percent of the very low-income households may be extremely low-income households. As a result, 103 extremely low-income households are projected in Norco in the planning period. This Housing Element will describe policies and programs that the City can utilize towards implementing this housing needs allocation.
4.7	Opportunities for Energy Conservation
In 1974 the California State Legislature created the California Energy Commission to deal with the issue of energy conservation. The Commission adopted conservation standards for new buildings in 1977 and was directed by the Legislature to periodically improve the standards to account for state-of-the-art energy-efficient building design. Since 1977 the Commission has adopted revised energy standards for new residential buildings which have been placed in Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. The new standards apply to all new residential buildings (and additions to residential buildings) except hotels, motels, and buildings with four or more habitable stores and hotels. The regulations specify energy-saving design for walls, ceilings, and floor installations, as well as heating and cooling equipment and systems, gas cooling devices, conservation standards, and the use of non-depleting energy sources such as solar energy or wind power. Compliance with the energy standards is achieved by satisfying certain conservation requirements and an energy budget. In turn, the home building industry must comply with these standards while localities are responsible for enforcing the energy conservation regulations.
The primary uses of energy in urban areas are for transportation, lighting, water, heating and space heating and cooling. The high cost of energy demands that efforts be taken to reduce or minimize the overall level of urban consumption. In relation to new residential development, and especially affordable housing, construction of energy-efficient buildings does add to the original production costs of ownership and rental housing. Over time, however, the housing with energy conservation features should reduce occupancy costs as the consumption of fuel and electricity is decreased. Opportunities for additional energy conservation practices include the implementation of “mitigation measures” contained in environmental impact reports prepared on residential projects in the City of Norco. Mitigation measures to reduce energy consumption may be proposed in the appropriate section of environmental impact reports, prepared by or for the City of Norco. These mitigation measures may be adopted as conditions of project approval.
Some additional opportunities for energy conservation that the City may consider include various passive design techniques. Among the range of techniques that could be used for purposes of reducing energy consumption are the following:
•	Locating the structure on the northern portion of the sunniest area on the site.
•	Designing the structure to admit the maximum amount of sunlight into the building and to reduce exposure of extreme weather conditions.
2 California Government Code 65583
2014-2021 Housing Element
51
City of Norco
General Plan
•	Locating indoor areas of maximum usage along the south face of the building and placing corridors, closets, laundry room, power core, and garages along the north face of the building to serve as a buffer between heated spaces of the colder north face.
•	Making the main entrance a small, enclosed space that creates an air lock between the building and its exterior; orienting the entrance away from the prevailing winds; or using a windbreak to reduce the wind velocity against the entrance.
•	Locating window openings to the south and keeping east, west, and north windows small, recessed, and double-glazed.
These and any other potential state-of-the-art opportunities could be evaluated within the context of environmental impact reports and/or site plan review. Feasible site planning and/or building design energy conservation opportunities then could be incorporated into the project design. An evaluation of the potential for energy conservation will be incorporated into the permit and processing procedures of the City.
The City will also explore potential goals and policies to promote a menu of developer incentives which could be applied to projects that promote infill, higher density, and compact development patterns in the right locations. Other regulations could focus on use of energy efficient materials and equipment, reuse of building materials, and implementation of water management designs and drought tolerant landscaping. While “green” building materials, appliances, and fixtures may increase the costs of housing construction, the long-term benefits (in terms of affordability and environmental concerns) outweigh the initial development costs. The program may therefore include incentives to help developers or property owners mitigate the initial cost impacts. Furthermore, the State passed the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32), which requires all local jurisdictions to reduce their carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by 2020. The program’s final policies will define how they contribute to the mandated reduction in carbon dioxide emissions.
The City’s goal is to achieve maximum use of conservation measures and alternative, renewable energy sources in new and existing residences. By encouraging and assisting residents to utilize energy more efficiently, historical rates of consumption can be reduced, thereby mitigating the rising cost of supplying energy and need for new, costly energy supplies. Potentially, the social and economic hardships associated with any future rate increases and/ or shortages of conventional energy sources will be minimized.
2014-2021 Housing Element
52
City of Norco
General Plan
5.	Housing Constraints Analysis
This section of the Housing Element examines the constraints that could hinder the City’s achievement of its objectives and the resources that are available to assist in the provision of housing. State law requires that Housing Elements analyze potential and actual governmental and nongovernmental constraints to the production, maintenance, and improvement of housing for persons of all income levels and disabilities. The constraints analysis must also demonstrate local efforts to remove governmental constraints that hinder achievement of housing goals.
5.1	Governmental Constraints
Local policies and regulations can affect the availability of housing and in particular, the provision of affordable housing. Land use controls, site improvement requirements, fees and exactions, permit processing procedures, and other factors can affect the maintenance, development, and improvement of housing.
State, Federal and Regional regulations, which the City has no control over, also affect the availability of land for housing and the cost of producing housing. Regulations related to environmental protection, building codes, and other topics have significant, often adverse impacts on housing cost and availability. While constraints exist at other levels of government, this section emphasizes policies and regulations that are under the control of the City.
Key Policies and Regulations Affecting Housing Costs	
City of Norco Controlled	Non-City Controlled
Zoning /Development Standards	MSHCP Requirements and Fees
Density / Open Space	TUMF Fees
Site Improvements	Environmental Impact Analysis
Impact Fees and Exactions	Building Codes
Permit Processing Time	Availability of Capital for New Construction
Parking	School Impact Fees
It is important to note that the City of Norco’s intent is to find a balance between implementing community standards and quality for new residential development, and maintaining a development review process and appropriate regulations that do not unreasonably constrain new residential construction.
5.1.1	Land Use Controls
General Plans
Under State law, every city and county in California must prepare and adopt a General Plan. It serves as the blueprint for future development. The General Plan is the foundation of all land use controls in a jurisdiction and establishes policy guidelines for all development within the City.
The Norco General Plan goals and policies guide residential development that is consistent with the animal-keeping lifestyle the City was founded on. The Land Use
2014-2021 Housing Element
53
City of Norco
General Plan
Element has the most direct influence on residential development by specifying the amount, location, type, and density of residential development. The Zoning Code reinforces the objectives of the Land Use Element by regulating development densities, housing types, and development standards in specific residential zones.
The Norco General Plan includes two residential land use designations: Residential Agricultural (RA) and Residential Low (RL). The City’s Land Use Element also includes a Hillside Areas designation (HS). The HS designation serves as a “temporary” designation that will allow development when a specific plan is approved. Once the specific plan is approved, it replaces the HS land use designation. The Specific Plan land use designation is applied to projects with standards that may deviate from the typical zones.
Zoning Code
The Zoning Code (Title 18 of the City’s Municipal Code) includes limits on unit density, building height, preservation of animaLkeeping areas and lot coverage, as well as minimum requirements for on-site parking. Differences in development standards can affect the relative affordability of dwellings. Approximately 60 percent of the City is zoned for agricultural/residential uses that accommodate animaLkeeping. A majority of the residential area is zoned A-l-20, which requires a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet to accommodate animaLkeeping and small-plot agriculture. The AU zones are intended to provide animaLkeeping and smalLplot agriculture residential areas. Table 5-1 identifies all zones that offer opportunities for residential uses within the City of Norco.
Table 5-1: Residential Land Use Zones
Zoning District		Approximate Total Acreage
A-E	Agricultural Estate	164
A-l A-l-5 A-l-2 A-l-20	Agricultural Low Density Min. lot size = 5 acres Min. lot size = 2 acres Min. lot size = 20,000 s.f.	4,084
R-l R-l-10 R-l-15 R-l-20	Residential Single-Family Min. lot size = 10,000 s.f. Min. lot size = 15,000 s.f. Min. lot size = 20,000 s.f.	160
R-3 R-3-6 R-3-8	Residential Multiple-Family Max. 6 du/ac Max. 8 du/ac	0
HS	Hillside (Agricultural/low density)	327
HDO	Housing Development Overlay (20-30 du/ac)	102
SP	Norco Hills SP (residential component) Norco Ridge Ranch SP Gateway SP (residential component)	730
Total Residentia	Acreage	5,567
The City also provides opportunities for residential development in the PD (Planned Development) Overlay zone. However, residential developments within the PD Overlay zone are still limited to the
2014-2021 Housing Element
54
City of Norco
General Plan
densities allowed in the underlying zoning designation. The form and type of residential development within this overlay zone is also required to be compatible with existing or potential development of surrounding neighborhoods. The PD Overlay zone would not be functional for providing affordable housing in an Ad zone because of the density restriction, but there is no such restriction on a PD Overlay zone in a commercial zone, which could include a residential component.
Table 5'2 provides a summary for each zone that allow residential uses, along with development standards for each, including setbacks, lot coverage, and maximum building height. The table does not include standards for the SP zone since standards for each Specific Plan will be unique and specific to each project.
2014-2021 Housing Element
55
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 5-2: Summary of Residential Zoning Regulations
Development Standard	A-E Zone	A-l Zones	A-2 Zones	R-l Zones	R-3 Zones	HS Zone
Residential Uses	1 Single-family Detached	1 Single-family Detached	1 Single-family Detached	1 Single-family Detached	Low-density multiple-family	1 Single-family Detached
Min. Dwelling Size 2 or fewer bedrooms More than 2 bedrooms	1,200 s.f. 1,500 s.f.	1,100 s.f. 1,300 s.f.	1,100 s.f. 1,300 s.f.	1,100 s.f. 1,300 s.f.	750 s.f. for any dwelling	1,100 s.f. 1,300 s.f.
Min. Lot Area	40,000 s.f.	A-l-10:10 acres A-l-20: 20,000 s.f. A-l-40:40,000 s.f.	5 acres	R-l-10:10,000 s.f. R-l-15:15,000 s.f. R-l-20: 20,000 s.f.	30,000 s.f.	20,000 s.f.
Min. Dimensions Width Depth	80 ft. 150 ft.	80 ft. 200 ft.	240 ft 320 ft	80 ft. 100 ft.	100 ft. 100 ft.	None
Min. Setbacks						
Front Yard	25 ft. from ROW	25 ft. from ROW	25 ft. from ROW	25 ft. from ROW	25 ft. from ROW	25 ft. from ROW
Side Yard (interior)	20 ft. aggregate, with 5 ft. min. on one side	20 ft. aggregate, with 5 ft. min. on one side*	20 ft. aggregate, with 5 ft. min. on one side	Lots < 10,000 s.f.: 5 ft. Lots >10,000 s.f.: 20 ft. aggregate, with 5 ft. min. on one side	A distance equal to 1/2 of a dimension measured from the highest point of a grade along the perimeter of the building to the uppermost portion of the building	20 ft. aggregate, with 5 ft. min. on one side
Side Yard (street side)	20% of lot width up to 15 ft.	20% of lot width up to 15 ft.	20 ft.	20% of lot width up to 15 ft.	10 ft.	20% of lot width up to 15 ft.
2014-2021 Housing Element
56
City of Norco
General Plan
Development Standard	A-E Zone	A-l Zones	A'2 Zones	R-l Zones	R-3 Zones	HS Zone
Rear Yard	30 ft.	60 ft. before Ord. 753 100 ft. after Ord. 753	30 ft.	15 ft.	A distance equal to 1/2 of a dimension measured from the highest point of a grade along the perimeter of the building to the uppermost portion of the building	30 ft.
Max. Bldg Height Accessory structures	35 ft. or 2 stories 2 stories	35 ft. or 2 stories 2 stories	35 ft. or 2 stories	35 ft. or 2 stories 1 story	35 ft. or 2 stories, whichever is less	35 ft. for all structures
Max. Lot Coverage	40%	40% of the pad area	40%	50%	35%	15%
Notes:
ROW - Right-of'Way
* Any residences built after the adoption of Ordinance 785 shall require a minimum 15 ft. setback on one side and a minimum 5 ft. setback on the opposite side.
2014-2021 Housing Element
57
City of Norco
General Plan
Mixed- Use Overlay Zone
The City of Norco recognizes the importance of providing a variety of housing opportunities and the benefits to locating affordable housing near sendees and employment center. Consequently, during the previous planning period, the City established development standards to allow for implementation of their Housing Development Overlay (HDO) zone. The HDO zone applies to specific properties within the City as shown on the official City of Norco Zoning Map and requires a HDO Site Plan to guide development on each site. The HDO zone is intended to facilitate the development of affordable housing within a mixed-use context while taking into account the community's small plot agricultural/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle. The HDO zone allows for densities up to 35 dwelling units per acre, which is appropriate to facilitate the development of affordable housing consistent with the requirements of State Government Code Article 10.6 (65580) and is appropriate to accommodate the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA allocation. Any development proposed on an HDO zoned property is subject to approval of an HDO Site Plan at which time the development will be reviewed by the various City departments for completeness and compatibility with the surrounding uses.
Parking Requirements
City parking standards for residential developments are tailored to the vehicle ownership patterns associated with different residential uses. However, some jurisdictions can impose excessive parking requirements, which can limit the overall production of housing. Parking is very expensive to provide and can consume valuable space that could have been otherwise used for additional housing or amenities such as common open space or private open space. Jurisdictions can implement greater parking requirements to avoid parking spillovers in adjacent neighborhoods. This is a common issue related to denser, multi-family residential uses that are adjacent to single-family areas.
The Zoning Code requires parking based on the number of dwellings on the property. Parking standards for residential uses in Norco are shown in Table 5-3. For single-family developments, the Zoning Code requires two enclosed parking spaces in a private garage. Multi-family developments require two roofed parking spaces for each dwelling unit. Senior housing requires parking to be provided at a ratio of not less than 0.75 parking spaces per dwelling unit with not less than 10 percent of the total number of required parking spaces being designed and designated as handicapped spaces.
Table 5-3: Residential Parking Requirements
Residential Type	Required Parking
Single-family Residential	2 enclosed parking spaces in a private garage
Multiple-family Residential	2 covered spaces for each unit
Open Space Requirements
To improve the living environment of residential neighborhoods, communities typically require housing to have a certain amount of open space, such as yards, common space, and landscaping. For single-family homes, open space is reflected in setbacks, yard sizes, and lot coverage requirements. With the City of Norco, most open space is preserved with the standards for single-family, as identified in Table 5-2, Summary7 of Residential Zoning Regulations. The R-3 Zone has development standards that ensure open space will be provided.
In addition to the development standards identified in Table 5-2, the A-l Zone also requires a Primary Animal Keeping Area (PAKA). This requirement ensures that enough open space is
2014-2021 Housing Element
58
City of Norco
General Plan
provided to maintain animal-keeping as the City’s focus. For a pad area less than 20,000 square feet, the PAKA shall be a minimum of 2,728 square feet. For a pad area greater than 20,000 square feet, the PAKA shall be a minimum of 3,304 square feet. Non-animal related structures are not allowed in the PAKA.
Density Bonus
Although the City does not have a codified density bonus, the City is required to grant a density bonus to an applicant that proposes a residential development which meets the requirements of the State density bonus. To comply with State law the City must adopt an ordinance that specifies how the City intends to comply with the requirements of the State density bonus. Therefore, Action 5.1.3 has been included in the Housing Plan stating the City shall adopt a density bonus ordinance that is in compliance with State law within one year of adoption of the housing element.
Second Dwelling Unit Requirements
In response to state mandated requirements and local needs, the City of Norco allows the development of second dwelling units. Traditionally intended for elderly or other members of owner-occupant families, the example of compact, infill development can be strategy for meeting the growing rental housing demands.
A second unit is a self-contained living unit with cooking, eating, sleeping, and full sanitation facilities, either attached to or detached from the primary residential unit on a single lot. Second units offer several benefits. They offer affordable rental housing for seniors, college students, and single persons that typically rent for less than apartment of comparable size. In addition, the primary homeowner receives supplemental income, which can help many modest income and elderly homeowners remain in or afford their homes.
While the City previously required a conditional use permit to construct a second unit, the City will amend the Zoning Code in 2013 to permit second unit approval through a discretionary process, removing a potential constraint. The Zoning Code currently allows for second units to be constructed in any residential zone, subject to the following conditions:
•	The lot upon which the second unit is to be established complies with the minimum lot requirements of the land use in which it is located
•	Second units are allowed so long as one of the units (primary or second) is owner occupied and a covenant of restriction is recorded prior to issuance of a building permit
•	Second units shall comply with all development requirements including, but not limited to, setbacks, height limitations, and total maximum lot coverage
•	Second units shall be attached along a common residential wall and not separated by a breezeway or garden wall, or contained within the walls of the primary dwelling
•	The second unit shall be architecturally compatible with the primary dwelling
Multi-family Housing
Low-density multi-family housing is permitted by right in the R-3 residential zone. The R-3 zone allows residential densities up to 6 dwelling units per acre or 8 dwelling units per acre.
During the previous planning period, the City also established development standards to allow for implementation of their Housing Development Overlay (HDO) zone. The HDO zone applies to specific properties within the City as shown on the official City of Norco Zoning Map and requires a HDO Site Plan to guide development on each site. The HDO zone is intended to
2014-2021 Housing Element
59
City of Norco
General Plan
facilitate the development of affordable housing within a mixed-use context while taking into account the community's small plot agricultural/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle. The HDO zone allows for densities up to 35 dwelling units per acre, which is appropriate to facilitate the development of affordable housing consistent with the requirements of State Government Code Article 10.6 (65580) and is appropriate to accommodate the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA allocation. Any development proposed on an HDO zoned property is subject to approval of an HDO Site Plan at which time the development will be reviewed by the various City departments for completeness and compatibility with the surrounding uses.
Factory-built Housing and Mobile Homes
The Norco Zoning Code defines factory-built housing and mobile homes differently. Factory-built housing is defined as a residential building, dwelling unit, or an individual dwelling room or combination of rooms thereof or building component, assembly, or system manufactured in such a manner that all concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot be inspected before installation at the building site. Factory-built housing is permitted on all residential zoned properties. Conversely, mobile homes are defined as a structure transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain no more than one dwelling unit to be used with or without a foundation system. Mobile homes are permitted in all zones that permit residential uses. However, mobile home park developments are conditionally permitted in the R-3 zone. In addition, the temporary use of a mobile home is permitted in any residential zone provided a Conditional Use Permit is granted and the mobile home is for the exclusive use of two family members (62 years old or older) of the owner occupant of the main use dwelling on the same property. The Conditional Use Permit shall be granted for a maximum one year period and may be extended on a year to year basis.
Senior Citizen Housing
Housing for senior citizens (age 55 years or older) is conditionally permitted within any zone of the City as deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission. Senior citizen housing developments constructed should generally meet the development standards as required within the zone and be compatible with existing and planned development in the area in which it is located. In order to ensure the proper maintenance of senior citizen housing developments, covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&R) are required prior to construction. The CC&Rs enforce age limitations, relocation when household survivor is not a senior citizen, maximum occupancy limitations, and long term project maintenance and repair. CC&Rs must be approved by the City Council.
Transitional and Supportive Housing
Transitional and supportive housing provides longer-term housing (typically six months to two years), often coupled with supportive services, to individuals and families who are transitioning to permanent housing. In a supportive housing development, housing is coupled with supportive sendees such as job training and counseling programs. Consistent with State law, the City amended the Zoning Code in 2013 to treat transitional and supportive housing as a proposed residential use and subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. For example, if transitional housing is a multifamily use proposed in a multifamily zone, then zoning should treat the transitional housing the same as other multifamily uses proposed in the zone.
Single-Room Occupancy Units
2014-2021 Housing Element
60
City of Norco
General Plan
Consistent with Section 17958.1 of the California Health and Safety Code, a single room occupancy (SRO) unit is a living unit which is rented to the same person for a period of more than 30 consecutive days at a rate at or below 30 percent of 50 percent of the monthly median income adjusted for a household size of one. In 2013, the City amended the Zoning Code to include a definition of SROs and has permitted the approval of SROs in the Heavy Commercial/Light Manufacturing (M-l) zone.
Emergency Shelters
Emergency shelters provide short term shelter for homeless persons. Emergency shelters must address statutory requirements pursuant to State law, requiring, among other things, the identification of at least one zone where emergency shelters are permitted without a CUP or other discretionary action.
To facilitate the development of emergency shelters, in 2013, the City amended the Zoning Code to permit emergency shelters by right in the Heavy Commercial/Light Manufacturing (MU) zone. The majority of land zoned MU is located near Hamner Avenue, the Gateway Specific Plan, and Lake Norconian. There is currently a 23-acre, vacant site in the MU zone that could accommodate an emergency shelter if one is proposed. This site is located in the center of the City, south of Fifth Street and west of Horseless Carriage Drive. This is an ideal location for an emergency shelter, as the site is located in walking distance of City Hall, the Department of Social Services, the Department of Motor Vehicles and retail, restaurant and employment opportunities. The development standards for emergency shelters will be consistent with State law and be clearly specified in the Zoning Code. These development standards include:
•	The maximum number of beds/persons permitted to be served nightly
•	Off-street parking based on demonstrated need, but not to exceed parking requirements for other residential or commercial uses in the same zone
•	The size/location of exterior and interior onsite waiting and client intake areas
•	The provision of onsite management
•	The proximity of other emergency shelters, provided that emergency shelters are not required to be more than 300 feet apart
•	The length of stay
•	Lighting
•	Security during hours that the emergency shelter is in operation Farmworker Housing
As indicated in Section 4.5.6 “Farm and Ranch Hand Housing Needs,” approximately 2 percent of Norco residents held “Agriculture, Forestry7, Fishing and Hunting, and Mining” occupations. These persons are most likely employed as farm hands or in plant nurseries, landscaping, or gardening companies. Large scale agricultural operations such as dairies have diminished in the City with agriculture operations being practiced more at the individual level in the form of raising livestock, primarily horses. The City currently allows for the construction of caretaker dwellings which can be used as a residence for full time farm hands. Caretaker dwellings may either be attached or detached dwellings secondary to the main dwelling unit and require a private garage to accommodate a minimum one parking space for each dwelling. Caretaker dwelling units are conditionally permitted in the A-E and AU zones.
Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Program (MSHCP)
In 2003, the Riverside County Board of Supervisors adopted the Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Program (MSHCP), which is a criteria-driven Habitat
2014-2021 Housing Element
61
City of Norco
General Plan
Conservation Plan intended to create a network of permanent open space. The intent is to conserve a variety of natural communities that would ensure survival of numerous species of plants and animals. The City of Norco is within the MSHCP boundaries, with approximately 1,600 acres within the MSHCP Criteria Area plus additional land within the MSHCP Plan Area, thus additional constraints on the provision of affordable housing for land within the MSHCP Reserve area will likely occur. The MSHCP is a governmental constraint that is beyond the City’s control, as it is a multi-jurisdictional program. The MSHCP may also create additional constraints due to the MSHCP fees, which are applied per dwelling unit. Specific fee amounts are listed under “Additional Development Fees.”
The MSHCP will reduce the land area available for a variety of uses, including residential development, for land that is within the MSHCP Criteria Areas. Land within the MSHCP Criteria Areas is also subject to two processes known as the Habitat Evaluation and Acquisition Negotiation Strategy (HANS) and Joint Project Review (JPR). Any development proposals for lands within the MSHCP Reserve area are subject to specialized review procedures which may create additional constraints to development of affordable housing.
5.1.2	Codes and Enforcements
Building and safety codes regulate new construction, alteration, and reconstruction of buildings, and are intended to protect occupants from unnecessary risk of fire, structural collapse, unsanitary conditions, and injury or loss of life. While building and safety codes are adopted for the purposes of preserving public health and safety, and ensuring the construction of safe and decent housing, they have the potential to increase the cost of housing construction and/or maintenance. The City of Norco’s building codes are based on regulations necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of its residents. The City has adopted into its Codes and Ordinances the 2010 California Building Code based on the 2009 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council, which establish construction standards for all residential buildings.
5.1.3	On- and Off- Site Improvements
Site improvements and property dedications are important components of new development and contribute to the creation of decent and affordable housing. Development in Norco requires site improvements that vary by size and location. These may include, but are not limited to, reservation of sites for parks, recreation facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses, grading, landscaping, irrigation, lighting, drainage, and vehicle, equestrian and pedestrian access including curb cuts and street improvements. Site improvements are required to ensure that there is adequate infrastructure and access to a site. Site improvements also make the project more compatible with surrounding neighborhoods.
Site improvements, particularly infrastructure, such as upgrades to major and local streets; curbs, gutters, and sidewalks; water and sewer lines; storm drains; and street lighting can be viewed as a constraint to the development of affordable housing. In most cases, these improvements are dedicated to the City, which is then responsible for their maintenance. The cost of these facilities is borne by developers, is added to the cost of new housing units, and eventually is passed on to the homebuyer or property owner. Norco is a unique jurisdiction in Riverside County, in that it is almost entirely built out and already has existing upgraded infrastructure and roadways throughout the City. To
2014-2021 Housing Element
62
City of Norco
General Plan
reduce the impact of potential infrastructure upgrades on the development of affordable units, sites identified in the Sites Inventory to accommodate very low- and low-income housing are located along existing major roadways that will not require further upgrades if a project is proposed. If affordable housing is proposed in a less dense area, the City will work with affordable housing developers to offset the cost of any necessary improvements using any available funding source including CDBG or HOME funds.
5.1.4	Fees and Exactions
Planning and permitting fees are charged on an at-cost basis to cover staff services and administrative expenses for processing development applications. Development impact fees are required to provide essential services and infrastructure to serve new residents. Impact fees are governed by State law to demonstrate a nexus between development and potential impacts. State law also requires the proportionality test to ensure the pro-rata share of costs to provide services and infrastructure by individual developments is reasonable.
The City recognizes that planning/permitting and development fees add to the cost of residential development. To mitigate the impact of planning/permitting and impact fees on the cost of residential development, the City uses CDBG funds, as well as other funding sources to gap-finance affordable housing development. . The City’s Planning Division Fees are shown in Table 5-4. Development Impact Fees, which are collected through the Building Division, are outlined in Table 5-5.
2014-2021 Housing Element
63
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 5-4: Planning Division Fee Schedule Effectivejune 2013
PLANNING DIVISION	FEE	
ABC Letter of Necessity	$148.00
Additional Animal Units per Section 18.35.06 or 18.13.08 (Fee + Public Noticing Fee + Animal Control Costs}	$72.00
Architectural & Photometric Review	$327.00
Developer Appeal to Planninq Commission	$1,007.00
Resident Appeal to Planninq Commission*	$94.00
Developer Appeal to City Council	$810.00
Resident Appeal to City Council*	$315.00
* Appeal fee will be refunded if the decision is reversed on appeal	
Cateqorical Exemption	$80.00
Commercial Vehicle Exemption Permit	$65.00
Continuance (Fee plus postaqe and publishing costs}	$875.00
Conditional Use Permit - Residential Accessory Building	1 % building valuation' + Public Noticing Fee
'-Planning Division fees paid at time of building permit fee based on current valuation rates (i.e. if building valuation for an accessory building is $37.72 per square foot) the Planning Divion fee would calculate as shown below. Public Noticing Fee paid at time of Planning application.	
Size of Buildinq	Valuation	=FEE
600 sq. ft.$22,632.00	$243.00
1,000 sq.ft.	$37,720.00	$406.00
2,000 sq. ft.	$75,440.00	$810.00
Conditional Use Permit - Self Audit - Sale of Alcohol	$132.00
Conditional Use Permit - Self Audit - All Others	$65.00
Conditional Use Permit - Miniaturized Piqs in R-1-10 Zone	$366.00
Conditional Use Permit - Miniaturized Pigs in R-1-10 Zone (Renewal)	$64.00
Conditional Use Permit - Minor, plus animal-control costs (Resident) (except Addionat Animal Units, refer to that fee)	$1,272.00
Conditional Use Permit - Minor, plus animal-control costs (Developer)	$2,864.00
Conditional Use Permit - Major	$6,061.00
Conditional Use Permit Modification - Minor	$2,523.00
Conditional Use Permit Modification - Major	$2,580.00
Conditional Use Permit-Annual Inspection	$49.00
C.C.& R. Review	$2,359.00
Development Phasinq Plan	$936.00
Entertainment Permit	$1,890.00
Fence/Wall Review (Subdivision)	$383.00
Filminq 1-4 Days (exclusive of all Public Safety, Public Works and Leqal Expenses, charged at fully burdened hourly rate)	$350.00
Filminq 4 plus Days (exclusive of all Public Safety, Public Works and Leqal Expenses, charged at fully burdened hourly rate)	$538.00
General Plan Amendment	$4,970.00
Initial Environmental Assessment	$909.00
Informal Review by Planninq Commission (with pre-application)	$784.00
Informal Review by Planninq Commission (no pre-application)	$784.00
Landscape Plan Checks Review - Three Reviews & one field review	$446.00
Additional Landscape Plan Check Review	$110.00
Landscape Plan Checks Review - On Site Only	$132.00
Larqe Family Day Care	$1,244.00
Major Environmental Assessment (up to 110 hours)	$14,161.00
Major Environmental Assessment (beyond 110 hours)	Cost of Service
Charqe fully burdened hourly rate & out of pocket costs against deposit	
Mitiqated Neqative Declaration (up to 5 hours)	$499.00
Mitiqated Neqative Declaration (beyond 5 hours)	Cost of Service
Charqe fully burdened hourly rate & out of pocket costs against deposit	
Mitigation Plan One Time Monitoring (up to 5 hours)	$499.00
Mitigation Plan One Time Monitoring (beyond 5 hours)	Cost of Service
Charqe fully burdened hourly rate & out of pocket costs against deposit	
Model Home Complex Review	$1,699.00
Planninq Information Letter	$120.00
Pre-Application Review, First Review	
Pre-Application Subsequent Reviews	$1,484.00
Public Notice Fee	$453.00
Relocation Permit	$1,451.00
Reproduction (up to 11" x 17") - Black/White	$0.25
Reproduction (up to 11 ” x 17”) - Color	$0.50
Reproduction (larqer than 11" x 17") - Black/White or Color	$10.00
Siqn Review - Monument & Pole Signs	$388.00
Siqn Review - Wall Siqns	$183.00
Siqn Review - Temporary Special Event Siqns	$26.00
Siqn Review, Freeway-Oriented	$1,812.00
Siqn Proqram Review	$854.00
Similar Use Finding - Planninq Commission	$876.00
2014-2021 Housing Element
64
City of Norco
General Plan
PLANNING DIVISION	FEE	
Site Plan Review - Minor	$2,415.00
Site Plan Review - Major	$5,585.00
Site Plan Review Modification	$2,740.00
Site Plan Review - Residential Accessory Building	1% building valuation*
'-Planning Division fees paid at time ofbuildinq permit fee based on current valuation rates (i.e. ifbuildinq valuation for	
Size of Bulldlnq	Valuation	=FEE
600 sq. ft.	$22,632.00	$238.00
1,000 sq.ft.	$37,720.00	$398.00
2,000 sq. ft.	$75,440.00	$794.00
Special Events - All Others	$92.00
Special Events - Sidewalk Sales	$31.00
Special Events - Non Profit Organizations	
Event on Private Property	
Requires Closure of Public Right-Of-Way at the End of Dead-End Public Trails, Sidewalks or Streets	$73.00
Requires the Closure of Public Right-Of-Way on or Through Public Trails, Sidewalks or Streets that Require a Traffic Plan/Detours	$284.00
Special Events - All Others	
Event on Private Property	$89.00
Requires Closure of Public Right-Of-Way at the End of Dead-End Public Trails, Sidewalks or Streets	$163.00
Requires the Closure of Public Right-Of-Way on or Through Public Trails, Sidewalks or Streets that Require a Traffic Plan/Detours	$373.00
Note: All Special Event applications would also include the cost of any street closure, traffic control, On-site patrol, additional fire protection standby, etc.	
Specific Plan Preparation (up to 136 hours)	$19,095.00
Specific Plan Preparation (beyond 136 hours)	Cost of Service
Charge fully burdened staff rale and consultant costs against deposit	
Specific Plan Amendment (up to 136 hours)	$12,622.00
Specific Plan Amendment (beyond 136 hours)	Cost of Service
Charge fully burdened staff rate and consultant costs against deposit	
Specific Plan Annexation - Delete Fee	
Swap Meet/Open Air Market-Temperary Permit	$40.00/per day
Swap Meet/Open Air Market-Permanent Permit	$2,628.00
Swap Meet Processing Fee/State Fee	$27.00/$ 1.00
Tentative Parcel Map - Single Family Residential (three plan checks included)	$5,941.00
Tentative Parcel Map - Commercial (three plan checks included)	$5,706.00
*(fee plus $200.00/1ot)	
Tentative Parcel Map (additional plan checks per sheet)	$334.00
Tentative Parcel Map Modification	$2,815.00
Tentative Parcel Map Extension of Time (Planninq Commission and City Council)	$761.00
Tentative Tract Map (first three plan checks are included)	$11,516.00
* (fee plus $170/lot over 5)	
Tentative Tract Map (additional plan check fees per sheet)	$334.00
Tentative Tract Map Modification	$2,815.00
Variance - Minor and Minor Modifications	$2,327.00
Variance - Major and Major Modifications	$3,051.00
Zone Change	$3,259.00
Zoning and General Plan Map Copies (H"X 17" folded)	$5.00
Zoning and General Plan Map Copies (wall map)	$10.00
In comparison to surrounding jurisdictions the City of Norco’s planning fees are lower than those implemented by City of Corona, City of Temecula, and the County of Riverside. While the City’s fees have increased slightly since the 2008'2014 planning period, the increases were minor and are not considered a constraint to the development of new housing.
2014^2021 Housing Element
65
City of Norco
General Plan
Effective 2013
Table 5-5: Development Impact Fees
Description	Single Family	Multi-Family
Building Permit (based on total valuation of project)	$102.72/s.f. of SFD R-3 VA $96.83/s.f. of SFD R-3 VB	$93.92/s.f. $89.32/s.f.
Fireplace	$1,000.00 each	$1,000.00 each
Garage (based on valuation)	$39.63/s.f. of U VA $37.72/s.f. of U VB	$39.63/s.f. $37.72/s.f.
Fire Sprinkler System	$3.50/s.f. of total built area	$3.5O/s.f of total built area
Air Conditioner	$4.25/s.f. of SFD	$4.25/s.f. of unit
Plan Check	65°/o of the Building Permit Fee	65% of the Building Permit Fee
Electrical Permit	$15.00 + first 20 receptacles are $0.75 each, all others are $0.45, all fixtures are $3.00	$15.00 + first 20 receptacles are $0.75 each, all others are $0.45, all fixtures are $3.00
Plumbing Permit	$15.00 + $6.00 for each fixture	$15.00 + $6.00 for each fixture
Mechanical Permit	$15.00 + minimal fee based on size of units installed	$15.00 + minimal fee based on size of units installed
Sewer Permit	$50.00	$50.00
Storm Drain Fee	$0.02/s.f. roof area	$0.02/s.f. roof area
Development Impact Fees		
Parks	$11,742.00	$6,192.00
Fire	$1,036.00	$1,683.00
General	$515.00	$515.00
Trails	$729.00	Not applicable
Water	$2,400.00 (1” meter only)	$2,400.00 (1” meter only)
Streets	$2,084.00	$1,373.00
Storm Drain	$1,560.00	$162.00
Animal Control	$146.00	$146.00
Public Library	$471.00	$248.00
Public Meeting	$1,312.00	$691.00
Aquatics Center	$251.00	$132.00
Water Meter Only	$610.00 (1” meter only)	$610.00 (1” meter only)
Sewer Capacity Fee	$2,120.00	$1,060.00
Sewer Connection	$255.00	$255.00
SMIF	(valuation amount in dollars) x 0.0001 = Fee	(valuation amount in dollars) x 0.0001 = Fee
School Fees	$4.22/s.f. (as of 12/16/09)	$4.22/s.f. (as of 12/16/09)
Microfilm/imaging	$0.50/page (8-1/2” x ll”and smaller) $2.00/page (8-1/2” x 14” and over)	$0.50/page (8-1/2” x lP’and smaller) $2.00/page (8-1/2” x 14” and over)
Countywide Development Fees
In addition to the fees shown above, Table 5-6 provides additional development impact fees that are not controlled by the City, but may apply to development. These fees include:
•	Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Program (MSHCP), which is a criteria-driven Habitat Conservation Plan intended to create a network of permanent open space;
•	Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee (TUMF) fees, intended to fund the mitigation of cumulative regional transportation impacts resulting from future development;
2014-2021 Housing Element
66
City of Norco
General Plan
•	Stevens Kangaroo Rat Mitigation Fees, to replace and preserve habitat for the species that may be affected by new development;
•	School Impact Fees, which are determined by district to maintain healthy schools throughout the County; and
•	Area Wide Drainage Fees, which were established to maintain and upgrade the City’s drainage system as new development occurs.
Table 5-6: Countywide Development Impact Fees
Fee Type	Fee Amount
Western Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Program (MSHCP) Fees	Less than 8.1 dwelling units per acre = $1,938.00 per dwelling unit Between 8.1 and 14.0 dwelling units per acre = $1,241.00 per dwelling unit Greater than 14.0 dwelling units per acre = $1,008.00 per dwelling unit
Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee (TUMF)	Single-Family Residential = $9,812.00 per single-family residential unit Multifamily Residential = $6,890.00 per multifamily residential unit
Kangaroo Rat Mitigation Fee	< 0.5 ac. = $250 / lot > 0.5 ac. = S500 / acre
School Impact Fees	$4.22 per square foot for each single-family and multiple-family dwelling
Area Wide Drainage Fee	Lots < 1 acre	Lots > 1 acre Murrieta Valley » $4,139.00 per acre	Murrieta Valley = $4,139.00 per lot Temecula Valley = $2,291.00 per acre	Temecula Valley = $2,291.00 per lot Santa Gertrudis Valley = $1,179.00 per acre	Santa Gertrudis Valley = $1,179.00 per lot Warm Springs Valley = $677.00 per acre	Warm Springs Valley = $677.00 per lot
Many of the fees identified in Table 5-6 were not established by the City of Norco, but rather, for example, by the Riverside County Board of Supervisors or the school district. The City does not have the authority to waive or modify these fees; however, these fees are often examined and/or waived for affordable housing developments. For example, TUMF fees are not applied to affordable housing complexes and kangaroo rat fees are reduced for multi-family developments. These fees should not be viewed as a constraint, because they are required for all new development and are often not applied to affordable development. In addition, as mentioned previously, the City, when feasible, makes every attempt to reduce development costs for affordable housing projects by assisting with infrastructure improvements and purchasing land.
As the City of Norco has historically been developed with single family homes catering to the ranch lifestyle of the residents, the development impact fees assessed reflect a single family unit. More recently the City has begun to re-evaluate their fees as new multiTamily projects are proposed within the City. While not all of the City-controlled development fees have been adjusted to reflect multiple units Table 5-7 presents an estimate of the development fees for a single family as compared to a multi-family unit constructed in the City.
2014-2021 Housing Element
67
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 5-7: Development Fees for a Typical Unit
Development Fees	Single Family	Multi-Family
Estimated City DIF per unit	$18,035	$11,235
Estimated Building Permit fee per unit	$3,213	$2,635
Estimated non-City DIF fees per unit	$23,141	$18,121
Estimated Infrastructure Fees per unit	$6,945	$4,232
Total Estimated Fees	$51,334	$36,223
Estimated Construction Cost per unit	$198,000	$150,000
Total Estimated cost of Development	$249,334	$186,223
Estimated proportion of fee cost to overall development cost per unit	21%	20%
As shown in Table 5-7, the overall estimated development fees are lower for multifamily units as compared to single family homes; however the proportion of fees in relation to the development cost is comparable between single and multi-family units. Generally the development impact fees charged by the City have not significantly increased from the fees reported in the 2008-2014 Housing Element Generally, the City’s development fees are comparable to other local jurisdictions, such as the City of Corona and the County of Riverside, and are not considered to be a major constraint to the development of affordable or market rate housing. The City of Corona, for example, estimates development fees for both a multifamily and a single family unit to be approximately 23% of the total cost to develop a unit. The City recognizes that planning/permitting and development fees add to the cost of residential development. To mitigate the impact of planning/permitting and impact fees on the cost of residential development, when funds are available the City can use redevelopment housing set-aside funds, HOME and CDBG funds, as well as other funding sources to gap-finance affordable housing development. The City has also historically purchased land for the creation of affordable housing, when funds are available, to offset costs.
5.1.5	Processing and Permit Procedures
Development entitlement processing fees levied by cities for reviewing development applications may vary significantly, although by State law, such fees must reflect the actual costs incurred by the city in carrying out this function. The time allotted for processing each entitlement may also vary for each city and can significantly affect the carrying costs of the developer (e.g. land purchase option payments, legal fees, interest on pre-development loans, etc.).
Builders and developers frequently cite the cost of holding land during the evaluation and review process as a significant factor to the cost of housing. Holding costs associated with delays in processing have been estimated to add between 1.1 percent and 1.8 percent to the cost of a dwelling unit for each month of delay. Processing times vary with the complexity of the project. Approval for single-family homes and other minor tenant improvements can usually be processed within two weeks after submittal to the City.
Multi-family development projects that exceed the density of the zone are subject to review and approval by both the Planning Commission and City Council. Both the
2014-2021 Housing Element
68
City of Norco
General Plan
Planning Commission and City Council, will determine if the nature of the proposed project will not pose a detriment to nearby properties and uses. The minimum processing time, as well as the public hearing, can pose a constraint to the development of multi-family projects. As discussed earlier, a delay in the review process increases holding costs of the land which is then reflected in the housing cost. In addition, development standards and design guidelines that must be implemented to comply with the conditions of approval could increase the overall cost of constructing the project, which is then reflected in the housing cost.
Projects in the PD overlay zones or other projects requiring Conditional Use Permits, Zoning Amendments, or other discretionary actions necessitate a higher level of review, resulting in a longer processing timeline; usually 60 to 90 days. The City of Norco’s development approval process is designed to accommodate, not hinder, appropriate development. As supported by reasonable processing times, and the relative facility of permit procedure, the City's processing and permit procedures are not meant to constrain the development of housing.
The Planning Division is the lead agency in processing residential development applications that involve more than one unit and coordinates the processing of these applications with other City departments and agencies. The time required to process a development entitlement application can have significant cost implications for affordable housing. Changes in zoning designations or standards may be typical of entitlement requests accompanying proposals for affordable housing. In Norco, zone change requests can be accommodated in as few as 90 days if no environmental impact report (EIR) is required. The table below provides more detailed information for the processing time of various requests.
Application/Request
Conditional Use Permit
Site Plan Review
Parcel Map/Subdivisions Tentative Tract Map Variance
Zoning Amendment or Zone Change General Plan Amendment Environmental Documentation Initial Study
Processing Time
10-12 weeks 10-12 weeks 12-16 weeks 16-20 weeks 6-8 weeks 12-16 weeks 12-16-weeks Approximately 1 year 30 days
Conditional use permits typically can be approved in approximately 10 weeks provided an EIR is not required. Subdivision parcel maps require 12 to 16 weeks for approval because they require Planning Commission and City Council review. Conditional Use Permits and Variances may be approved or denied at the discretion of the Planning Commission, and decisions of the Planning Commission are final unless appealed to the City Council. All other application must be reviewed by the Planning Commission and City Council.
2014-2021 Housing Element
69
City of Norco
General Plan
Permit Types
Conditional Use Permits
The purpose of a conditional use permit is to review the location, site development, and/or conduct of certain land uses. A Conditional Use Permit may be granted at the discretion of the Planning Commission, and is not the automatic right of any applicant.
Site Plan Review
The purpose of a Site Plan Review is to provide for the development of property in accordance with the general purposes of the City’s Codes, as well as determine compliance with the property development standards stated in the City’s Zoning Code. It is further intended to provide for the review of those developmental qualities which are not subject to precise statement; all as a part of the City’s desire to maintain its unique rural environment and atmosphere.
Variances
The purpose of the variance is to provide a discretionary permit process that allows for deviations from applicable standards of the Zoning Code, provided very specific findings can be made pursuant to State law. The variance procedure does not unduly burden housing development, as the City’s discretion in granting variances is tied to the limitations established by State law.
5.2	Housing for Persons with Disabilities
State law requires localities to analyze potential and actual constraints upon housing for persons with disabilities, demonstrate efforts to remove governmental constraints, and include programs to accommodate housing designed for people with disabilities. The City has no special zoning or land use restrictions that regulate the siting of housing for persons with disabilities. There are also no additional requirements, standards or regulations that present constraints to the development of housing for disabled individuals.
In accordance with State law, Norco permits state-licensed residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons in all of its residential zoning districts by right. State-licensed residential care facilities serving seven or more persons and convalescent centers are conditionally permitted in the A-l and R-l zones. The City does not have a definition or provide regulations for congregate care facilities.
Inclusion of an overly restrictive definition of a “family” in the zoning code may have the potential of discriminating against group homes or other housing for persons with disabilities on the basis of familial status. The Norco Municipal Code defines “family” as “an individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage, or a group of individuals who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.”
The City has adopted the 2010 California Building Code, which is based on the 2009 International Building Code. Standards within the Code include provisions to ensure accessibility for persons with disabilities. These standards are consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). No local amendments exist that would constrain accessibility or increase the cost of housing for persons with disabilities have been adopted.
2014-2021 Housing Element
70
City of Norco
General Plan
Americans with Disabilities Act
Building codes require that new residential construction and rehabilitation construction comply with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). ADA provisions include requirements for a minimum percentage of units in new development to be fully accessible to the physically disabled. Unlike the Uniform Building Code, enforcement of ADA requirements is not at the discretion of the City, but is mandated under Federal law. Compliance with building codes and ADA increases the cost of housing production, and can potentially delay the rehabilitation of older properties required to be brought up to current standards. However, these regulations provide minimum standards that must be complied with in order to ensure the development of safe and accessible housing.
Reasonable Accommodation
The Fair Housing Act, as amended in 1988, requires that cities and counties provide reasonable accommodation to rules, policies, practices and procedures where such accommodation may be necessary to afford individuals with disabilities equal housing opportunities. While fair housing laws intend that all people have equal access to housing, the law also recognizes that people with disabilities may need extra tools to achieve equality. Reasonable accommodation is one of the tools intended to further housing opportunities for people with disabilities. For developers and providers of housing for people with disabilities who are often confronted with siting or use restrictions, reasonable accommodation provides a means of requesting from the local government flexibility in the application of land use and zoning regulations or, in some instances, even a waiver of certain restrictions or requirements because it is necessary to achieve equal access to housing. Cities and counties are required to consider requests for accommodations related to housing for people with disabilities and provide the accommodation when it is determined to be “reasonable” based on fair housing laws and the case law interpreting the statutes.
State law allows for a statutorily based four-part analysis to be used in evaluating requests for reasonable accommodation related to land use and zoning matters and can be incorporated into reasonable accommodation procedures. This analysis gives great weight to furthering the housing needs of people with disabilities and also considers the impact or effect of providing the requested accommodation on the City and its overall zoning scheme. Developers and providers of housing for people with disabilities must be ready to address each element of the following four-part analysis:
•	The housing that is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation is for people with disabilities as defined in federal or State fair housing laws
•	The reasonable accommodation requested is necessary to make specific housing available to people with disabilities who are protected under fair housing laws
•	The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the local government
•	The requested accommodation will not result in a fundamental alteration in the local zoning code
To create a process for making requests for reasonable accommodation to land use and zoning decisions and procedures regulating the siting, funding, development and use of housing for people with disabilities the City has adopted a reasonable accommodation procedure and provides notice to the public of the availability of an accommodation process at all counters where applications are made for a permit, license or other authorization for siting, funding, development or use of housing and on the City’s website. Throughout the planning period, the City will also ensure that information on reasonable accommodation is available on the City’s website, at City Hall and in other public locations.
2014-2021 Housing Element
71

City of Norco
General Plan
5.3	Non-Governmental Constraints
The production and availability of housing may be constrained both by government regulations and by non-governmental factors, such as the costs of construction and interest rates on home mortgages.
5.3.1	Environmental Constraints
Environmental factors can constrain residential development in a community by increasing costs and reducing the amount of land suitable for housing construction. Environmental constraints to residential development typically relate to the presences of sensitive biological resource habitat or geological hazards.
Natural resources within Norco include areas identified in the MSHCP and the hillside areas along the east side of the City, which are one of the primary undisturbed habitat areas. The Santa Ana River is also a natural resource that is primarily preserved in open space. The MSHCP identifies habitat corridors which will be preserved through the MSHCP to provide wildlife habitable areas. Preservation is ensured by requiring that requests for sites within MSHCP Criteria Areas go through additional discretionary processes called HANS and JPR to protect certain species and habitat. The HANS process is used by the County of Riverside to implement portions of the MSHCP by identifying and delineating conservation areas on specific properties. All completed HANS cases are sent to the Western Riverside County Regional Conservation Authority (RCA) for review. The RCA reviews the County's HANS determinations to ensure compliance with MSHCP Criteria and other MSHCP requirements.
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act of 1972 is used in California to prevent the construction of buildings used for human occupancy on the surface trace of active faults. The Act prohibits new construction of homes within these zones unless a comprehensive geologic investigation shows that the fault does not pose a hazard to the proposed structure. The City of Norco is not located within an Alquist-Priolo Special Study Zone that would affect housing production. The entire City is within Zone II and the nearest faults - the Chino and Elsinore faults - have a relatively low level of seismic activity. There are no known “active” or “potentially active” faults present in the City of Norco.
In most cases, the City would be protected from extensive, serious flooding by the Santa Ana River because there is a slope gradient along the south bank of the river. However, the City’s Safety Element indicates that flood hazards exist along the North and South Norco Channels. Although the channels have nominal drainage capacities that are adequate for moderate sized storms, both are inadequate in the event of a 100-year storm. Hence, a 100-year storm would affect the City in areas along the North and South Norco Channels. Flood hazards related to inundation do not affect the City, as it is not in a pathway of any major dams or reservoirs.
5.3.2	Infrastructure Constraints
The lack of necessary infrastructure or public sendees can constrain residential development in a community by increasing costs and reducing the amount of land
2014-2021 Housing Element
72
City of Norco
General Plan
suitable for housing. A brief summary of the principal infrastructure systems serving the City follows:
Water
The City of Norco produces 40 percent of its water from five deep wells, four within the Temescal Basin and one lying north of the Santa Ana River within the Chino Basin. Water is also purchased from the Arlington Desalter, Chino Desalter Authority, and Western Municipal Water District.
Water monthly basic service charge is based on meter size. Additionally, there is a quantity water rate of $1.29 per unit, or the current prevailing rate, per one hundred cubic feet (HCF) or 748 gallons per unit of water volume. The billed water amounts include both the monthly meter charges and water consumption charges combined. An additional pass through electricity pumping surcharge may be applicable, based on location, at varying rates and adjusted annually.
Sewer
The sewer collection system is maintained and operated by the City of Norco. Residential sewer service is a flat 30-day monthly rate of $35, subject to change, per household. Homeowners are required to connect to the sewer upon failure of the septic system, or upon sale of the property. The following programs are:
•	CRA Sewer Loan Program: This program assists households that do not exceed 100 percent of the median income for Riverside County.
•	City Sewer Loan Program: This program assists households whose income exceeds the 100 percent limit of the CRATunded program, but do not exceed 120 percent of the County median income.
•	CRA Home Improvement Grant/Loan Program: This program assists households that do not exceed 120 percent of the County median income with a grant or loan to connect to the City sewer system.
5.3.3	Market Constraints
Recognizing that increasing development costs are precluding many families from owning homes, the City of Norco is a jurisdiction that is served by the Riverside County Housing Authority. The City has its own First Time Homebuyers Program that is intended to assist low- to moderate'income households to purchase their first home. However, high home prices in the City have made it difficult for applicants to purchase a home that would allow them a payment that falls within affordability guidelines. Development Costs
The cost of construction is dependent primarily on the cost of labor and materials. The relative importance of each is a function of the complexity of the construction job and the desired quality of the finished product. As a result, builders are under constant pressure to complete a job for as low a price as possible while still providing a quality product. This pressure has led (and is still leading) to an emphasis on labor'saving materials and construction techniques.
2014-2021 Housing Element
73
City of Norco
General Plan
The price paid for material and labor at any one time will reflect short-term considerations of supply and demand. Over the previous five years, construction costs rose approximately 16 percent per year. Future costs are difficult to predict given the cyclical fluctuations in demand and supply that in large part are created by fluctuations in the state and national economies. Such policies unilaterally impact construction in a region and therefore do not deter housing construction in any specific community.
For the average home, the cost of labor is generally two to three times the cost of materials and therefore represents a very important component of the total cost of construction. Most residential construction in Riverside County is performed with nonunion contractors; as a result, labor costs are responsive to changes in the residential market. The relative ease by which a skilled tradesperson can get a contractor’s license further moderates the pressures that force labor costs to rise. Construction costs in Norco are about the same as in other parts of Southern California. For standard housing construction, costs may average $100 to $120 per square foot for singleTamily residences depending on the level of amenities provided, and $150 per square foot for a standard two- to three-story multi-family residential structure, excluding parking.
A reduction in amenities and quality of building materials (above a minimum acceptability for health, safety, and adequate performance) could result in lower sale prices. Economy building techniques may reduce costs to $75 to $95 per square foot for such economy building techniques. In addition, prefabricated, factory-built housing may provide for lower priced housing by reducing construction and labor costs. Another factor related to construction costs is the number of units built at one time. As the number of units is increased, construction costs over the entire development are generally reduced based on economies of scale. This reduction in costs is of particular benefit when density bonuses are used for the provision of affordable housing. Availability of Financing
The availability of financing affects a person’s ability to purchase or improve a home and the cost of borrowing money for residential development is incorporated directly into the sales price or rent. Interest rates are determined by national policies and economic conditions and there is very little a local government can do to affect these rates. Some local jurisdictions, such as the City of Norco, offer assistance to residents to make home buying more affordable. Norco has housing programs that are funded by the Redevelopment Agency, such as the First-time Homebuyer Program and Infill Housing Program. However, due to the very high cost of single-family housing the agency has made one (1) loan in the past nine years.
Under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions must disclose information on the disposition of loan applications by the income, gender, and race of the applicants. This applies to all loan applications for home purchases and improvements, whether financed at market rate or through government assistance. HMDA data can be used to evaluate lender compliance with anti-discrimination laws and other consumer protection laws. The anti-discrimination laws include the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Fair Housing Act (FHA). These laws prohibit discrimination in home mortgage lending, among other things, on several bases such as race, national origin, sex, and, age.
Table 5-8 presents the disposition of home purchase loan applications in 2011 by income of the applicants from HMDA data. The data is for the Riverside-San Bernardino-
2014-2021 Housing Element
74
City of Norco
General Plan
Ontario Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) and for the purchase of single-family, duplexes, triplexes, and manufactured homes. Over 60% of the loan applications were received from moderate and above moderate-income households (earning 80-120% of the Median Family Income [MFI] and greater than 120% of Median Family Income, respectively). Low-income households (50 to 80% of MFI) and very low income households (less than 50% MFI) accounted for approximately 27% and 13%, respectively (please note that there is a slight margin of error in the percentage calculations because the sum of the total applications for each income category does not equal the actual total count). The overall loan origination rate was 67% and this rate decreased as income decreased. These rates can be expected to continue as banks continue to maintain tightened lending standards in response to the Recession of 2008.
Table 5-8: Disposition of Conventional Home Purchase Loan Applications
Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario MSA
Applicant Income	Total Applications	Percent Originated1	Percent Denied	Percent Other2
Very Low Income (<50% MFI)	4,926	55%	15%	30%
Low Income (50-79% MFI)	9,659	67%	13%	30%
Moderate Income (80-120% MFI)	10,781	70%	12%	18%
Upper Income (>120% MFI)	10,354	70%	12%	18%
All	36,060'	67%	13%	20%
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), 2011
Notes:
1.	“Originated” refers to loans approved by the lender and accepted by the applicant
2.	“Other” includes applications approved but not accepted, files closed for incompleteness, and applications withdrawn.
3.	The total applications for each income category do not sum to equal the total due to unavailability of income data for some applicants.
Another constraint that affects the ability of a household to purchase a home is the cost of the house itself and the costs that are associated with the purchase. In 2012, the median sales price of a home in Norco was reported to be $355,000, with the average listing price at $552,000, according to Truha.com, an online real estate source. While this price is moderate to low for the southern California region, it often exceeds what is considered affordable to the homebuyer. Other factors in home purchasing can constrain a buyer’s ability to qualify for a buyer’s loan such as high escrow costs, mortgage processing, title acquisition, realtor fees, etc. Factors such as homeowner associations, increased tax bills due to special assessment districts, and Mello-Roos districts also affect a potential homebuyer’s ability to qualify for a loan.
2014-2021 Housing Element
75

City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014'2021 Housing Element
76
City of Norco
General Plan
6.	Housing Resources
This section summarizes the land, financial, and administrative resources available for the development and preservation of housing in Norco. The analysis includes an evaluation of the availability of land resources for future housing development; the City’s ability to satisfy its share of the region’s future housing needs, the financial resources available to support housing activities, and the administrative resources available to assist in implementing the City’s housing programs and policies.
6.1 Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
Norco’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the 2014-2021 planning period has been determined by SCAG to be 818 housing units, including 205 units for very low-income households, 136 units for low-income households, 151 units for moderate-income households, and 326 units for above moderate-income households. Of the total number of units allocated for very low income households, approximately 50 percent, or 102 units are assumed to accommodate the need of extremely low income residents.
Table 64: Regional Housing Needs Allocation 2014-2021
Income Group	Number of Units	Percentage
Very Low	205	25%
Low	136	17%
Moderate	151	18%
Above Moderate	326	40%
Total	818	100%
Source: Regional Housing Needs Assessment, SCAG July 2012.
As the City of Norco is almost entirely built out, construction of housing will require a new approach to accommodate future growth. The existing residential zones require large minimum lot sizes and low maximum densities which makes it challenging to accommodate the fair share housing allocation. Infill development is likely to be the best strategy to meet the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA allocation. In selecting infill sites, it is important to select vacant or underutilized sites where mixed use development with a residential component can be accommodated. The following sections will present potential sites to accommodate the remaining housing need.
6.2 Zoning Appropriate to Accommodate Lower Income Housing
Density is a critical factor in the development of affordable housing. In theory, maintaining low densities typically increases the cost of construction per unit, while higher density development lowers the per-unit land cost and facilitates construction in an economy of scale. In addition to
2014-2021 Housing Element
77
City or Norco
General Plan
potential for density bonus provisions, more intense residential development is achieved through a number of mechanisms, including clustering of residential development, and zero lot line development, subject to City development standards. Clustering of housing can produce higher densities on a portion of land while creating space for amenities, and retaining the overall density assignment of the entire property. This method is effective when portions of the property not utilized for residential development can be developed with compatible uses, such as open space/recreation, parks, schools, public facilities, and support commercial. The City's Housing Development Overlay provides the best opportunity for the development of affordable housing.
The State Housing and Community Development Department has deemed affordability as correlated with density. Consequently, HCD has established “default densities” that by definition are considered sufficient to provide market-based incentives for the development of housing for lowerTncome households. For jurisdictions with a population greater than 25,000, that are located within a Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) with a population of more than 2 million the default density is 30 dwelling units per acre. These jurisdictions are known as metropolitan jurisdictions. In contrast, for jurisdictions with a population of less than 25,000, that are located within a Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) with a population of more than 2 million, the default density is 20 dwelling units per acre. These jurisdictions are considered to be suburban jurisdictions.
According to the 2010 Census, the City of Norco has a population of 27,063 residents, and is also located within the Riverside MSA, which has a total population of more than 2 million residents. However, additional information obtained from the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation and the 2010 Census websites reveals that the 2010 Census population count for the City includes approximately 4,905 individuals that were institutionalized in the Norco California Rehabilitation Center (CRC) in Fiscal Year 2009-2010 (see Appendix C). While HCD does not take the institutionalized population of a jurisdiction into account when distributing the RHNA, HCD has confirmed that it is included when assigning default densities. Consequently, in a June 20, 2013 memo addressing the Default Density Standard Option based on the 2010 Census, HCD identified the City of Norco as a metropolitan jurisdiction, which requires a default density of at least 30 dwelling units per acre.
While HCD has identified Norco’s default density as 30 dwelling units per acre for the 2014-2021 planning period, the City contends that the metropolitan default density is not appropriate given the number and percentage of institutionalized individuals housed in the CRC. As the Housing Element is intended to plan for existing and future housing needs in Norco, and taking into account that individuals at the CRC are only temporarily housed there until returning to their permanent homes, it may be inappropriate and unnecessary for the City to take into account this transient population group when assessing long range zoning and land use regulations. To be consistent with the 2010 Census, the FY 2009-2010 population count was obtained for the Norco CRC which shows 4,905 prisoners were incarcerated at that time, which amounts to roughly 18 percent of the City’s total population. If the institutionalized population group were to be removed from the City’s overall population count, the City’s adjusted population is estimated to be approximately 22,158 residents. This would change the City’s classification from a metropolitan to a suburban jurisdiction which requires a default density of 20 dwelling units per acre.
In addition to the analysis presented above, the Norco CRC has been identified by the State as a facility that will close by December 2016 due to State budget cuts (see Appendix C). The closure of this facility would officially change the City’s classification from metropolitan to suburban within the 5th RHNA planning period based on the change in population. As Norco is a
2014-2021 Housing Element
78
City of Norco
General Plan
predominantly built out community known for its equestrian lifestyle it is not expected that growth would otherwise occur resulting in the need for significant additional development.
Despite the information presented above, HCD has maintained that the City must adhere to the default density assigned to them in the June 20, 2013 memo. Consequently, the City has amended the Housing Development Overlay to allow at least 20 dwelling units per acre and up to 30 dwelling units per acre. A density bonus allowing up to 35 units per acre is permitted if a project includes equestrian facilities. The City feels this zoning designation is appropriate to accommodate a variety of housing opportunities while meeting the State mandated default density.
6.3	Availability of Sites for Housing
State law requires that a community provide an adequate number of sites to allow for, and facilitate production of the City’s regional share of housing. To determine whether the City has sufficient land to accommodate its share of regional housing needs for all income groups, the City must identify “adequate sites.” Under State law (California Government Code section 65583 c.l.), adequate sites are those with appropriate zoning and development standards, with services, and facilities, needed to facilitate and encourage the development of a variety of housing for all income levels.
As it was determined in the 2008-2014 Housing Element that Norco did not have a sufficient amount of residentially-zoned, undeveloped land to accommodate their RHNA allocation, the City identified five sites in the Housing Resources Section to accommodate future housing through mixed use development. The five sites identified for potential mixed use projects are located at:
•	Hamner Avenue and Fourth Street (Site 1)
•	Hamner Avenue and Third Street (Site 2)
•	Beacon Hill (Site 3)
•	Southwest corner of Fifth Street and Horseless Carriage Drive (Site 4)
•	Mountain Avenue (Site 5)
During the previous planning period all five sites were rezoned to Housing Development Overlay which allows residential development at 30 dwelling units per acre. As the sites were rezoned, but were not developed during the 2008-2014 planning period, they remain viable sites to accommodate the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA allocation.
6.3.1 Potential Mixed Use Sites
Sites 1 through 5 contain parcels that were previously zoned Commercial General (OG), Heavy Commercial/Fight Manufacturing (M-T), Specific Plan (SP), and Agricultural Eow-Density Residential (A-l-20) and are appropriate to accommodate mixed use and residential projects. To allow for mixed use and high density residential development, the City adopted a General Plan amendment and Zoning Code amendment in 2012 to establish the Housing Development Overlay (HDO) zone. The HDO zone was then applied to the identified properties, permitting mixed use development and requiring the
2014-2021 Housing Element
79
City of Norco
General Plan
development of residential uses. All parcels approved as a HDO zone, were required to meet the requirements for residential development before non-residential uses, as permitted in the underlying zoning, are allowed.
The HDO zone requires residential development allows for the development of residential uses at 30 dwelling units per acre. Specific development and design standards will be created for each site by a HDO Site Plan, subject to the same review process as a Site Plan per Chapter 18.40 (Site Plan Review) of the Norco Municipal Code. To further encourage the development of housing that is affordable to lower income households the City offers a density bonus, allowing up to 35 dwelling units per acre if a proposed HDO Site Plan includes equestrian facilities and/or parkland above the City’s open space requirements. The following maps identify sites within the City that can potentially accommodate mixed use development with a residential component.
63.2	Vacant and Underutilized Sites
State law requires that jurisdictions demonstrate in the Housing Element that the land inventory is adequate to accommodate the jurisdiction’s share of the region’s projected growth. According to Norco’s General Plan Land Use Element, “the City of Norco is approaching buildout, and very little land area remains in the sphere of influence where the City could annex large undeveloped areas.”3 Sites 1 through 5 in the Sites Inventory are predominantly vacant, and have been rezoned to accommodate and encourage development at densities appropriate for lower income housing. Historically, a density of 20 and 30 dwelling units per acre have not been necessary to achieve affordability in multi-unit projects in Norco.
To calculate the number of potential residential units, a potential unit capacity of fifty percent has been applied to all five sites. This reflects that half the site would realistically be developed for residential uses and the other half developed for commercial or mixed uses. Each site rezoned HDO will accommodate residential densities of 30 dwelling units per acre, which is consistent with the HCD default density to accommodate lower income housing in a metropolitan jurisdiction. To further facilitate the development of higher density residential development at least 15 acres of HDO zoned land will be dedicated to exclusively residential uses. This provision was put in place to address the requirements AB 2348 as they applied to the City’s remaining, lower income RHNA from the 2008-2014 planning period. The City will continue to enforce this requirement through the HDO site plan review process.
’ Norco’s General Plan Land Use Element, 2001
2014-2021 Housing Element
80
City of Norco
General Plan
2014'2021 Housing Element
81
City of Norco
[This page intentionally left blank.]
City of Norco
General Plan
2014'2021 Housing Element
83
City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank
2014-2021 Housing Element
84
City of Norco
General Plan
Site 1: Hamner Avenue and Fourth Street
Located in the center of the City, west of Interstate-15, Site 1 is comprised of four vacant parcels totaling 18.6 acres. The site is generally located north of Fourth Street, west of Hamner Avenue, with Town and Country Drive to the north and no formal boundary on the west. There are single family homes located to the east across the Interstate, and a mix of commercial, office and business park uses surrounding the entire site. The site was previously zoned General Commercial and was rezoned in 2012 to the new Housing Development Overlay (HDO) zone. In November 2007, a developer purchased the site from Caltrans; however, to date no formal proposals have been presented to develop the site.
In 2012, the HDO zone was applied to the site allowing and encouraging the development of a mix of residential and commercial uses. Assuming that fifty percent of the site will be developed as residential units at a minimum density of 20 dwelling units per acre approximately 186 units can be accommodated on site. As this site was included in the 2008-2014 Housing Resources section but not developed during the previous planning period, the City have included the site as viable to accommodate their 2014-2021 RHNA allocation. It is likely that given the proposed density that this site is appropriate to accommodate a portion of the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA allocation of 492 units. Site 1 is entirely vacant and located in the center of the City along a prominent arterial roadway. This site is ideal for the development of affordable housing based on its proximately to City Hall, the DMV, a US Post Office, the Department of Social Sendees, and a number of retail businesses.
To encourage and facilitate the development of affordable housing on Site 1, the City has the ability to offer potential developers a menu of incentives including: development fee modifications, fast track processing, density bonus incentives, reductions in development standards, and funding for off-site improvements, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for these regulatory and financial incentives will be provided through available CDBG and HOME funds. The City will also prioritize funding for projects that incorporate units for extremely low income households. Table 6-2 provides detailed information on the parcels that are identified as part of Site 1.
Table 6-2: Site 1 - Hamner Avenue and Fourth Street
APN	General Plan/Zoning	Acres	Proposed Density	Potential Unit Capacity*	Status
129-230-033	HDO	5.4	20 du/ac	54	Vacant
129-230-034	HDO	4.4	20 du/ac	44	Vacant
129-230-036	HDO	6.4	20 du/ac	64	Vacant
129-230-037	HDO	2.4	20 du/ac	24	Vacant
Total		18.6		186	
Note: Development capacity for the site is assumed to be 50% residential.
2014-2021 Housing Element
85
City of Norco
General Plan
Site 2: Hamner Avenue and Third Street
Located in the center of the City, along Hamner Avenue and 3rd Street, Site 2 is an 18.4 acre site with great potential for mixed use development. The site is loosely bordered by Third Street to the north, Hamner Avenue to the east, a flood control channel to the south, with no formal boundary on the west. The site was previously zoned Specific Plan with underlying Commercial General zoning, but was rezoned in 2012 to the new Housing Development Overlay (HDO) zone. The Norco Auto Mall Specific Plan was also amended to apply the HDO zone to the three identified parcels.
In 2012 the Housing Development Overlay zone was applied to the site to facilitate and encourage the development of a mix of residential and commercial uses. Assuming that fifty percent of the site will be developed as residential units at proposed density of 20 dwelling units per acre approximately 184 units can be accommodated on site. As this site was included in the 2008-2014 Housing Resources section but not developed during the previous planning period, the City have included the site as viable to accommodate their 2014-2021 RHNA allocation. It is likely that given the proposed density that this site is appropriate to accommodate a portion of the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA allocation of 482 units. Site 2 is currently vacant and located within the Norco Auto Mall Specific Plan. This site is ideal for the development of affordable housing as it is located in walking distance to the Riverside Community College - Norco campus, employment opportunities at the auto dealerships as well as restaurants and other retail businesses.
To encourage and facilitate the development of affordable housing on Site 2, the City has the ability to offer potential developers a menu of incentives including: development fee modifications, fast track processing, density bonus incentives, reductions in development standards, and funding for off-site improvements, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for these regulatory and financial incentives will be provided through available CDBG and HOME funds. The City will also prioritize funding for projects that incorporate units for extremely low income households. Table 6-3 provides detailed information on the parcels that are identified as part of Site 2.
Table 6-3: Site 2 - Hamner Avenue and Third Street
APN	General Plan/Zoning	Acres	Proposed Density	Potential Unit Capacity*	Status
126-050-002	Specific Plan -HDO	7.9	20 du/ac	79	Vacant
126-050-004	Specific Plan -HDO	8.2	20 du/ac	82	Vacant
129-380-010	Specific Plan - HDO	2.3	20 du/ac	24	Vacant
Total		18.4		184	
Note: Development capacity for the site is assumed to be 50% residential.
2014-2021 Housing Element
86
City of Norco
General Plan
Site 3: Beacon Hill
Site 3 consists of two vacant, contiguous parcels totaling approximately 19.4 acres. Located in the northern portion of the City near Interstate-15, Site 3 is a sloped site not visible from the Hamner Avenue commercial corridor. The site is bordered by Norconian Drive on the west, Norco Drive on the north with no formal existing boundaries on the east or south. The two parcels are both irregularly shaped and surrounded primarily by single family homes and several established religious institutions. The northern most parcel fronting Norco Drive was previously zoned Commercial General while the southwestern parcel fronting Norconian Drive is zoned Agricultural Low Density (20,000 sq ft minimum lot size).
In 2012, the Housing Development Overlay zone was applied to the site facilitating the development of a mix of residential and commercial uses. Assuming that fifty percent of the site will be developed as residential units at a maximum density of 20 dwelling units per acre approximately 194 units can be accommodated on site. As this site was included in the 2008-2014 Housing Resources section but not developed during the previous planning period, the City have included the site as viable to accommodate their 2014-2021 RHNA allocation. It is likely that given the proposed density that this site is appropriate to accommodate a portion of the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA allocation of 482 units. This site is ideal for the development of affordable housing as it is located near several community parks, Highland Elementary School and along Hamner Avenue and lnterstate-15 providing crucial access to jobs and services in the City and the region.
To encourage and facilitate the development of affordable housing on Site 3, the City has the ability to offer the new land owners a menu of incentives including: development fee modifications, fast track processing, density bonus incentives, reductions in development standards, and funding for off-site improvements, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for these regulatory and financial incentives will be provided through available CDI3G and HOME funds. The City will also prioritize funding for projects that incorporate units for extremely low income households. Table 6.4 provides detailed information on the parcels that are identified as part of Site 3.
Table 6-4: Site 3 - Beacon Hill
APN	General Plan	Zoning	Acres	Proposed Density	Potential Unit Capacity*	Status
130-240-021	Community Commercial	Commercial General	7.2	20 du/ac	72	V acant
130-240-023	Residential Agricultural	Agricultural -Low Density	12.2	20 du/ac	122	V acant
Total			19.4		194	
Note: Development capacity for the site is assumed to be 50°/o residential.
2014-2021 Housing Element
87
City of Norco
General Plan
Site 4: Fifth Street and Horseless Carriage Drive
Site 4 is a vacant, single parcel totaling 22.9 acres, situated in the center of the City west of Interstate-15 and east of Lake Norconian. Located on the southwest corner of Fifth Street and Horseless Carriage Drive the site was previously zoned Heavy Commercial/Light Manufacturing (M-l) and is adjacent to the Naval Surface Warfare Center. The City in recent years identified the site as a transition area from industrial to commercial uses and has, in light of the need for housing, identified the site as ideal for mixed use development.
In 2012 the Housing Development Overlay zone was applied to the site to facilitate and encourage the development of a mix of residential and commercial uses. Assuming that fifty percent of the site will be developed as residential units at a maximum density of 20 dwelling units per acre approximately 229 units can be accommodated on site. As this site was included in the 2008-2014 Housing Resources section but not developed during the previous planning period, the City have included the site as viable to accommodate their 2014-2021 RHNA allocation. It is likely that given the proposed density that this site is appropriate to accommodate a portion of the City’s 2014-2021RHNA allocation of 482 units. This site is ideal for the development of affordable housing as there are a number of sendees and businesses in walking distance including the Department of Social Services, City Hall, the DMV, a US Post Office, as well as a number of retail businesses.
To encourage and facilitate the development of affordable housing on Site 4, the City has the ability to offer the new land owners a menu of incentives including: development fee modifications, fast track processing, density bonus incentives, reductions in development standards, and funding for off-site improvements, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for these regulatory' and financial incentives will be provided through available CDBG and HOME funds. The City will also prioritize funding for projects that incorporate units for extremely low income households. Table 6-5 provides detailed information on the parcels that are identified as part of Site 4.
Table 6-5: Site 4 - Fifth Street and Horseless Carriage Drive
APN	General Plan	Zoning	Acres	Proposed Density	Potential Unit Capacity*	Status
129-200-011	Industrial	Commercial Transition Overlay	22.9	20 du/ac	229	Vacant
Total			22.9		229	
Note: Development capacity for the site is assumed to be 50% residential.
2014-2021 Housing Element
88
City of Norco
General Plan
Site 5: Mountain Avenue
The final site identified in the sites inventory includes fifteen vacant and underutilized parcels in the Gateway Specific Plan area along Mountain Avenue between Second and First Streets. The parcels identified as Site 5 are primarily owned by the Norco Egg Ranch whose distribution facilities are predominantly located northwest of the site. When the Egg Ranch was originally developed, the area was dominated by agricultural uses. However, through the years, the City has experienced significant growth, and the site is now surrounded by residential and commercial uses. Consequently, the Norco Egg Ranch has indicated to City Staff that they will be relocating their facilities to a less urban area, outside of the City. The property owners have also initiated talks with the City regarding the redevelopment of the site with mixed uses. A mix of uses would be most compatible with the existing residential uses on the west and north and will also help transition existing uses into the business parks located along Hamner to the east. All identified parcels were previously zoned for industrial development within the Gateway Specific Plan, but were rezoned Housing Development Overlay in 2012.
The total acreage of the site is approximately 22.4 acres with at least 12.0 acres of vacant, undeveloped land and 10.4 acres of underutilized land. The actual amount of vacant land is even greater as the majority of the parcels contain older, ranch style, single family ranch-style homes on small portions of the lot with significant areas of open, undeveloped land. In 2012 the Housing Development Overlay zone was applied to the site facilitating the development of a mix of residential and commercial uses. Assuming that fifty percent of the site will be developed as residential units at a maximum density of 20 dwelling units per acre approximately 224 units can be accommodated on site As this site was included in the 2008-2014 Housing Resources section but not developed during the previous planning period, the City have included the site as viable to accommodate their 2014-2021 RHNA allocation. It is likely that given the proposed density that this site is appropriate to accommodate a portion of the City’s 2014-2021RHNA allocation of 482 units.
As Site 5 is the only site in the inventor)7 that includes underutilized properties, information has been provided about existing structures on the eight developed parcels. A visual survey was performed and photos with written descriptions of the current conditions by parcel are provided in the following pages. This site offers great potential for redevelopment as many of the parcels contain older or abandoned single family homes which can be combined through the City’s lot consolidation program, to accommodate a larger development. Site 5 is also ideal for lower income housing, in that is it situated close to major roadways with transit options and several large commercial centers offering goods, sendees and employment opportunities.
To encourage and facilitate the development of affordable housing on Site 5, the City has the ability to offer land owners a menu of incentives including: development fee modifications, fast track processing, density bonus incentives, reductions in development standards, and funding for off-site improvements, as indicated in the Housing Plan. Funding for these regulatory and financial incentives will be provided through available CDBG and HOME funds. The City will also prioritize funding for projects that incorporate units for extremely low income households. Table 6-6 provides detailed information on the parcels that are identified as part of Site 5. The aerial image below and the following parcel descriptions provide an overview of the uses on the entire site.
2014-2021 Housing Element
89
City of Norco
General Plan
Site 5: Aerial Map of Vacant and Underutilized Sites
2014-2021 Housing Element
90
City of Norco
General Plan
Table 6-6: Site 5 ' Mountain Avenue
Parcel ID No.	APN	General Plan/Zoning	Acres	Proposed Density	Potential Unit Capacity*	Status
1	126-210-003	Gateway Specific Plan -HDO	1.0	20 du/ac	10	Vacant
2	126-210-004	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	1.0	20 du/ac	10	Vacant
3	126-210-005	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	1.0	20 du/ac	10	Vacant
4	126-210-006	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	1.0	20 du/ac	10	Underutilized/Marginal (Single family ranch)
5	126-210-007	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	1.0	20 du/ac	10	Vacant
6	126-210-008	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	1.0	20 du/ac	10	Underutilized/Marginal (Single family ranch)
7	126-210-009	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	1.0	20 du/ac	10	Underutilized/Marginal (Single family ranch)
8	126-210-010	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	3.0	20 du/ac	30	U nderutilized/Marginal (Single family ranch; agricultural warehouse)
9	126-240-001	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	2.0	20 du/ac	20	Vacant
10	126-240-002	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	1.0	20 du/ac	10	Vacant
11	126-240-003	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	2.0	20 du/ac	20	Underutilized (Contractor office, storage yard)
12	126-240-004	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	5.0	20 du/ac	50	Vacant
13	126-240-006	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	0.6	20 du/ac	6	Underutilized/Marginal (Single family ranch)
14	126-240-005	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	0.6	20 du/ac	6	Underutilized/Marginal (Storage yard)
15	126-240-007	Gateway Specific Plan-HDO	1.2	20 du/ac	12	Underutilized/Marginal (Single family ranch)
	Total		22.4		224	
*Note: Development capacity for the site is assumed to be 50% residential.
2014-2021 Housing Element
91
City of Norco
General Plan
Parcel No. 4 (APN 126-210-006)
Heading south along the east side of Mountain Avenue, Parcel No. 4 is approximately 1 acre in size with one vacant, non-conforming, residential structure situated at the front of the parcel, fronting Mountain Avenue. The rear half of the parcel is vacant with no existing structures. This property is considered underutilized and ready for redevelopment within the planning period.
Parcel No. 6 and 7 (APN 126-210-008 and 126-210-009)
Located centrally along the east side of Mountain Avenue, Parcels 6 and 7 total approximately 2 acres with two, nonconforming, single family homes on-site. The homes front Mountain Avenue with significant, undeveloped area in the rear of each parcel. The homes are older, in need of renovations, and possibly uninhabited. This property is considered to be underutilized and ready for redevelopment within the planning period.
2014-2021 Housing Element
92
City of Norco
General Plan
Parcel No. 8 (APN 126-210-010)
Also located on the eastern side of Mountain Avenue, Parcel No. 8 totals approximately 3 acres and is primarily undeveloped with one vacant Norco Egg Ranch structure and a non-conforming, single-family home situated at the front of the site near Mountain Avenue. At least half of the parcel is vacant and undeveloped, while the developed portions are unused. As the Norco Egg Ranch is proposing to relocate to a new jurisdiction, this parcel is a key opportunity site for high density residential and mixed use development. This property is considered to be underutilized and ready for redevelopment within the planning period.
2014-2021 Housing Element
93
City of Norco
General Plan
Parcel No. 11 (APN 126-240-003)
Parcel No. 11 is located in the southern half of Site 5 and totals approximately 2 acres. At the front of the parcel is a newly developed office building with a storage yard located in the rear. The storage yard located on the back half of the parcel is not paved and is not an approved use. It is likely, when this parcel is redeveloped into mixed use that the office building would remain and would be considered the primary7 non-residential use on the site. The remainder of the site would then be utilized for residential development.
Parcel No. 13 and 14 (APN 126-240-006 and 126-240-005)
At the southern end of Site 5 are Parcels 13 and 14, totaling 1.2 acres, and housing a mix of nonconforming uses. Located on Parcel 21 which is situated along Mountain Avenue is a non-conforming residential structure. Parcel 13 is situated east of, or behind, Parcel 14 and currently houses an informal, non-conforming junk/storage yard. Both uses are incompatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The parcels would be better utilized as a site for high density residential and mixed use development. Both parcels are considered to be underutilized and ready for redevelopment within the planning period.


2014-2021 Housing Element
94
City of Norco
General Plan
Parcel No. 15 (APN 126-240-007)
Located at the southeastern end of Site 5 is Parcel 15, the final underutilized parcel included as an opportunity site. This parcel is approximately 1.2 acres in size with two, non-conforming, residential structures situated near Mountain Avenue. There is a significant amount of vacant land at the back of the parcel. Pending redevelopment, these single family homes could be relocated and the property could be redeveloped with mixed use and high density residential uses. This property is considered to be underutilized and ready for redevelopment within the planning period.

2014'2021 Housing Element
95
City of Norco
General Plan
63.3	Comparison of Sites Inventory and RHNA (Summary)
As outlined in the previous section, the City was assigned a RHNA allocation of 818 units for the 2014-2021 planning period. To accommodate the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA, the sites inventory includes 5 sites that are zoned Housing Development Overlay which allows for densities of 30 dwelling units per acre. Table 6-7 provides detailed site information showing how the housing opportunity sites can accommodate the City’s remaining RHNA allocation.
Table 6-7: Residential Unit Capacity on HDO Zoned Sites
Site	Acres	Proposed Density	Potential Unit Capacity
1: Hamner Avenue and Fourth Street	18.6	20 du/ac	186
2: Hamner Avenue and Third Street	18.4	20 du/ac	184
3: Beacon Hill	19.4	20 du/ac	194
4: Fifth Street and Horseless Carriage Drive	22.9	20 du/ac	229
5: Gateway Specific Plan	22.4	20 du/ac	224
Total Units Accommodated	101.7		1,017
As shown in Table 6-7, the five identified sites are more than able to accommodate the City’s remaining RHNA allocation of 818 units. The five sites combined are able to accommodate 1,017 units at a conservative minimum density of 20 units per acre, which is permitted and encouraged through the application of the Housing Development Overlay zone. The Housing Plan also includes a specific program ensuring that sites are available exclusively for residential uses.
In addition to the sites that been identified to accommodate housing, the City has implemented housing programs to address housing needs in the City. The City offers rehabilitation funds to qualified residents to repair their homes along with deferred loans to assist persons with disabilities to make repairs to their homes. Also, the City’s Infill Housing Program, managed by the City Housing Division, acquires vacant land and constructs housing to be sold to qualifying low-income families. The City has also made many efforts to address housing needs given the City’s lack of unavailable land to construct new housing.
6.3.4 Environmental Constraints
Potential environmental constraints to future development of sites identified include the Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP) and seismic and flooding hazards, which are addressed in the Non-Governmental Constraints Section of the Housing Element. Locations identified in the Sites Inventory were compared with all hazards maps included in the City’s Safety Element; none were found to be within areas that have development restrictions due to risk of damage from disasters (such as floods, wildfires, or seismic events). The sites inventoried have a commercial or residential land use designation which was determined based on surrounding land uses and has already
2014-2021 Housing Element
96
City of Norco
General Plan
examined potential environmental constraints. Aside from the constraints mentioned above, there are little additional constraints that would impede the development of new housing units in the future on the identified sites.
6.3.5	Infrastructure
The City’s five year Capital Improvement Plan has identified expenditures of City funds used for public improvement projects, including infrastructure. The City understands that improvements can be achieved with a comprehensive approach that includes reviewing infrastructure plans for each application for discretionary approval of General Plan amendments, tentative parcel tract maps, or developments proposals that includes extension of an existing street or construction of a new street. The City requires that project applications for new development be reviewed for adequate infrastructure. Applications are reviewed on a case-by-case basis to ensure there is the capacity to service new developments. Infrastructure requirements and costs are discussed in the Non-Governmental Constraints Section of the Housing Element.
Improvements to the City’s sewer system are of importance. Due to the rural development trend in Norco, many homes were built with septic tanks instead of being connected to the City sewer system. A concern with septic tanks is contamination of ground water from deteriorating septic tanks. The City has passed an ordinance requiring that new homes built must be connected to the City’s sewer system and existing homes upon sell to a new owner must be connected to the City’s sewer system if the home is within 200 feet of a sewer line. If new residential projects are constructed on the above mentioned sites, the project will be required to be connected to the City sewer system.
6.4	Financial Resources
A variety of federal, state, and local programs are available to create and/or maintain rental and purchase affordability for lower income households and for persons with special needs. These programs are also available to other jurisdictions for potential acquisition, subsidy, or replacement of units at-risk. The following summarizes financial resources available to the City, private, and non-profit parties to preserve/create housing that is affordable.
Programs that may be of use in Norco are listed below. Information related to these programs will be updated annually and made available by the City of Norco.
6.4.1 Federal Programs
•	Community Development Block Grant Program (CDBG) - This program is intended to enhance and preserve the City’s affordable housing stock. Funds are awarded to the City on a formula basis for housing activities. Eligible activities include acquisition, rehabilitation, economic development, and public sendees. CDBG grants benefit primarily households with incomes not exceeding 80 percent of the County median family income.
•	HOME Investment Partnership - HOME funding is a flexible grant program which is awarded to Norco on a formula basis for housing activities which takes into account local market conditions, inadequate housing, poverty and housing production costs. HOME funding is provided to jurisdictions to either assist rental housing or home ownership
2014-2021 Housing Element
97
City of Norco
General Plan
through acquisition, construction, reconstruction and/or rehabilitation of affordable housing. Tenant-based rental assistance, property acquisition, site improvements, expenses related to the provision of affordable housing, and projects that serve a group identified as having special needs related to housing are also available.
•	Section 8 Rental Assistance Program - This program provides rental assistance payments to owners of private market-rate units on behalf of very low-income tenants.
•	Section811/202 Program - Non-profit organizations and consumer cooperatives are eligible to receive no interest capital advances from HUD for the construction of very low-income rental housing for senior citizens and disabled persons. Project-based assistance is also provided in conjunction with this program. Section 811 can be used to develop group homes, independent living facilities, and intermediate care facilities. Eligible activities include acquisition, rehabilitation, new construction, and rental assistance.
•	Emergency Shelter Grant (ESG) Program Funds emergency shelters, sendees and transitional housing for homeless individuals and families.
•	Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP) Funds - Provide funds to purchase abandoned and foreclosed homes and residential property.
•	Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA) - HOPWA is an entitlement grant distributed to the largest jurisdiction in each county. HOPWA funds may be used for a wide range of housing, social sendees, program planning, and development costs. These include, but are not limited to, the acquisition, rehabilitation, or new construction of housing units; costs for facility operations; rental assistance; and short-term payments to prevent homelessness. HOPWA funds also may be used for health care and mental health services, chemical dependency treatment, nutritional services, case management, assistance with daily living, and other supportive services.
•	Supportive Housing Program - Provides funding to develop supportive housing and sendees that will allow homeless persons to live as independently as possible. Grants under the Supportive Housing Program are awarded through a national competition held annually.
•	Choice Neighborhoods Grants - Funds to address distressed neighborhoods and public and assisted projects to transform them into viable and sustainable mixed-income neighborhoods by linking housing improvements with appropriate sendees, schools, public assets, transportation, and access to jobs. Planning grants and implementation grants are available.
6.4.2	State Programs
•	California Housing Finance Agency (CalHFA) - CalHFA sells tax exempt bonds for below market rate loans to first-time homebuyers. The program operates through participating lenders who originate loans for CalHFA purchase.
•	Low-Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC) - Tax credits available to individuals and corporations that invest in low-income rental housing. Tax credits sold to people with high tax liability, and proceeds are used to create housing.
•	Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods (BEGIN) - Grants to cities to provide down payment assistance (up to $30,000) to low and moderate income first-time homebuyers of new homes in projects with affordability enhanced by local regulatory incentives or barrier reductions.
2014-2021 Housing Element
98
City of Norco
General Plan
•	CalHome - Grants to cities and non-profit developers to offer homebuyer assistance, including down payment assistance, rehabilitation, acquisition/rehabilitation, and homebuyer counseling. Loans to developers for property acquisition, site development, predevelopment and construction period expenses for homeownership projects.
•	Multifamily Housing Program (MHP) - Deferred payment loans for new construction, rehabilitation, and preservation of rental housing. Administered by HCD.
•	Transit-Oriented Development Housing Program - Under the program, low-interest loans are available as gap financing for rental housing developments that include affordable units, and as mortgage assistance for homeownership developments. In addition, grants are available to cities, counties, and transit agencies for infrastructure improvements necessary for the development of specified housing developments, or to facilitate connections between these developments and the transit station.
•	Infill Incentive Grant Program - Funding of public infrastructure (water, sewer, traffic, parks, site clean-up, etc) to facilitate infill housing development. One funding round annually.
•	Infill Infrastructure Grant Program (IIG) - Provides grants for infrastructure construction and rehabilitation to support higher-density affordable and mixed-income housing in infill locations.
•	Multifamily Housing Program - Provides funding for new construction, rehabilitation, or acquisition and rehabilitation of permanent or transitional rental housing, and the conversion of nonresidential structures to rental housing. Projects are not eligible if construction has commenced as of the application date, or if they are receiving 9% federal low income housing tax credits. Eligible costs include the cost of child care, after-school care and social service facilities integrally linked to the assisted housing units; real property acquisition; refinancing to retain affordable rents; necessary onsite and offsite improvements; reasonable fees and consulting costs; and capitalized reserves.
•	Predevelopment Loan Program (PDLP) - Provides predevelopment capital to finance the start of low income housing projects.
•	CalHFA Mental Health Services Act Funds	- Jointly administered by the California
Department of Mental Health and the California Housing Finance Agency on behalf of counties, the Program offers permanent financing and capitalized operating subsidies for the development of permanent supportive housing, including both rental and shared housing, to serve persons with serious mental illness and their families who are homeless or at risk of homelessness. MHSA Housing Program funds wiU be allocated for the development, acquisition, construction, and/or rehabilitation of permanent supportive housing.
•	CalHFA New Issue Bond Program (NIBP) - Provides affordable housing bond funding to CalHFA and other housing finance agencies. This funding allows developers to secure a source of affordable financing in the marketplace which otherwise could not be obtained.
•	Golden State Acquisition Fund (GSAF) - Affordable Housing Innovation Program (AHIP): provides loans for developers through a nonprofit fund manager to provide quick acquisition financing for the development or preservation of affordable housing.
•	Emergency Housing and Assistance Program Operating Facility Grants (EHAP) -Provides operating facility grants for emergency shelters, transitional housing projects, and supportive services for homeless individuals and families.
2014-2021 Housing Element
99
City of Norco
General Plan
•	Emergency Housing and Assistance Program Capital Development (EHAPCD) - Funds capital development activities for emergency shelters, transitional housing, and safe havens that provide shelter and supportive services for homeless individuals and families.
•	Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) Program - Funds projects that serve homeless individuals and families with supportive services, emergency shelter/transitional housing, assisting persons at risk of becoming homeless with homelessness prevention assistance, and providing permanent housing to the homeless population. The Homeless Emergency Assistance and Rapid Transition to Housing (HEARTH) Act of 2009 places new emphasis on assisting people to quickly regain stability in permanent housing after experiencing a housing crisis and/or homelessness.
6.4.3	Local Programs
•	Riverside County Mortgage Credit Certificate Program (MCC) - Income tax credits available to first-time homebuyers for the purchase of new or existing single-family housing. Local agencies make certificates available.
•	Riverside County Mortgage Revenue Bond - Bonds used to finance the development of multifamily housing for lower- and moderate-income households.
•	Home Improvement Grant - Run by Riverside County, funding is available for exterior and/or interior repairs and improvements costing up to $10,000 for homeowners that are over age 62, or households where the head of household or spouse are handicapped or disabled.
6.4.4	Administrative Resources
• City of Norco Planning Division - The primary responsibility of the Planning Division is the long-range planning and physical development of the City to promote livability and appearance. The division ensures the City’s viability through enforcement of land use, construction, health, safety, and environmental regulations. This involves land use and development standards, building codes, economic vitality, and adherence to the General Plan. It is also responsible for the administration of the General Plan and implementation of the Zoning Code and Specific Plans.
6.4.5	Private Resources/Financing Programs
•	Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) Fixed rate mortgages issued by private mortgage insurers; mortgages which fund the purchase and rehabilitation of a home; low downpayment mortgages for homes in underserved areas.
•	National Housing Trust - The Green Affordable Housing Preservation Loan fund through the National Housing Trust Provides below market predevelopment and interim development loans to affordable housing developers who seek to incorporate green building techniques when rehabilitating existing affordable housing. Under the program, a portion of the loan will be forgiven when the developer demonstrates that they have incorporated practical, environmentally friendly design elements in the property's rehabilitation plan.
2014-2021 Housing Element
100
City of Norco
General Plan
•	California Community Foundation - Provides support for general operating of existing nonprofit affordable housing developers, with the focus on supporting the development and preservation of permanent affordable housing.
•	MacArthur Foundation - Preserving Affordable Rental Housing Program is a $150 million initiative that seeks to preserve and improve affordable rental housing.
•	Local banks - Thanks to the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977, commercial banks are required to “meet the credit needs'1 of all the areas from which they draw deposits. They usually do this through belowmarket loans to both developers and qualified low-income homebuyers, and grants to community development nonprofits. Many banks have set up a separate community development division, and partner with local organizations that provide services like homeownership counseling to their borrowers. Larger banks often have a separate foundation to handle the grants.
2014-2021 Housing Element
101
City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014'2021 Housing Element
102
City of Norco
General Plan
7.	Progress Report
State law establishes a eight-year cycle regulating housing element updates. In compliance with the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) cycle, the Norco Housing Element was updated for the 2008-2014 planning period, and submitted for review and certification by the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). The Element was certified by HCD in March of 2012. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65588 local governments shall review their 2008-2014Housing Element and evaluate the following:
1.	The progress of the City or County in the implementation of the housing element;
2.	The effectiveness of the housing element in attainment of the community’s housing goals and objectives; and
3.	The appropriateness of the housing goals, objectives, and policies in contributing to the attainment of the State housing goal.
For the 2008-2014 planning period, the City established 7 specific goals related to housing:
1.	Conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock.
2.	Assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of low and moderate-income households.
3.	Identify adequate housing sites which will be made available through appropriate zoning and development standards and with public services and facilities needed to encourage the development of a variety of types of housing for all income groups.
4.	Address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing that is consistent with the Land Use Element.
5.	Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, or color.
6.	Encourage residential energy conservation.
The following table reviews the continued progress in implementation, the effectiveness of the Housing Element, and the appropriateness of the City’s housing goals since 2008.
2014-2021 Housing Element
103
City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014-2021 Housing Element
104
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 1: Promote and maintain the City’s small-plot agricultural and animal-keeping lifestyle.	
Policy 1.1 Animal-Keeping Policy: Housing program and subsequent projects and regulations will be evaluated on the basis of protecting and enhancing an animal-keeping lifestyle.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 1.1.1: All new single-family subdivisions shall have a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet. Timing: By the end of 2013 Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: During the previous planning period, the City established development standards that ensure that all newly created subdivisions consist of a minimum of 20,000 square feet. Effectiveness: The City’s Zoning Code mandates that all new single family agricultural/residential lots have a minimum lot size of 20,000 sq. ft., and some residential zones require a minimum lot size greater than 20,000 sq. ft. Zones greater than 20,000 sq. ft are: •	The Agricultural Estate (A-E) zone requires a minimum lot size of 40,000 sq. ft. •	The Agricultural Low-Density (A-l) zone has three separate zones requiring minimum lot sizes of 10 acres, 20,000 sq. ft. and 40,000 sq. ft. •	Residential lots in the Hillside (HS) zone require a minimum lot size of 20,000 sq. ft. Appropriateness: To maintain the rural atmosphere of Norco, the Zoning Code set forth standards to require minimum lot sizes that arc 20,000 sq. ft. or greater in most residential zones. The City will continue to maintain this rural atmosphere through requiring lot sizes that are approximately 20,000 sq. ft. or greater. This action will be combined with Action 1.1.2 and Action 1.1.3 and will be continued in the 2014-2021 Housing Plan focusing on the preservation of the animal-keeping and small-plot agricultural character of the existing community,
Action 1.1.2: All residential lots, with the exception of special redevelopment infill parcels for low and moderate-income families, shall have minimum lot depths of 200 feet to allow appropriate yard area for the keeping of large animals. Timing: By the end of 2013 Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: Minimum lot depths are applied to all residential development to preserve the rural atmosphere of residential communities in the City. The City does not apply this requirement to identified infill and growth areas, including the sites identified in the Housing Resources section. Effectiveness: Due to staff reductions and budget cuts, Staff was unable to update the Zoning Code to require all residential zones to have a minimum lot depth of 200 feet. Currently, the A-l zone require a minimum lot depth of 200 feet, the A-2 zone requires a minimum lot depth of 240 feet, and the A-E zone requires a lot depth of 150 feet. The R-l and Residential Multi-Family (R-3) zones require a minimum lot depth of 100 feet. Although Staff was unable to officially update the Zoning Code during the previously planning period, all newly created single family lots within the A-l, A-2 and A-E zones achieved a minimum depth of 200 feet. Appropriateness: To maintain the rural atmosphere of Norco, the City will continue to maintain this rural atmosphere by requiring a minimum lot depth of 200 feet in zones that are intended for agriculture and animal keeping. This action will be combined with Action 1.1.1 and Action 1.1.3 and will be continued in the 2014-2021 Housing Plan focusing on the preservation of the animal-keeping and small-plot agricultural character of the existing community,
2014-2021 Housing Element
105
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 1: Promote and maintain the City’s small-plot agricultural and animal-keeping lifestyle.	
Policy 1.2 Agricultural Policy: Housing programs and subsequent projects and regulations will be appraised on the basis of maintaining, protecting, and enhancing the small-plot agricultural lifestyle.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 1.2.1: All residential lots, with the exception of special redevelopment infill parcels for low and moderate-income families, shall have minimum lot depths of 200 feet to allow appropriate yard area for the practice of small plot agriculture. With adoption of a specific plan, primary animal keeping areas can be established on each individual lot in place of requiring the standard 200 foot lot depth, so as to still encourage the small-plot agricultural lifestyle. Timing: By the end of 2013 Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: As stated previously in Action 1.1.2, minimum lot depths are applied to all residential development and Specific Plans to preserve the rural atmosphere in the City. Effectiveness: Due to staff reductions and budget cuts, Staff was unable to update the Zoning Code to require all residential zones to have a minimum lot depth of 200 feet. Currently, the A-l zone require a minimum lot depth of 200 feet, the A-2 zone requires a minimum lot depth of 240 feet, and the A-E zone requires a lot depth of 150 feet. The R-l and Residential Multi-Family (R-3) zones require a minimum lot depth of 100 feet. Although Staff was unable to officially update the Zoning Code during the previously planning period, all newly created single family lots within the A-l, A-2 and A-E zones achieved a minimum depth of 200 feet. Appropriateness: To maintain the rural atmosphere of Norco, the City will continue to maintain this rural atmosphere by requiring a minimum lot depth of 200 feet in zones that are intended for agriculture and animal keeping. This action will be combined with Action 1.1.1 and Action 1.1.2 and will be continued in the 2014-2021 Housing Plan focusing on the preservation of the animal-keeping and small-plot agricultural character of the existing community,
2014-2021 Housing Element
106
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 1: Promote and maintain the City’s small-plot agricultural and animal-keeping lifestyle.	
Policy 1.3 Public Service Policy: Ensure that the level of public sendees to residential areas of the City is based on anticipated population projections with the goal of protecting the environment.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 1.3.1: AU new residential construction shall include the necessary infrastructure to provide sendees concurrent with City standards, including a lateral connection to the City’s sewer system for each single lot that is developed with a home. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014 Responsibility: Engineering Department, Riverside County Health Department, Economic Development Agency.	Progress: During the previous planning period, as applications were processed the City required and verified that all new residential construction would be connected to the City’s sewer system. The City has an established ordinance that specifically mandates that all new construction connect to the City’s existing sewer system. Effectiveness: From 2006 to 2012, approximately 27 residential units were constructed, aU of which were connected to the existing infrastructure system. During the planning period, the City also encouraged existing households to utilize the City’s sewer rebate/loan programs low interest loans to complete infrastructure upgrades. Appropriateness: The City will continue to require all new construction to connect to existing systems or to provide new infrastructure to avoid the use of septic tanks and other private disposal systems. This program will be combined with Action 1.3.2 and will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
107
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 1: Promote and maintain the City’s small-plot agricultural and animal-keeping lifestyle.	
Policy 1.3 Public Service Policy: Ensure that the level of public sendees to residential areas of the City is based on anticipated population projections with the goal of protecting the environment.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 1.3.2: Any residential unit not currently hooked up to the sewer system shall be required to install a lateral sewer line connection to the system prior to the sale of the property in question where a sewer main exist near the property. Qualified residents are encouraged to use the HIP or Sewer Loan Program, which provide the necessary financing for low- and moderate-income households. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014 Responsibility: Engineering Department, Riverside County Health Department, Economic Development Agency.	Progress: During the previous planning period, as applications were processed the City required and verified that all new residential construction would be connected to the City’s sewer system. The City has an established Ordinance 14.07.100 that specifically mandates that all new construction connect to the City’s existing sewer system. The City also offered two programs to reduce the number of housing units using a septic system. The Home Improvement Program (HIP) offers a Deferred Loan that can be used to assist households that do not exceed 80 percent of the median income for Riverside County. Second, the Sewer Connection Loan Program has three sewer connection/rebate programs: 1)	The CRA Sewer Loan Program offers assistance of a 3 percent interest loan for households that do not exceed 120 percent of the Riverside County median income. 2)	The City Sewer Loan Program assists households whose income exceeds the 120 percent limit of the CRA-funded program. 3)	The Sewer Assessment Rebate Program offers reimbursement of homeowners of Low-Mod income for a 20-year tax assessment levied to construct the sewer lateral in the street. This bond expires in fiscal year 2008-09 and will be discontinued upon expiration of the bond. Effectiveness: From 2006 to 2012, approximately 27 residential units were constructed, all of which were connected to the existing infrastructure system. During the planning period, the City also encouraged existing households to utilize the City’s sewer rebate/loan programs low interest loans to complete infrastructure upgrades. Since 2006, 45 households have been assisted through the HIP Deferred Loan Program; and 280 households have been assisted through the City’s Sewer Loan Program. Appropriateness: The City will continue to require all new construction to connect to existing systems or to provide new infrastructure to avoid the use of septic tanks and other private disposal systems. This program will be combined with Action 1.3.1 and will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
108
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 2: Remove or reduce constraints on the development of housing.	
Policy 2.1 Land Use Policy: The City will remove or mitigate constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of affordable housing as is feasible and in conjunction with the Land Use Element of the General Plan, and the goals of the community.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 2.1.1: The City shall prioritize the development processing time of applications for new construction or rehabilitation of housing for lower and moderate' income households and seniors. Additionally, extremely low income households will be given priority over all other income groups. Timing: Ongoing, 2008'2014 Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: Throughout the planning period, the City offered and promoted streamlined development processing, prioritizing the review of projects that include affordable units. Staff continuously facilitates interdepartmental collaboration to ensure that the application process is as efficient as possible. Effectiveness: To date no applications for the development of housing for lower income households has been proposed. Due to the decline in development applications the City has been effective in minimizing application processing times. Appropriateness: The City recognizes the importance of providing a streamlined review process and approving residential projects as quickly as possible to minimize funds lost due to schedule delays. This program will be included in the 2014'2021 Housing Element.
Action 2.1.2: Amend the Zoning Code to treat transitional and supportive housing as a residential use, subject only to those restrictions on residential uses contained in the same zone. Timeframe: Within one year of Housing Element adoption Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: Due to funding reductions and staff cutbacks the City was unable to complete the Zoning Code amendments in the time specified in the Housing Plan. In 2013, the City drafted an ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance to allow transitional and supportive housing as a residential use, subject to the same requirements that apply to other residential uses in that same zone. The final revised ordinance will be presented to the City Council concurrent with the adoption of the 2014' 2021 Housing Element. Effectiveness: The City will effectively amend the Zoning Code to allow for transitional and supportive housing within the planning period. Appropriateness: As the City will complete the required rezoning to ensure that transitional housing is permitted, this program will not be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
109
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 2: Remove or reduce constraints on the development of housing.	
Policy 2.1 Land Use Policy: The City will remove or mitigate constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of affordable housing as is feasible and in conjunction with the Land Use Element of the General Plan, and the goals of the community.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 2.1.3: Amend the Heavy Commercial/Light Manufacturing (Md) zone to permit emergency shelters by right, without a conditional use permit or any other discretionary action and will only be subject to those conditions and standards consistent with State law. Timeframe: Within one year of Housing Element adoption Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: Due to funding reductions and staff cutbacks the City was unable to complete the Zoning Code amendments in the time specified in the Housing Plan. In summer 2013, the City drafted an ordinance amending the Zoning Code to allow emergency shelters in the Heavy Commercial/Light Manufacturing (MT) zone by right without any other discretionary permit required. The final revised ordinance will be presented to the City Council concurrent with the adoption of the 2014' 2021 Housing Element. Effectiveness: The City will effectively amend the Zoning Code to allow for emergency shelters within the planning period. The City has also identified a 23'acre vacant M4 (Heavy Commercial/Light Industrial) site that could accommodate an emergency shelter if one is proposed. Appropriateness: As the City will complete the required rezoning to ensure that opportunities for emergency shelters are permitted, this program will not be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
Action 2.1.4: Continue to utilize the City’s website to advertise programs, such as the Home Improvement Grant, Deferred Loan Program, Emergency Grant, First' time Homebuyer, and Infill Program that offer housing assistance opportunities for residents of Norco. Timeframe: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Housing Division	Progress: During the 2008-2014, City Staff maintained and updated information on its available housing programs. Residents can easily search to find a program description and information on the application process. Effectiveness: In 2006, the Home Improvement Program assisted 17 very low-, 28 low- and 41 moderate-income households; City staff continues to service an increase in the number of clients seeking assistance for home repairs. Additionally, the City’s Sewer Connection/Rebatc Programs assisted 118 very low-income households in covering the costs to connect their residence to a lateral sewer line. Appropriateness: The City recognizes the importance of providing residents with information on available funding offered and will continue to take an aggressive approach in advertising programs through different forms of media. With the elimination of the Redevelopment Agency the City has reduced funds available to support housing programs and has decided to focus efforts on the Home Rehabilitation Program, which combines the Home Improvement Grant, the Deferred Loan Program, and the Emergency Grant programs. Separate housing assistance programs have been included in the 2014-2021 Housing Plan.
2014-2021 Housing Element
110
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 2: Remove or reduce constraints on the development of housing.	
Policy 2.1 Land Use Policy: The City will remove or mitigate constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of affordable housing as is feasible and in conjunction with the Land Use Element of the General Plan, and the goals of the community.	
Program	Accomplish ments
Action 2.1.5: Amend the approval process for Second Dwelling Units by removing discretionary review and public hearing requirements in the Zoning Code. Timeframe: Within one year of Housing Element adoption Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: To approve a second unit on a residential lot, the Norco Zoning Code historically has required an applicant to adhere to minor site plan review process, which specifies review and approval by the Norco Planning Commission. To achieve compliance with State law, the City determined that the Zoning Code should be amended to allow for applications to be administcrally approved by Planning Staff. Due to funding reductions and staff cutbacks the City was unable to complete the Zoning Code amendments in the time specified in the Housing Plan, however in summer 2013, the City revised their second unit ordinance to be compliant with State law. The final revised ordinance was presented to the City Council concurrent with the adoption of the 2014-2021 Housing Element. Effectiveness: During the 2008-2014 planning period, the City continued to provide for second units in single family residential zones on lots with an appropriate area. Since 2006, no second unit applications have been received.
	Appropriateness: The City recognizes second units as an affordable housing option and will continue to allow for second units to be constructed. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
Action 2.1.6: The Zoning Code will be amended to include a definition of Single Room Occupancy (SRO) unit and to permit SROs in the Heavy Commercial/Light Manufacturing (M-l) zone. Timeframe: Within one year of Housing Element adoption Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: Due to funding reductions and staff cutbacks the City was unable to complete the Zoning Code amendments in the time specified in the Housing Plan. In 2013, the City drafted an ordinance defining single room occupancy (SRO) units and amending the Zoning Code to allow SRO units in the Heavy Commercial/Light Manufacturing (M-l) zone. The final revised ordinance was presented to the City Council concurrent with the adoption of the 2014-2021 Housing Element. Effectiveness: The City will effectively amend the Zoning Code to allow for SRO units within the planning period. Appropriateness: As the City will complete the required revisions to define and permit SRO units, this program will not be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
111
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 2: Remove or reduce constraints on the development of housing.	
Policy 2.1 Land Use Policy: The City will remove or mitigate constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of affordable housing as is feasible and in conjunction with the Land Use Element of the General Plan, and the goals of the community.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 2.1.7: City staff will specifically review development standards for established residential zones to identify standards that may constrain the development of affordable housing and housing for special groups such as disabled individuals. Timeframe: Within one year of Housing Element adoption Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: On a regular basis the City reviews their development standards and also in instances where developers express concern regarding the feasibility of constructing new housing in the City. During the planning period, Staff has maintained communication with local developers regarding development standard modifications. Effectiveness: Throughout the planning period, Staff has maintained their commitment to address development constraints on a project by project basis and to identify ways that standards could be modified if it is determined that such requirements were impeding the development of affordable housing or housing for disabled residents. The City also provides fast track processing for applications related to the creation of affordable housing and offers fee modifications, when funds are available, for projects including affordable units that are required to apply for variations to the existing development standards. The City was able to achieve their objectives. Appropriateness: The City recognizes the importance of reviewing their development standards on a regular basis and seeking input from developers to identify potential constraints to the development affordable housing. The City will continue to review their standards and address any standards that may be identified as a constraint in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
112
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 2: Remove or reduce constraints on the development of housing.	
Policy 2.1 Land Use Policy: The City will remove or mitigate constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of affordable housing as is feasible and in conjunction with the Land Use Element of the General Plan, and the goals of the community.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 2.1.8: To facilitate the development of affordable housing and accommodate the City’s remaining RHNA of 599 lower income households; the City will establish and implement the Housing Development Overlay (HDO) zone on approximately 100 acres of underutilized and vacant land. Timeframe: Within one year of Housing Element adoption Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: During the previous planning period, the City adopted Ordinance 947 on April 4, 2012, which amended the General Plan and Zoning Code to implement the Housing Development Overlay (HDO) zone. The HDO zone is intended to encourage the development of affordable housing at densities up to 30 dwelling units per acre. Per Ordinances 942, 943, 944, 945 and 946 also adopted on April 4, 2012, the City has rezoned approximately 100 acres to accommodate their 2008-2014 RHNA and AB 1233 carryover from the 2000-2005 planning period. Specifically, to accommodate their combined RHNA allocation, the City identified 5 sites to be immediately rezoned. All identified parcels approved as part of the HDO zone, were required to meet the minimum development requirements for residential units before non-residential uses, as permitted in the underlying zoning, are allowed. Effectiveness: To achieve certification of their 2008-2014 Housing Element the City effectively created the HDO zone to facilitate and encourage the development of residential uses on five specific sites at densities appropriate to accommodate their combined RHNA allocation. The City effectively implemented this action. Appropriateness:	The City maintains an inventory of available and potential residential development sites and will continue to do so for the upcoming planning period. The City utilizes this inventory to help direct interested developers to potential sites for housing. The City will continue to update the inventory throughout the 2014-2021 planning cycle, and will continue to offer development incentives whenever feasible. This program will not be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
113
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 2: Remove or reduce constraints on the development of housing.	
Policy 2.1 Land Use Policy: The City will remove or mitigate constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of affordable housing as is feasible and in conjunction with the Land Use Element of the General Plan, and the goals of the community.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 2.1.9: To encourage the development of residential and mixed-use projects, the City will establish a lot consolidation program, which offers incentives such as a reduction in development standards (i.e. lot size, parking, and open space requirements) to merge adjacent lots. Timeframe: Within one year of Housing Element adoption Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: The City has historically offered development incentives for projects that include affordable units and will continue to offer these incentives for projects requiring lot consolidation actions. On a case-by-case basis the City docs review projects and provides project assistance to developments that include affordable units, when funding is available. Effectiveness: The City has not to date had an application or a request from a developer to consolidate lots for the purposes of creating a larger development. Appropriateness: The City recognizes the importance of offering incentives to encourage lot consolidation and will continue to provide incentives when feasible. The City will continue to provide information on this program to developers with applicable projects. While funding is limited, the City recognizes the importance of maintaining this program, which will allow Staff to easily administer funds as they become available. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
Goal 2: Remove or reduce constraints on the development of housing.	
Policy 2.2 Infrastructure Policy: Ensure that water and sewer providers are aware of the City’s intentions for residential development throughout the City.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 2.2.1: In accordance with Government Code Section 65589.7 as revised in 2005, immediately following City Council adoption, the City must deliver a copy of the 2008 Housing Element to all public agencies or private entities that provide water or sewer sendees to properties within the City of Norco. Timeframe: Within one year of Housing Element adoption Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: Following the certification and adoption of the 2008-2014 Housing Element the City submitted the final draft to the appropriate water and sewer service providers. Effectiveness: The City was able to effectively achieve their objective, providing water and sewer providers with information about future housing development. Appropriateness: As required by State law, the City will submit the final 2014-2021 Housing Element to local water and sewer providers for their review and input. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
114
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 3: Conserve the existing low income/affordable housing stock.	
Policy 3.1 Conservation Policy: The City will establish measures to conserve existing housing stock and maintain it within an affordability range for low- and moderate-income households.	
Program	Accomplish ments
Action 3.1.1: The City should keep an inventory of affordable housing units and promote, through its Redevelopment Agency, the use of additional affordable housing assistance programs, as appropriate, for existing homes that have the potential to convert to non low'income status. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Redevelopment Agency	Progress: In accordance with provisions of AB 987, the City maintains a database of affordable housing units in the City, which is updated annually. The report describes newly constructed and substantially rehabilitated housing units that were developed or assisted with former Redevelopment Agency Housing Funds. The City’s current AB 987 table indicates that no affordable units are at-risk from converting from affordable to market-rate housing: Clark Terrace Phase 1 (40 years; expires 2035), Clark Terrace Phase II (40 years; expires 2041), Heritage Park (55 years; expires 2062). Effectiveness: The City continues to monitor the affordable units within the community and will actively address developments that are at-risk of conversion to market rate rents. This program provides important information to City Staff and public officials about existing affordable units in the City. Appropriateness: An inventory of affordable units will be maintained to monitor affordable units that may be at-risk of converting to market-rate housing, as required by AB 987. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
115
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 3: Conserve the existing low income/affordable housing stock.	
Policy 3.1 Conservation Policy: The City will establish measures to conserve existing housing stock and maintain it within an affordability range for low- and moderate-income households.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 3.1.2: Utilize Redevelopment Set-Aside Housing funds if available, or other resources such as HOME funds, California Housing Finance Agency single-family and multi-family programs, HUD Section 208/811 loans, and HOPE 11 and III Homeownership programs to stimulate private developer and non-profit entity efforts in the development and financing of housing for lower and moderate-income households. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Redevelopment Agency	Progress: The Infill Housing Program, operated by the former Redevelopment Agency, allows for the purchase of substandard housing units to be rehabilitated and sold to low-income households. The Infill Housing Program also allowed the City to acquire vacant and substandard lots to develop infill housing. Effectiveness: During the planning period the City was able to purchase and assist with the rehabilitation of 2 single family homes. These properties have 30 year affordability covenants in place that do not expire until 2037 and 2038. In both instances the City partnered with Habitat for Humanity. With the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency in 2012 and the loss of the redevelopment set-aside fund, the City does not have a permanent funding source to purchase or rehabilitate properties. Appropriateness: While this program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element the program will be modified and administered based on funds available. For the 2014-2021 planning period, through the Infill Housing Program, the City will maintain, on an ongoing basis, the comprehensive land use database identifying parcels and/or structures suitable for residential development and/or redevelopment. As the City has created and identified the City as the successor agency to the RDA, Staff will be responsible for the continuation of the program. It is the City’s hope that as the economy improves having this program in place will allow Staff to purchase sites when funding is available. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element
Action 3.1.3: The Redevelopment Agency should facilitate discussions between developers and local banks to meet their obligations pursuant to the California Community Reinvestment Act (CCRA) providing favorable financing to developers involved in projects designed to provide lower and moderate-income housing opportunities. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Redevelopment Agency	Progress: Due to funding reductions and staff cutbacks the City was unable to facilitate regular meetings between developers and local banks. Furthermore the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency eliminated key staff people necessary to organize potential meetings. Remaining staff members are aware of the programs offered by the California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) and direct affordable housing developers to contact CHFA regarding funding opportunities. Effectiveness: During the planning period, the City did not facilitate meetings between developers and local banks as development in the City was minimal, and key RDA staff member positions were eliminated. Appropriateness: Given that the availability of funding and the participating mortgage lenders are often changing the City' will modify this program to focus on providing information and educating developers and homebuyers about funding opportunities through CHFA. This program will be combined with Action 3.1.4 and included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
116
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 3: Conserve the existing low income/affordable housing stock.	
Policy 3.1 Conservation Policy: The City will establish measures to conserve existing housing stock and maintain it within an affordability range for low- and moderate-income households.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 3.1.4: The City will maintain a list of mortgage lenders participating in the California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) program and refer the program to builders or corporations interested in developing housing in the City. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Redevelopment Agency	Progress: Due to funding reductions and staff cutbacks the City was unable to assemble and maintain a list of mortgage lenders as the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency eliminated key staff people necessary to collect and update the required information. Remaining staff members are aware of the programs offered by the California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) and direct affordable housing developers to contact CHFA regarding funding opportunities. Effectiveness: The City was unable to establish and maintain a list of lenders, however City Staff is aware of programs offered by CFHA and provides information on available programs to interested residents. Appropriateness: Given that the availability of funding and the participating mortgage lenders arc often changing the City will modify this program to focus on providing information and educating developers and homebuyers about funding opportunities through CHFA. This program will be combined with Action 3.1.3 and included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
Action 3.1.5: Continue cooperation with the Riverside County Housing Authority to provide Section 8 rental assistance and work with property owners to encourage expansion of rental projects participating in the program. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Redevelopment Agency	Progress: The City currently offers information on their website and on City Hall on housing programs offered by the City, the County of Riverside and other local housing service providers, including the Section 8 program. Effectiveness: On an annual basis approximately 8,000 households receive Section 8 vouchers in Riverside County. Norco currently refers residents in need of housing assistance to the County to receive Section 8 assistance. Generally, within Norco there is surplus of available units that accept Section 8. Appropriateness: The County offers a variety of housing assistance programs that can supplement the City’s current housing programs. Consequently, the City will continue to provide information on programs offered by the County on the City website, at City Hall, and in other public places. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
117
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 4: Provide adequate housing in the City for all economic segments of the community.	
Policy 4.1 Government Aid Policy: The City will seek any Federal, State, and Local funding to help provide and subsidize low-cost housing.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 4.1.1: Identify sites that could potentially serve as locations for the construction of infill housing in accordance with the Redevelopment Agency's Infill Housing Program, using the Agency's set-aside funds and CDBG funds as appropriate. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Housing Division and Redevelopment Agency	Progress: During the previous planning period, to promote the Housing Infill Program the City identified opportunity sites for the future construction of infill housing. Specifically, the 2008-2014 Housing Element identified 5 specific sites that were rezoned to accommodate higher density development and a specific page on City’s website was developed, dedicated to major development opportunities. The website includes a map of opportunity areas and descriptions of specific sites. Effectiveness: The City was able to effectively provide and maintain information on specific sites that are available for development in the community. As RDA funds are no long available and CDBG funds are very limited the City has determined that an alternative funding source is needed to provide additional incentives to affordable housing developers to develop affordable units. Appropriateness: This program will be combined with Action 3.1.2 and included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element focusing on providing developers with information on available sites in the City that are appropriate for new development. City Staff will promote the program at City Hall, on its website and will evaluate requests for funding on a case by case basis. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element
Action 4.1.2: The City should seek additional opportunities to assist low and moderate-income households through the First-Time Homebuyer Program, using the Redevelopment Agency’s set-aside funds as appropriate. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Housing Division and Redevelopment Agency	Progress: Prior to 2012, the City advertised the availability of RDA funding to assist households through the First-Time Homebuyers Program online and at City Hall. The First-Time Homebuyers Program offers down-payment assistance to households that earn less than 120% of the County median income. Effectiveness: Due to high home prices in Norco, most applicants have been unable to purchase a home that qualifies as affordable to a moderate or low income household. Consequently, since 2006, no households have been assisted through the program. Furthermore with the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency in 2012, funding for this program was suspended. As the City was identified as the successor agency to the RDA, Staff will be responsible for the continuation of the program, should funding become available. The City continues to seek new funding sources for the program. Appropriateness: While this program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element the program will be administered based on funds available. It is the City’s hope that as the economy improves, having this program in place will allow Staff to easily begin accepting applications when funding is available. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
118
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 4: Provide adequate housing in the City for all economic segments of the community.	
Policy 4.2 Public/Private Partnership Policy: The City will encourage public/private sector partnerships and cooperation in developing and implementing solutions to affordable housing, and special housing needs.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 4.2.1: Continue to seek additional opportunities to work with Habitat for Humanity, and other private or public agencies, for the development of low income housing units, especially through the Infill Housing Program. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Housing Division and Redevelopment Agency	Progress: Through the Infill Housing Program, operated by the former Redevelopment Agency, the City was able to focus resources to purchase of substandard housing units to be rehabilitated and sold to low-income households. Through this program the City was able to purchase and assist with the rehabilitation of 2 single family homes through partnerships with Habitat for Humanity. Effectiveness: The City has determined that a close working relationship with non-profit and private organizations is an effective means of creating or rehabilitating affordable housing units. The two properties rehabilitated in 2007 and 2008, both have 30 year affordability covenants in place that do not expire until 2037 and 2038 respectively. Unfortunately, with the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency in 2012 and the loss of the redevelopment set-aside fund, the City docs not have a permanent funding source to purchase or rehabilitate properties. Appropriateness: While this program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element the program will be administered based on funds available. As the City has created and identified the City as the successor agency to the RDA, Staff will be responsible for the continuation of the program. It is the City’s hope that as the economy improves having this program in place will allow Staff to purchase sites when funding is available. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element
2014-2021 Housing Element
119
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 4: Provide adequate housing in the City for all economic segments of the community.	
Policy 4.3 Services and Utilities Policy: The City will encourage residential infill within existing neighborhoods to better utilize existing services and utilities and to reduce infrastructure development costs.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 4.3.1: Prioritize Redevelopment Set-Aside Housing funds if available, or other resources such as HOME funds, California Housing Finance Agency singleTamily and multi-family programs, HUD Section 208/811 loans, and HOPE II and III Homeownership programs for the development of rental projects that provide units with three or more bedrooms. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Planning Division and Redevelopment Agency	Progress: During the planning period, the City maintained RDA funding prior to the dissolution of the RDA in 2012 and investigated alternative funding sources such as HOME funds, the California Housing Finance Agency singleTamily and multiTamily programs, HUD Section 208/811 loans, and HOPE II and III Homeownership programs to encourage the development of large units with three or more bedrooms. Effectiveness: From 2006 to 2012, approximately 27 residential units were constructed, all of which were market rate single family homes. As this program is aimed at multiTamily rental projects, proposed development did not qualify for the funding available from this program. Appropriateness: Large renter households continue to be a prominent special needs group in the City, as identified in Chapter 5, Housing Needs. The City will continue to provide incentives, when feasible, to encourage developers to provide units with three or more bedrooms. While funding is limited, the City recognizes the importance of maintaining this program, which will allow them to easily administer funds as they become available. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014'2021 Housing Element
120
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 5: Improve and conserve existing residential neighborhoods.	
Policy 5.1 Preservation Policy: Seek methods of preserving and enhancing existing neighborhoods within the City through capital improvement planning and redevelopment programs.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 5.1.1: Continue to utilize the Redevelopment Agency's Deferred Loan Program to assist low and moderate income families to finance needed home improvements with low interest rate loans. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Housing Division and Redevelopment Agency	Progress: Prior to 2012, the City advertised the availability of RDA funding to assist households through the Deferred Loan Program online and at City Hall. The Deferred Loan Program offers assist low and moderate income families to finance needed home improvements with low interest rate loans. Starting in 2012 the City posted notice on their website that program was suspended pending the identification of new funding sources. Effectiveness: From 2006 to 2012, the City was able to assist 5 households annually through the program. As mentioned previously, following the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency in 2012, funding for this program was suspended. As the City was identified as the successor agency to the RDA, Staff will be responsible for the continuation of the program, should funding become available. The City continues to seek new funding sources for the program. Appropriateness: While this program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element the program will be administered based on funds available. It is the City’s hope that as the economy improves, having this program in place will allow Staff to easily begin accepting applications when funding is available. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
Action 5.1.2: Identify capital improvements citywide, including maintenance and improvement of streets and trails, to preserve and enhance the identity of each of the City's neighborhoods. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Engineering Division and Redevelopment Agency	Progress: The City’s Budgeting and Finance Department produces an annual Five Year Capital Improvement Plan that serves as a guide to ensure that limited financial resources are allocated towards important City services and strategic priorities identified by the City Council and management. Effectiveness: In 2006, street medians were installed along Hamner Avenue. Equestrian trails have been improved with new trail fencing and paving materials to improve safety and aesthetics. Also, new equestrian trails have been added to form an extensive trail network. New irrigation systems have been installed to water trees and landscaping along trails ancl paths. Appropriateness: The City will continue to make capital improvements that enhance and preserve the rural atmosphere of the City’s neighborhoods; however the policies and programs to achieve this will be emphasized in the General Plan Circulation Element. This program will not be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
121
City of Norco
General Plan
Action 5.13: The City shall adopt a density bonus ordinance that is in compliance with the State’s density bonus law. Timeframe: Within one year of Housing Element adoption Responsibility: Planning Division and Housing Division	Progress: Progress: Due to funding reductions and staff cutbacks the City was unable to adopt a density bonus ordinance in the time specified in the Housing Plan. The City did adopt the Housing Development Overlay zone, which permits a density bonus up to 30 dwelling units per acre in specified areas of the city. In summer 2013, the City drafted an ordinance that is in compliance with the State’s density bonus law. The final revised ordinance was presented to the City Council concurrent with the adoption of the 2014-2021 Housing Element. Effectiveness: The City will effectively amend the Zoning Code to introduce a density bonus ordinance that is in comphance with State law during the planning period. Appropriateness: The City recognizes the importance of offering incentives like the density bonus incentive and will continue to provide this incentive in the future. The City will continue to provide information on this program to developers with applicable projects. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element
Goal 5: Improve and conserve existing residential neighborhoods.	
Policy 5.2 Code Compliance Policy: Code Compliance Policy: Continue to pursue enforcement of the housing code, and the nuisance abatement program.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 5.2.1: Pursue the abatement of code violations and ensure that households that qualify for assistance are aware of the Redevelopment Agency's Home Improvement Program. This can be used to fund improvements in low income households where financing the improvements may be beyond the capacity of the household in violation. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Housing Division, Planning Division, Building Division, and Redevelopment Agency	Progress: The City of Norco code enforcement division inspects residences to make sure they are in compliance with the California Building Code and the City’s Municipal Code. If tenants complain about maintenance problems, Code Enforcement will investigate the complaint and send violation notices if necessary. Effectiveness: Throughout the planning period the City allocated $100,000 from the General Fund to support their code enforcement program. From 2006-2012 the estimated that more than 800 code enforcement cases were addressed annually. The City was able to achieve their objectives. Appropriateness: This program is crucial to preserving the City’s existing housing stock and is connected to rehabilitation programs offered by the City. The City will continue to utilize departmental funds to offer this program in the upcoming planning period.
2014-2021 Housing Element
122
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 6: Provide quality housing for all residents of the community.
Policy 6.1 Equal Housing Policy: Promote equal housing opportunities that do not discriminate against any person due to age, race, sex, marital status, ethnic background, income, or any other arbitrary factors.
Programs	Accomplishments
Action 6.1.1: Promote assistance in home repairs to senior citizens using the Home Improvement Grant for qualifying households. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Housing Division and Redevelopment Agency	Progress: Prior to 2012, the City advertised the availability of RDA funding to assist households through the Home Improvement Grant online and at City Hall. The Home Improvement Grant offers assistance to low and moderate income senior residents to finance needed home improvements or modifications to accommodate a disability. Effectiveness: From 2006 to 2011, the City was able to assist 10 households annually through the program. Following the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency in 2012, funding for this program was suspended. As the City was identified as the successor agency to the RDA, Staff will be responsible for the continuation of the program, should funding become available. The City continues to seek new funding sources for the program. Appropriateness: While this program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element the program will be administered based on funds available. It is the City’s hope that as the economy improves, having this program in place will allow Staff to easily begin accepting applications when funding is available. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
Action 6.1.2: Promote housing assistance opportunities through the Home Improvement Grant and/or the Deferred Loan Program, for low and moderate-income households with special housing needs as a result of one or more members within that household being disabled and needing specific household aids. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Housing Division and Redevelopment Agency	Progress: Prior to 2012, the City advertised the availability of RDA funding to assist households to complete home modifications to accommodate disabilities through the Home Improvement Grant and the Deferred Loan Program online and at City Hall. Effectiveness: From 2006 to 2011, the City was able to assist 5 households annually through the programs. Following the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency in 2012, funding for both programs was suspended. Given their limited resources the City has decided to combine the grant and loan program into one program and as the successor agency to the RDA, Staff will be responsible for the continuation of the program, should funding become available. The City continues to seek new7 funding sources for the program. Appropriateness: The Home Improvement Grant and the Deferred Loan Program will be combined into one program titled the Home Improvement Program, which will offer loans and grants as funds are available. Funding wall be prioritized for senior households, and very low income families. It is the City’s hope that as the economy improves, having this program in place will allow7 Staff to easily begin accepting applications when funding is available. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
123
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 6: Provide quality housing for all residents of the community.	
Policy 6.1 Equal Housing Policy: Promote equal housing opportunities that do not discriminate against any person due to age, race, sex, marital status, ethnic background, income, or any other arbitrary factors.	
Programs	Accomplishments
Action 6.1.3: Establish reasonable accommodation procedures in the Zoning Code and as applicable, the Building Code, to provide disabled individuals or household’s equal housing opportunity through residential unit modifications intended to improve mobility and accessibility, and to provide the flexibility necessary for developing housing for individuals with disabilities. Timeframe: Within one year of Housing Element adoption Responsibility: Planning Division and Building Division	Progress: Concurrent with housing element adoption, the City Council will consider an ordinance, to establish reasonable accommodation procedures to address existing constraints to the provision of accommodations for persons with disabilities. The City is committed to assisting residents in need of reasonable accommodation and will continue to direct eligible residents to apply for applicable funds through the Riverside County including the Home Repair Loan Program (HRLP) and Senior Home Repair Grant (SHRG). The HRLP provides one-time loans to qualified low-income homeowners to repair or improve the quality of their homes. The loan is designed to address health and safety issues, Housing Quality Standards (HQS) and improve substandard living conditions within the scope of eligible program repairs. The SHRG Program provides one-time grants to qualified very low-income senior homeowners (62 years or older) or very low-income persons with disabilities of any age to repair or improve their homes within the scope of eligible program repairs. The City also offers assistance though the Home Improvement Grant and/or the Deferred Loan Program to complete modifications for disabilities. Effectiveness: Due to reductions in staff time and available funding this program was not implemented in the timeframe identified in the previous Housing Plan; however the City was able to effectively implement a reasonable accommodate ordinance prior to the end of the planning period, concurrent with the adoption of the 2014-2021 update. Appropriateness: For the 2014-2021 planning period the City will continue to partner with the County of Riverside and will promote the adopted reasonable accommodation procedures on the City website and at City Hall.
Action 6.1.4: Revise the definition of family in the Zoning Code to comply with federal and State housing laws. Timeframe: Within one year of Housing Element adoption Responsibility: Planning Division	Progress: Concurrent the adoption of the 2014-2021 Housing Element, the City Council will amend the zoning code to include a definition of family that is compliant with State requirements. Effectiveness: Due to staffing reductions and budget cuts, the City was unable amend the zoning ordinance to include a definition of “family" in the timeframe anticipated. The City has prepared a draft definition and will present the revised Zoning Code to City Council concurrent with the adoption of the 2014-2021 Housing Element. The City will effectively implement this program during the established planning period. Appropriateness: As the City will effectively implement the program and no further action is required, this program will not be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Plan.
2014-2021 Housing Element
124
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 6: Provide quality housing for all residents of the community.
Policy 6.1 Equal Housing Policy: Promote equal housing opportunities that do not discriminate against any person due to age, race, sex, marital status, ethnic background, income, or any other arbitrary factors.
Programs	Accomplishments
Action 6.1.5: The City will continue to receive fair housing sendees through the County of Riverside’s program for participating cities. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Housing Division	Progress: The City maintains an active partnership with the Riverside County Fair Housing Council, providing information to residents on the services available including tenant-landlord mediation, anti-discrimination, first time homebuyer, foreclosure prevention and loan modifications. Effectiveness: Throughout the planning period the City has made information available online about services and programs provided by the Fair Housing Council. With the elimination of the Redevelopment Agency, the City has been identified to maintain the relationship with the Fair Housing Council and will continue to provide information about tenant and landlord housing rights offered. City Staff will work cooperatively with the Fair Housing Council to actively pursue any complaints of housing discrimination within the City. Appropriateness: The City will continue to be involved with the Fair Housing Council to eliminate housing discrimination and distribute information to the public about how they can report housing discrimination. This program will be merged with Action 6.1.6 and included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
Action 6.1.6: The City, in conjunction with the Riverside County Fair Housing Council, shall support efforts dedicated to working towards the elimination of the discrimination of housing. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Housing Division	Progress: The City maintains an active partnership with the Riverside County Fair Housing Council and currently provides information to residents on the process to file complaints with the Fair Housing Council to eliminate housing discrimination. Effectiveness: Throughout the planning period the City has made pamphlets available at City Hall regarding information about fair housing as provided by the Fair Housing Council. With the elimination of the Redevelopment Agency, the City has been identified to maintain the relationship with the Fair Housing Council and will continue to provide information about tenant and landlord housing rights offered. City Staff will work cooperatively with the Fair Housing Council to actively pursue any complaints of housing discrimination within the City. Appropriateness: The City will continue to be involved with the Fair Housing Council to eliminate housing discrimination and distribute information to the public about how they can report housing discrimination. This program will be merged with Action 6.1.5 ancl included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
125
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 7: Encourage energy conservation activities in all residential development.	
Policy 7.1 Energy Conservation Policy: Encourage the use of active and passive solar energy systems in residential developments and enforce energy standards required by the State Energy Building Regulations for residential development.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 7.1.1: The City should coordinate with Southern California Edison to ensure that the public is informed of all available programs providing incentives for the installation of energy conserving measures. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Building Division	Progress: The City currently provides information on energy efficiency programs on their website and at City Hall, including programs available through Southern California Edison. When appropriate, City Staff and code enforcement officers, direct residents to apply for applicable programs. This program was effectively implemented during the planning period. The City building division enforces development compliance with Title 24 Energy Conservation Standards. Effectiveness: The City continues to acquire funds from public and private sources, along with the City’s general fund, to promote and educate the public about energy conservation. The City distributes brochures that educate the public about energy savings tips. Brochures are available at City Hall. Appropriateness: The City will continue to encourage use of Federal and State programs that assist homeowners in energy conservation activities.
Action 7.1.2: Homes that are rehabilitated through City programs will encourage the use of energy conservation devices including, but not limited, to lighting and water heater treatments. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Building Division, Planning Division and Housing Division.	Progress: As applicants apply for funding through various housing programs offered by the City including the Home Improvement Grant and/or the Deferred Loan Program, the plans are reviewed to identify opportunities for energy conservation. Within the City of Norco Zoning Code, specific guidelines have been established to promote energy efficiency and the use of alternative forms of energy. Specifically the City allows and promotes the use of solar panels and enforces Title 24 Energy Conservation Standards. Brochures on energy efficiency are available at City Hall. Effectiveness: The City continues to acquire funds from public and private sources, along with the City’s general fund, to promote and educate the public about energy conservation. The City distributes brochures that educate the public about energy7 savings tips. Appropriateness: The City will continue to encourage use of Federal and State programs that assist homeowners in energy conservation activities. Also, Title 24 energy standards will continue to be applied to all new and remodeled residential construction.
2014-2021 Housing Element
126
City of Norco
General Plan
Goal 7: Encourage energy conservation activities in all residential development.	
Policy 7.1 Energy Conservation Policy: Encourage the use of active and passive solar energy systems in residential developments and enforce energy standards required by the State Energy Building Regulations for residential development.	
Program	Accomplishments
Action 7.1.3: The City will review ordinances and recommend changes where necessary to encourage energy efficient housing design and practices that are consistent with state regulations. Timing: Ongoing, 2008-2014. Responsibility: Building Division and Planning Division	Progress: On an ongoing basis the City reviews applicable ordinances and recommends changes to encourage energy efficient housing design and practices that are consistent with state regulations. During the 2008-2014 planning period, the City of West Covina as part of the Western Riverside Council of Governments will be adopting an Energy Action Plan and Climate Action Plan. Through their EAP, the City of Norco is committed to reducing local energy use through the enactment of policies, strategies, and actions that are cost-effective and environmentally sound. Effectiveness: The City currently provides information on energy efficiency programs on their website and at City Hall. When appropriate, City Staff and code enforcement officers, direct residents to apply for applicable programs. Additionally, the City encourages all new development to be energy efficient and to take into consideration LEED standards. The City was able to achieve their objectives. Appropriateness: The City recognizes the importance of encouraging energy efficient design, particularly in the design of new residential units for lower income households. The City will continue to encourage maximum utilization of Federal, State, and local government programs, such as the County of Riverside Home Weatherization Program, that assist homeowners in providing energy conservation measures. Staff will provide information on available programs and funding opportunities to residents on City website and at City Hall. This program will be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
2014-2021 Housing Element
127
City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014-T021 Housing Element
128
City of Norco
General Plan
8.	Definitions
Key housing-related terms and concepts, as well as agencies involved in housing in Norco are defined below:
Acre
A unit of land measure equal to 43,560 square feet.
Affordable Housing
Under State and federal statutes, housing which costs no more than 30 percent of gross household income is referred to as "affordable" housing. Housing costs factored into this definition include rent or mortgage payments, utilities, taxes, insurance, homeowner association fees, and other related costs. Assisted Housing
Assisted housing refers to units that are subsidized by federal, state, or local housing programs.
At'Risk Housing
Multi-family rental housing that may lose its status as housing affordable for low and moderate income tenants due to the expiration of federal, state or local agreements is referred to as "at-risk" housing. California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
HCD is responsible for administering State-sponsored housing programs and for reviewing housing elements to determine compliance with State housing law.
Census
The official United States decennial enumeration of the population conducted by the federal government.
Condominium
A building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually, but the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
Community Development Block Grant
The CDBG program is administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The program allots money to cities and counties for housing and community development activities. Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS)
The U.S Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) received a special tabulation of 2000 Census data from the U.S. Census Bureau. The 2008 Housing Element draws additional information from the 2004 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data. This data is typically referred to as “CHAS data.”
Density
Density is the number of dwelling units per unit of land. Density is usually expressed “per acre.” As an example, a development with 100 units located on 20 acres has a density of 5.0 units per acre.
Density Bonus
Under State density bonus laws, a developer is commonly allowed additional residential units within a project beyond the maximum for which the parcel is otherwise permitted. Usually, a density bonus is
2014-2021 Housing Element
129
City of Norco
General Plan
permitted in exchange for the provision or preservation of affordable housing units at the same site or at another location.
Development Impact Fees
A fee or charge imposed on developers to pay a jurisdiction’s costs of providing sendees to new development.
Dwelling, Multi-family
A building containing two or more dwelling units for the use of individual households is referred to as multi-family. Apartments and condominium buildings are examples of this dwelling unit type.
Dwelling, Single-family
A dwelling unit designed for occupancy by not more than one household is referred to as a single-family housing unit. Single-family detached units do not share a wall with other single-family units. Single-family attached units are attached to one or more other one-family dwellings by a common vertical wall. Dwelling Unit
One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the unit for the exclusive use of a household.
Element
A division or chapter of the General Plan.
Economic Segments
The term “economic segments” is intended to include all persons living in the City and includes all five income categories. Please see definition for “Income Category.”
Emergency Shelter
Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.
General Plan
A legal document that is adopted by the legislative body of a City or County. The General Plan sets forth policies regarding long-term development. California law requires the preparation of seven elements or chapters in the General Plan: Land Use, Housing, Circulation, Conservation, Open Space, Noise, and Safety. Additional elements are permitted, such as Economic Development, Urban Design, and similar local concerns.
HCD
See definition for California Department of Housing and Community Development.
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
The HMDA requires larger lending institutions making home mortgage loans to publicly disclose the location and disposition of home purchase, refinance, and improvement loans. Institutions subject to HMDA must also disclose the gender, race, and income of loan applicants.
HOME Program
The HOME Investment Partnership Act, Title II of the National Affordable Housing Act of 1990 authorized a funding program for housing. The HOME program administered by HUD provides formula
2014-2021 Housing Element
130
City of Norco
General Plan
grants to states and localities to build, buy, and/or rehabilitate affordable rental or ownership housing or to provide direct rental assistance to low-income people.
Household
The U.S. Bureau of the Census defines a household as all persons living in a housing unit whether or not they are related. A single person living in an apartment as well as a family living in a house is considered a household. Household does not include individuals living in dormitories, prisons, convalescent homes, or other group quarters.
Household Income
The total income of all the persons living in a household.
HUD
See definition for U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Income Category
For planning purposes, the Department of Housing and Community Development has established income definitions based on the area mean income (AMI) within California counties. The table below presents HCD 2013 income categories applicable to Norco.
Income Category	Income Limit for a Four-Person Household (Year 2013)
Extremely Low	$18,210
Very Low	$30,350
Low	$48,560
Moderate	$60,700
Above Moderate	$72,840
Note: Based on Riverside County area mean income of $60,700 for four-person households in 2013 Source: Department of Housing and Community Development, 2013
Market Rate Housing
Housing which is available on the open market without any subsidy. The price for housing is determined by the market forces of supply and demand and varies by location.
Median Income
The midpoint income for each household size within a region that is defined annually by HUD. Half of the households in the region have incomes above the median and half have incomes below the median.
Parcel
The basic unit of land entitlement. A designated area of land established by plat, subdivision, or otherwise legally defined and permitted to be used, or built upon.
Redevelopment Agency
California Community Redevelopment Law provides authority for cities to establish Redevelopment Agencies with the scope and financing mechanisms necessary to remedy blight and provide stimulus to eliminate deteriorated conditions. The law provides for the planning, development, redesign, clearance, reconstruction, or rehabilitation, or any combination of these, and the provision of public and private improvements as may be appropriate or necessary in the interest of the general welfare by the Agency. Redevelopment law requires an Agency to set aside 20 percent of all tax increment dollars generated from each redevelopment project area for the purpose of increasing and improving the community's supply of housing for low and moderate income households.
2014-2021 Housing Element
131
City of Norco
General Plan
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA)
The Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) is based on State of California projections of population growth and housing unit demand. The State distributes the total RHNA to each regional Council of Governments, which is SCAG for the southern California region. SCAG is responsible for allocating the quantified housing need to each city and/or county within the SCAG region. These housing need numbers serve as the basis for the update of the Housing Element in each California city and county.
Rehabilitation
The upgrading of a building previously in a dilapidated or substandard condition for human habitation or use.
Section 8 Rental Voucher/Certificate Program
The tenant-based Section 8 program subsidizes a family's rent in a privately owned house or apartment. Local public housing authorities typically administer the program. The Section 8 program pays the difference between 30 percent of the household annual income and fair market rent charged by the landlord. Households with incomes of 50 percent or below the area median income are eligible to participate in the program.
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG)
The Southern California Association of Governments is a regional planning agency that encompasses six counties: Imperial, Riverside, San Bernardino, Orange, Los Angeles, and Ventura. SCAG is responsible for preparation of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA), which determines a jurisdiction's share of regional housing growth.
Special Needs Groups
Special needs groups tend to have more difficulty in finding decent affordable housing due to their special circumstances. Under California Housing Element statutes, these special needs groups consist of the elderly, disabled, large families, female-headed households, farmworkers, and the homeless. A jurisdiction may also choose to consider additional special needs groups in the Housing Element, such as students, military households, or other groups present in their community.
Subdivision
The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act (California Government Code Section 66410 et seq.).
SRO
A common acronym used to refer to “single room occupancies,” which is a housing type that can be used for affordable housing. Tenants occupy a single room and share bathrooms, kitchens, and other living areas.
Supportive Housing
Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.
2014-2021 Housing Element
132
City of Norco
General Plan
Transitional Housing
Rental housing operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
HUD is a cabinetTevel department of the federal government responsible for housing, housing assistance, and urban development. Housing programs administered through HUD include Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), HOME and Section 8 Rental Assistance.
Zoning
A land use regulatory measure enacted by local government. Zoning district regulations governing lot size, building bulk, placement, and other development standards vary from district to district, but must be uniform within the same district. Each city and county adopts a zoning ordinance/code specifying these regulations.
2014'2021 Housing Element
133
City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014-2021 Housing Element
134
City of Norco
General Plan
9.	Appendix A: AB 987 Database
CITY OF NORCO REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY AB 987 AFFORDABLE HOUSING DATABASE
In accordance with the provisions of AB 987 passed by the California State Legislature, a worksheet describing newly constructed and substantially rehabilitated housing units that were developed or otherwise assisted with Low & Moderate Income Housing Funds, including units counted toward the Agency's inclusionary and replacement housing obligations, is posted below for public review. Please be aware that this is only a summary of affordable housing units assisted with Low & Moderate Income Housing Funds and is not a listing of currently available housing Pursuant to AB 987. this database is updated annually.
Street Address	Assessor’s Parcel Number	Total Subsidized Units	Subsidized Units Bedroom Size 1 BR 2 BR 3 BR			>y 4 BR	Year Constructed/ Rehabilitated/ Assisted	Covenant Document No. & Date	Restrictions Expiration Date
		Senior Rental Housini				3			
Heritage Park 2665 Clark St. Norco, CA 92860	129261001	86	64	22	0	0	2007	5/22/2007	5/22/2062
Clark Terrace 1 2660 Clark St. Norco, CA 92860	129240008	40	40	0	0	0	1995	12/20/1995	12/20/2035
Clark Terrace II 2680 Clark Ave. Norco, CA 92860	129240011	40	40	0	0	0	2000	7/26/2001	7/26/2041
	Ownership Housing—First Time Homebuyer Program								
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	130162037	1			1	--	1994	#069298 2/17/1994	2/17/2024
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	126240010	1	-	--	1	-	1998	#164322 4/28/1 938	4/28/2028
Single-Family Home Norco. CA 92860	123091021	1	—	--	1	--	2001	#2001-108381 3/16/2001	3/16/2031
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	133130011	1	1	--	-	--	1995	#302205 9/13/1995	9/13/2025
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	125070018	1	-	--	1	-	1996	#245382 7/1/1996	7/1/2026
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	131180027	1		--		1	1995	#218474 7/6/1995	7/6/2025
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	127150021	1		--	1	--	1994	#449285 11/30/94	11/30/2024
2014'2021 Housing Element
135
City of Norco
General Plan
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	129272002	1	--	--	1	--	1998	#557311 2/24/1998	2/24/2028
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	129281004	1	-	-	1	--	1995	#236976 6/22/1995	6/22/2025
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	123060023	1	--	--	1	--	1997	#283042 8/8/1997	8/8/2027
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	168020008	1	--	--	1	--	1994 		#394346 10/13/1994	10/13/2024
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	127342009	1	"■	--	1	--	1999	#1999-330722 7/23/1999	7/23/2029
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	125240003	1	-	--	--	1	1995	#327937 9/291/1995	9/29/2025
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	131040021	1	--	--	1	--	1997	#115581 11/25/1997	11/25/2027
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	125100042	1	'■	-	1	-	2001	N/A 3/30/2001	3/30/2031
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	153061002	1		--	--	1	1998	#283545 7/9/1998	7/92/2028
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	125100024	1			1	--	1998	#48950 2/11/1998	2/11/2028
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	131060017	1			1	--	1994	#410304 10/26/94	10/26/2024
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	127030009	1		1	--	--	1999	#199549 2/25/1999	2/25/2029
Ownership Housing—Infill Housing Program									
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	131030052	1			1	--	1994	#267797 6/30/1994	5/4/2024
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	131030069	1		--	1	--	1995	#167142 5/24/1995	4/25/2025
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	131060008	1		--	1	..	1994	#250769 6/21/1994	4/27/2024
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	133040018	1		--	1	--	2004	#250774 6/21/2004	4/27/2034
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	122080035	1		--	1	--	2004	N/A 4/16/2004	1/7/2034
2014-2021 Housing Element
136
City of Norco
General Plan
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	131030070	1		-	1	--	2007	N/A 4/14/2007	3/21/2037
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	131030071	1		-	1		1994	#478985 12/27/1994	12/21/2024
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	122080032	1			1	-	2004	N/A 2/5/2004	2/5/2034
Single-Family Home Norco, CA 92860	131040001	1			1	-	1998	#364963 8/28/1998	8/28/2023
Updated June 2008
2014-2021 Housing Element
137
City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014'2021 Housing Element
138
City of Norco
General Plan
10.	Appendix B: Public Participation
This appendix contains the following materials to illustrate the City’s effort to conduct quality community outreach efforts with regard to the Housing Element update process:
1.	List of Stakeholders contacted
2.	Meeting flyer
3.	Sample Stakeholder letter
2014-2021 Housing Element
139
City of Norco
General Plan
Table B-l: Stakeholder List
Organization Name	Address	City	State	Zip
Norco Senior Citizens Center	2690 Clark Avenue	Norco	CA	92860
Inland Regional Center	1365 South Waterman Avenue	San Bernardino	CA	92408
Abode Communities	701 East 3rd Street, Suite 400	Los Angeles	CA	90013
Affirmed Housing Group	13520 Evening Creek Drive North #160	San Diego	CA	92128
California Housing Partnership Corporation	28545 Old Town Front Street, Suite 205	Temecula	CA	92591
Coachella Valley Housing Coalition	45-701 Monroe Street, Suite G	Indio	CA	92201
Community Food Pantry of Murrieta	39793 Avenida Acacias	Murrieta	CA	92563
Fair Housing Council	3933 Mission Inn Avenue	Riverside	CA	92501
Family Support Program	4601 Jefferson Street	Murrieta	CA	92562
Housing and Homeless Coalition for Riverside County	4060 County Circle Drive	Riverside	CA	92503
Jamboree Housing Corporation	17701 Cowan Avenue	Irvine	CA	92614
National Community Renaissance (CORE)	9065 Haven Avenue, Suite#100	Rancho Cucamonga	CA	91730
Neighborhood Housing Sendees of the Inland Empire, Inc	1390 North D Street	San Bernardino	CA	92405
Riverside County Economic Development Agency	3403 10th Street, Suite 500	Riverside	CA	92501
Riverside County Housing Authority	5555 Arlington Ave	Riverside	CA	92504
Riverside County Office on Aging	6296 River Crest Drive, Suite K	Riverside	CA	92507
Safe Alternatives for Everyone	28816 Pujol Street	Temecula	CA	92590
Salvation Army	10020 Magnolia Ave	Riverside	CA	92503
Senior Citizens Sendee Center Inc.	41538 Eastman Drive # C	Murrieta	CA	92562
Southern California Association of Non-Profit Housing	3345 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 1005	Los Angeles	CA	90010
The Boys and Girls Club - S.W. County	40550 California Oaks Road	Murrieta	CA	92562
Women's Health Assistance Program	41785 Elm St., #305,	Murrieta	CA	92562
2014-2021 Housing Element
140
City of Norco
General Plan
City of Norco Housing Element
The City of Norco is in the process of updating the State-required Housing Element.
Bern
Please join us at the upcoming community workshop:
Wednesday, July 31,2013 6:30 pm
The workshop will be held at:
Norco City Hall, Conference Rooms A & B 2870 Clark Avenue
Norco, CA 92860
Included in this workshop will be:
•	Purpose and intent of the Housing Element
•	Why and how often the Housing Element is updated
•	The contents of the Housing Element
•	The process for adoption
•	Benefits of Housing Element certification
If you have any questions or would like additional information, please contact Alma Robles at (951) 270-5682, or visit the Planning Division located at Norco City Hall.
2014-2021 Housing Element
141
City of Norco
General Plan
CITY of NORCO
CITY HALL • 2870 CLARK AVENUE • NORCO CA 92860 • (951)735-3900 • FAX (951) 270-5622
July 18, 2013
Subject: Community Workshop for the Norco 2014-2021 Housing Element Update
The City of Norco cordially invites you to the upcoming community workshop to discuss and present the 2014-2021 Housing Element update. This community event is intended to provide information to the community about the General Plan Housing Element update, and to answer any questions regarding the update process. In addition, we would like to gather input from residents, City leaders, and interested stakeholders on housing issues and concerns that should be addressed in the Housing Element update. The workshop will be held:
Wednesday July 31, 2013, 6:30 p.m.
Norco City Hall, Conference Rooms A & B 2870 Clark Avenue Norco, CA 92860
The Housing Element is one component of the City’s General Plan, the City’s long-range plan for land use and housing in the community. The Housing Element identifies housing specific needs in Norco and describes the approaches the City will take to facilitate meeting those needs.
If you have questions or would like additional information, please contact Alma Robles by telephone at (951)	270-5682, or visit the Planning Division website at
http://www.norco.ca.us/depts/planning/default.asp.
If you cannot attend the meeting in person and would like to comment, please forward written comments to the Planning Division, located at Norco City Hall, 2870 Clark Avenue, Norco, CA 92860. Future public hearings on the Draft Norco 2014-2021 Housing Element Update will be scheduled with the Planning Commission and City Council.
Enclosed with this letter is a flyer that provides information about the community workshop for you to copy, post, and distribute as you deem necessary. Thank you.
Sincerely,
Steve King
Planning Director
Attachment: Community Workshop Flyer
CITY COUNCIL
KATHY AZEVEDO Mayor
BERWIN HANNA Mayor Pro Tem
KEVIN BASH Council Member
HERB HIGGINS Council Member
HARVEY SULLIVAN Council Member
2014'2021 Housing Element
142

City of Norco
General Plan
11.	Appendix C: Analysis
Default Density
2014'2021 Housing Element
143
City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014-2021 Housing Element
144
City of Norco
General Plan
CDCR - California Rehabilitation Center (CRC) - Institution Statistics
http://wwrv.cdcr.ca.gov/Facilities_Locator/CRC-Institution_Stats.html
CAgov |	| About CDCR |	Featured Links	I News |
		Search	IQ
		...	Site	California
PAROLE	JUVENILE JUSTICE		REPORTS	VICTIM SERVICES
HOME CAREERS PRISONS VISITATION REHABILITATION
nfcto
lof l
Select a prison facility for more information
California Rehabilitation Center (CRC)
Physical Address	All Staff	!r»W.t.BAll	Inmate Money Order*
6th Streel &	P.O. Bom 1841	P.O. Bom 3536	P.O. Bom 2000
Western	Norco, CA	Norco, CA	Norco. CA 82860
Norco. CA92860	92860-0991	82860	
(851)737-2683			
of Govwof
Edmund G. Brown Jr.
Cynthia Y. Tampkins, Warden
Secretary	!.
Jeffrey Beard, Ph.D.
Visit his Website
Population Reports
Inmate Population Reports (Weekly/Monthly)
CRC Links
Institution Statistics
California Rehabilitation Center was opened In 1962, and covers 98 acres. As of Fiscal Year 2009/2010, the following statistics apply
Number of custody staff	838
Number of support services staff	464
Total number of staff	1,302
Annual budget
Operating:	$128 million
Medical	S20 million
"Includes custody staff at Patton State Hospital
Designed Bedspace 6 Count
Facility Level	Design Capacity	Count
Males I/II	2,314	4.680
SAP	225	225
Back to Top | Conditions a< Use | Accessibility | Contact Us Copyright ® 2013 State of California
Mission Statement Institution Statistics Inmate Programs Inmate Mental Health Inmate Mail Historical Notes Visiting and Directions
City of Norco
INMATE LOCATOR
Visitation
Visitation Home Facility Locations CA Out-of-State Facilities Community Correctional Facilities Juvenile Facilities (DJJ)
CDCR Adult and Juvenile Institutions and Camps In California (pdf)
Get on the Bus/Chowchilla Family Express
Inmate Visiting Guidelines - includes Mail and Telephone calls (pdf) Juvenile Visitor Guidelines Visitor Processing Appointment Scheduling System (VPASS)
9/3/2013 8:15 PM
2014'2021 Housing Element
145

City of Norco
General Plan
[This page intentionally left blank]
2014-2021 Housing Element
146
City of Norco
General Plan
1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This Executive Summary section is provided in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines. As stated in CEQA Guidelines Section 15123(a), "[a]n EIR shall contain a brief summary of the proposed actions and its consequences. The language of the summary should be as clear and simple as reasonably practical.” State CEQA Guidelines Section 15123(b) states, “[t]he summary shall identify: (1) each significant effect with proposed mitigation measures and alternatives that would reduce or avoid that effect; (2) areas of controversy known to the Lead Agency, including issues raised by agencies and the public; and (3) issues to be resolved including the choice among alternatives and whether or how to mitigate the significant effects.” Accordingly, this summary includes a brief synopsis of the proposed project and project alternatives (including potential site locations), environmental impacts and mitigation, areas of known controversy, and issues to be resolved during environmental review. Table 1-1 (presented at a later point in this section) presents the summary of potential environmental impacts and their level of significance with or without mitigation measures. Section 1.3 provides a summary of each significant impact identified for each infill facility site and a summary of mitigation measures recommended to avoid or substantially reduce those impacts.
1.1 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT
The proposed project involves the construction and operation of new level II infill correctional facilities (up to 2,376 low-security inmate beds) as part of the State of California’s prison system.1 The proposed project is authorized by Senate Bill (SB) 1022, Statutes of 2012. SB 1022 directs the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) to locate these facilities on available land within seven intermediate-care-level prisons. Within the properties associated with these seven prisons, there are five potential development sites that can accommodate a 792-bed facility or, in some cases, a 1,584-bed facility. In compliance with the provisions of SB 1022, CDCR has proposed construction of a 792-bed facility within the grounds of Richard J. Donovan Correctional Facility (RJD) in southern San Diego County and a 1,584-bed facility within the grounds of Mule Creek State Prison (MCSP) in lone, California. This DEIR also analyzes the potential construction of the SB 1022 level II beds at three alternative sites including the California Institution for Men (CIM) in Chino, California; a site situated between California State Prison, Solano (SOL) and the California Medical Facility (CMF) in Vacaville, California; and a site situated between Folsom State Prison (FSP) and California State Prison, Sacramento (SAC) in Folsom, California. The physical address locations for each of these sites are:
a RJD Infill Site-South San Diego County, 480 Alta Road (Volume 2), San Diego County, California
MCSP Infill Site-4001 State Route 104, lone, Amador County California (Volume 3) j FSP/SAC Infill Site-300 Prison Road, Represa, Folsom, Sacramento County, California
(Volume 4) (Note: Potential infill site is situated between FSP and SAC)
CMF/SOL Infill Site-SOL is at 2100 Peabody Road, Vacaville; CMF is at 1600 California Drive, Vacaville, Solano County, California (Volume 5) (Note: Potential infill site is situated between CMF and SOL)
a CIM Infill Site-14901 Central Avenue, Chino, San Bernardino County, California
Four of the five sites have been evaluated at an equal, project-level analysis in this DEIR; site-specific project description information is contained in Chapter 2 of the EIR volume for each infill site (e g.,
1 Level II is one of four classifications (I [minimum], II [low]. III [medium], and IV [high]) of inmate type identified by CDCR as part of its ongoing realignment of the state prison system. Based on this classification system, a level II facility is the second lowest classification but does include standard CDCR perimeter fencing with a lethal electrified fence component and perimeter guard towers. The inmates of a level II facility, in contrast to a Level III or Level IV facility that have celled housing units, are housed in a secure dormitory structure.
California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation	Volume 1
Level II Infill Correctional Facilities Project HR	1-1
2014'2021 Housing Element
147
City of Norco
General Plan
Executive Summary____________________________________________________________________________________________Ascent Environmental
Volumes 2 through 5). The fifth site associated with CIM has been evaluated as an alternative within this DEIR, but not at an equal-level as the proposed project because additional study was needed to address the adequacy of the infrastructure capacity at this site. The project schedule, which is driven by target dates established in SB 1022, includes activation of the proposed level II infill correctional facilities by December 31, 2016, which limits the ability of CDCR to conduct the necessary infrastructure studies while still meeting this statutory requirement. If CDCR were to fully consider the CIM site for development of a new level II infill correctional facility subsequent additional analysis of the potential environmental effects of such a facility would be required.
In addition to the proposed construction of new level II beds adjacent to existing CDCR prisons, Section 16 of SB 1022 directs CDCR to cease operations of the California Rehabilitation Center in Norco (CRC) no later than December 31, 2016 or six months after construction of the new level II beds. No modifications to any of the structures within the grounds of CRC are authorized by this legislation.
1.2 SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS FOR
PROPOSED PROJECT AND PROJECT ALTERNATIVES
A summary of the impacts of the proposed project and project alternatives is provided in Table 1-1. As noted previously, CDCR has proposed construction of a 792-bed facility at the RJD Infill Site in southern San Diego County and a 1,584-bed facility at the MCSP Infill Site in lone, California based on initial evaluations of available land and potential constraints associated with the five potential development sites. Consistent with SB 1022 requirements, this DEIR also analyzes the potential construction of the SB 1022 level II beds at the other three alternative sites including the California Institution for Men (CIM) in Chino, California; a site situated between California State Prison, Solano (SOL) and the California Medical Facility (CMF) in Vacaville, California; and a site situated between Folsom State Prison (FSP) and California State Prison, Sacramento (SAC) in Folsom, California. For ease of comparison, the proposed project is presented together in Table 1-1 with the project alternatives mandated by SB 1022. For a summary discussion of the significant impacts identified for the proposed project and each of the project alternatives, as well as mitigation recommended for those impacts, please refer to Section 1.3, below.
Volume 1	California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation
1-2	Level II Infill Correctional Facilities Project EIR
2014-2021 Housing Element
148
City of Norco
General Plan
Certification:
Attached letter from the State of California-Business, Consumer Services, and Housing Agency, Department of Housing and Community Development, Division of Housing Policy, dated January 15, 2014
2014-2021 Housing Element
STATE OF CALIFORNIA - BUSINESS CONSUMER SERVICES AND HOUSING AGENCY	EDMUND G. BROWN JR.. Governor
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
DIVISION OF HOUSING POLICY DEVELOPMENT
2020 W. El Camino Avenue, Suite 500
Sacramento, CA 95833
(916) 263-2911 / FAX (916) 263-7453
www.hcd.ca.gov
RECEIVED CITY OF NORC
January 15, 2014
JAN 2 1 2014
Mr. Andy Okoro, City Manager
City of Norco
2870 Clark Avenue	CITY CLERK
Norco, CA, 92860	TIME:_______________________
Dear Mr. Okoro:
RE: Review of Norco’s 5th Cycle (2014-2021) Adopted Housing Element
Thank you for submitting the City of Norco’s housing element adopted on November 6, 2013 and received for review on November 22, 2013. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65585(h), the Department is reporting the results of its review.
The Department is pleased to find the adopted housing element in full compliance with State housing element law (Article 10.6 of the Government Code). The Department’s review found the adopted element to be substantially the same as the revised draft element reviewed by the Department on October 1, 2013 and determined to comply with statutory requirements. This finding was based on, among other reasons, Norco’s commitment to revise zoning to treat transitional and supportive housing as a residential use subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone pursuant to Chapter 633, Statutes 2007 (SB2).
The Department wishes Norco success in implementing its housing element and looks forward to following its progress through the General Plan annual progress reports pursuant to Government Code Section 65400. if the Department can provide assistance in implementing the housing element, please contact Janet Myles, of our staff, at (916) 263-7423.
Sincerely,
Campora
'Glen
Assistant Deputy Director﻿GENERAL PLAN
LAND VSE ELEMENT
UPDATE ADOPTION DATE: October 7, 2009
NORCO
LAND USE ELEMENT
2009 UPDATE
ADOPTED BY CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION NO. 2009-75 October 7, 2009
CITY COUNCIL
Kathy Azevedo, Mayor Malcolm Miller, Mayor Pro Tem Frank Hall Berwin Hanna Richard L. MacGregor
PLANNING COMMISSION
Phil Jaffarian, Chair Pat Hedges, Vice Chair Mike Harris Greg Newton Robert Wright
STAFF
Beth Groves, City Manager Brenda Jacobs, City Clerk Steve King, Planning Manager Alma Robles, Senior Planner Susan Dvorak, Executive Secretary
TABLE OF CONTENTS:
TITLE
PAGE NUMBER
1.0 INTRODUCTION TO THE LAND USE ELEMENT............................1
1.1	Purpose of the Land Use Element.........................1
1.2	Requirements............................................2
1.3	Defining Norco’s Lifestyle and Principle Land Use.......2
1.4	Historical Development of Norco.........................4
2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES..................................5
2.1	Land Use Issues..............................................5
2.1.1	Land Use Compatibility................................5
2.1.2	Limitations on Future Growth..........................6
2.1.3	Development and Preservation	of a	Unique Lifestyle....6
2.1.4	Community Design Cohesion.............................6
2.1.5	Protected Habitat/Species.............................7
2.1.6	Blighted Areas........................................8
2.2	Residential-Small Plot Agriculture/Animal Keeping Goal.......9
2.2.1	Residential Small Plot Agriculture Protection	Policy..9
2.2.2	Housing Development Policy...........................10
2.3	Economic Development Goal...................................11
2.3.1	Economic Development Policy..........................11
2.3.2	Hospitality District Development Policy..............12
2.4	Community Design Goal.......................................12
2.4.1	Community Design Policy..............................12
2.5	Public and Community Uses Goal..............................14
2.5.1	Equestrian and Animal-Keeping Facilities Policy......14
2.5.2	General Animal-Keeping Policy........................15
2.5.3	General Residential Development Policy...............15
2.6	Environmental Resources Goal................................16
2.6.1	Land Form Conservation Policy........................16
2.7	Historical Resources Goal...................................17
2.7.1	Historical Building Preservation Policy..............17
2.7.2	Archaeological Resources Policy......................18
2.8	Growth Management Goal......................................19
2.8.1	Annexation Policy....................................19
2.8.2	Annexation/Public Service Policy.....................19
3.0
THE LAND USE PLAN.................................................20
3.1	Existing Setting............................................20
3.1.1	Local Setting.........................................20
3.1.2	Regional Setting......................................21
3.2	Major Land Use Patterns.....................................22
3.2.1	Major Land Uses.......................................22
3.2.2	Planned Development Communities.......................24
3.3	Economic Base...............................................32
3.3.1	Existing Commercial Development.......................32
3.3.2	Commercial Zoning Designations.........................36
3.3.3	Existing Industrial Development........................38
3.3.4	Industrial Zoning Designations.........................38
3.3.5	Redevelopment..........................................39
3.4	Residential Base.............................................42
3.4.1	Existing Residential Development.......................43
3.4.2	Residential Zoning Designations........................43
3.4.3	Future Residential Growth..............................46
3.4.4	Infrastructure Finance for New Residential Development 46
3.5	Public Land Uses.............................................47
3.5.1	Open Space for the	Preservation of Resources...........48
3.5.2	Land Use Preservation..................................49
3.5.3	Open Space for Outdoor Recreation......................49
3.6	Community Design.............................................50
3.6.1	Landmarks and Community Focal Points...................51
3.6.2	Visual Corridors/Vista Points..........................51
3.6.3	Residential Neighborhood Design........................51
3.6.4	Commercial Neighborhood Design.........................52
4.0 IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES........................................53
4.1	Project Review/Permitting	Process.......................53
4.2	Capital Improvement Program.............................53
4.3	Grant Coordination......................................53
4.4	Redevelopment Funding...................................53
4.5	Economic Development....................................54
4.6	Community Development...................................54
LIST OF EXHIBITS:
EXHIBIT
3.1	Specific Plans Map..........................
3.2	Gateway Specific Plan.......................
3.3	Auto Mall Specific Plan.....................
3.4	Norco Hills Specific Plan...................
3.5	Norco Ridge Ranch Specific Plan.............
3.6	4th Quarter Taxable Sales Trends............
3.7	Regional Growth in Per Capita Sales 1997-2000
3.8	Regional Growth in Per Capita Sales 2001-2007
3.9	Redevelopment Area Map......................
General Plan Land Use Map...................
LIST OF TABLES:
TABLE
3.1	Land Use by Zoning..........................
3.2	Specific Plans
3.3	Commercial Land Uses........................
3.4	Industrial Land Uses........................
3.5	Residential Land Uses.......................
3.6	Public Uses/Open Space/Limited Development
PAGE NUMBER
27
28
29
30
31
33
34
35
............41
Pocket
PAGE NUMBER
23
24 37 39 46 50
1.0 INTRODUCTION TO THE LAND USE ELEMENT
The City of Norco was incorporated to preserve a small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle. Primary to this goal is the maintenance of residential lots that will accommodate and encourage animal keeping and agriculture at a family scale, a concept that dates back to early colonial times. It is important that the Land Use Element be established so that all other elements of the General Plan support animal keeping and agrarian land uses in perpetuity for future residents of the City. The primary goal of the Land Use Element is the maintenance of the small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle, to which all other elements of the General Plan must be consistent.
Equally important as the primary goal is the attraction and development of desired commercial uses. The Land Use Element must provide for all of the land uses that will sustain the community and support the preservation of the small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle as a viable land use in a rapidly urbanizing region. In that urban setting, the City provides a unique opportunity to maintain a residential lifestyle based on animal-keeping that is not available on a community scale anywhere else in the region. Desired commercial development will provide the necessary tax base to sustain the community; and, the introduction of previously excluded mixed-use and multi-family developments will allow the City to come into compliance with state-mandated housing requirements.
1.1	PURPOSE OF THE LAND USE ELEMENT
It is the purpose of the Land Use Element to provide appropriate land for the variety of activities including residential, commercial, public, etc., and to guide the manner in which each land use is developed and used. In so doing, the element intends to create and regulate a compatible and functional interrelationship between the various land uses in the City of Norco.
The Land Use Element, required by law since 1955, has the broadest scope of the seven mandatory General Plan elements. It embodies most of the concerns of the other six elements and plays a central role in synthesizing all land use issues. By definition in Government Code Section 65302(a):
“A land use element designates the proposed general distribution, general location and extent of the uses of the land for housing, business, industry, open space, including agriculture, natural resources, recreation and enjoyment of scenic beauty, education, public buildings and grounds, solid and liquid waste disposal facilities, and other categories of public and private uses of land. The land use element shall include a statement of the standards of population density and building intensity recommended for the various districts and other territory
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
General
1
covered by the plan. The land use element shall also identify areas covered by the plan which are subject to flooding and shall be reviewed annually with respect to such areas”.
This Element presents a land use plan with the associated policies that establish a pattern of land use in the City and sets standards and guidelines for the development of those land uses. It is a long-range plan (to the year 2020) and is based on current community goals as well as foreseeable needs and constraints of the community.
1.2	REQUIREMENTS
The California Government Code requires that general plans contain a land use element or section which designates the proposed general distribution, location and extent (including standards for population density and building intensity) of the uses of the land for housing, business, industry, open space, education, public buildings, solid and liquid waste disposal facilities, renewable energy facilities and other categories of public and private use.
The Land Use Element should:
•	Promote a balanced and functional mix of land uses consistent with community values;
•	Provide for the growth of housing and employment opportunities in keeping with community goals and consistent with planned infrastructure and service capacities;
•	Guide public and private investments;
•	Reflect the opportunities and constraints affecting land use identified in the other elements of the general plan; and,
•	Reduce loss of life, injuries, damage to property, and economic and social dislocation resulting from flooding and other hazards.
1.3	DEFINING NORCO’S LIFESTYLE AND PRINCIPLE LAND USE
Norco was incorporated for the purpose of preserving a lifestyle that is increasingly difficult to maintain in urban Southern California. Many of Norco’s residents once lived in Los Angeles and Orange counties in communities that started as equestrian areas but then were zoned out as higher density urbanization encroached. Norco was created to preserve lots big enough to accommodate small plot agriculture, animal keeping and the equestrian lifestyle. The City was designed from the start so that higher density residential development could not eventually create political pressure to abandon the animal-keeping lifestyle. The goals of the Land Use Element are: 1) to maintain the small plot agricultural animal-keeping residence as the primary residential use of the
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
General
2
City; 2) attract desired commercial uses; and 3) accommodate different types of housing that will allow the City to be compliant with state housing requirements.
To understand the cornerstone of the residential lifestyle in the City of Norco, it is necessary to define what is meant by certain statements and phrases that are used to define that lifestyle.
•	Small plot agriculture: an historical family-based agricultural system that was the basis for agricultural production in the founding days of this country, and which to a large extent has been replaced by large agribusinesses. It is still a viable land use for agricultural production and the raising of animals, particularly at a family scale where principles and trades can be taught that are not readily available in other avenues of modern education. For many families in Norco, this is an important part of our heritage, and of the principles of self-reliance, that needs to be preserved. The opportunities for this type of lifestyle in an urban setting are becoming increasingly difficult to find in Southern California; and communities in urban settings that are established on these principles are even more rare.
•	Animal keeping: The City of Norco is committed to residences that allow the keeping of animals. Lots not only have to have the appropriate size, but also a topography that allows for adequate area to safely keep animals. For lots that have manufactured slopes pads need to be large enough to accommodate both the residence and the animal-keeping area. Building coverage on lots is restricted to ensure that adequate room for animals is maintained.
•	Equestrian: Regulations controlling residential development in Norco are designed to accommodate the keeping of many types of animals not generally allowed on a large scale in urban residential areas. The focus of community design however, is the promotion of an animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle. All public streets must have at least one equestrian trail on one side of the street. Commercial developments accommodate watering troughs, tie-ups, and other amenities as feasible.
•	Rural: Norco is a community preserving aspects of a rural lifestyle that existed in this area before the rapid urbanization that characterizes western Riverside County. Those aspects that are core to the image and lifestyle of Norco are the large lots to accommodate small plot agriculture/animal-
keeping/equestrian land uses, and the “rural” style street improvements with equestrian/pedestrian trails, equestrian fencing, minimal street lighting, and no sidewalks except along Hamner Avenue, Mountain Avenue, Hidden Valley
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
3
Parkway, and other specific commercial or industrial areas (not including Sixth Street).
1.4	HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF NORCO
The pre-European history of Norco is much like the rest of Southern California where various tribes of Indians occupied the different portions of the region. The Luiseno Indians, part of the Shoshonean linguistic tribe occupied this area when settlement north from Mexico began. The name Luiseno was assigned by Spaniards due to the fact that the Indians occupied territory controlled by the San Luis Rey Mission. The main village was in Temescal Canyon, and the Norco area was used as a hunting-gathering location.
In 1846 present-day Norco was part of a land grant (Rancho La Sierra) that Mexican Governor Pio Pico granted to Vicenta Sepulveda. The land was later sold to Abel Stearns an early cattle rancher who was the first Mexican mayor of Los Angeles. After the drought of 1863 the land passed through various owners. The San Jacinto Land Company purchased the property and started irrigating for the purpose of growing orange trees. That and other ventures to grow oranges failed due to high winds and frost. In 1908 the land was purchased by the Orange Heights Water Company who established wells and pipeline, and subdivided the property for development.
Farmers gradually ventured into animal-raising, especially poultry and rabbits, some operations of which are still active today. In 1921 the land was purchased by Rex Clark who with the assistance of the North Corona Land Company set about to develop the area. Clark constructed many of the community’s first buildings including the first school (now the community recreation center), the first general store (now the library), and the Norconian Resort.
The Norconian Resort was constructed at the site of a hot springs discovered while digging for irrigation water. It occupied a 700-acre site and was for years a favorite of Hollywood celebrities. Its use declined during the 1930’s and in 1941 the resort was sold to the U.S. Navy for use as a hospital. It was subsequently declared surplus after the war. The grounds and buildings have since been divided and now function as an ordnance laboratory for the Department of the Navy and an incarceration/rehabilitation center (California Rehabilitation Center) in the state prison system. The actual Norconian Hotel is on property controlled by the prison but it currently stands vacant. In 2009 the Norco City Council established the Historic Preservation Commission charged with the task of establishing the regulatory framework, and finding ways to preserve and eventually restore the hotel and resort properties when they become available.
The community’s first public recreational facility was developed in 1948 when the old Norco School (see above) was acquired for use as a community center. The Norco
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
4
Recreation and Park District was then formed to maintain and operate the property. During the 1950’s and 1960’s Norco began to experience more growth, resulting from the population explosion occurring throughout the Southern California metropolitan area. The San Bernardino and Riverside freeways made the area more accessible from Los Angeles and Orange Counties, and Norco’s animal-keeping lifestyle came within commuting distance of major centers of employment. Because of rapid growth in surrounding communities, and the previous loss of other unincorporated animal-keeping communities in Los Angeles and Orange counties, the City of Norco was incorporated in 1964 to preserve the animal-keeping community that had established roots here.
The City was incorporated on December 28, 1964 as a General Law City and on December 10, 2003 officially became a Charter City, that having previously been approved by the voters. The new charter affects land use regulation by requiring a super-majority (4 out of 5) approval for any zone change. The City must still operate under the general land use laws of the State. On July 3, 2007 “Horsetown USA” was officially trademarked to the City by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
The primary goal for the City is the preservation of a small plot agricultural/animal-keeping lifestyle which by its nature requires a unique approach to land use for a city in an urban setting, one that also has a strong tax base of desired commercial uses to support that lifestyle. The primary intent of land use goals is to protect this unique lifestyle.
2.1	LAND USE ISSUES
2.1.1	LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
In order for the City of Norco to remain an intact community that can meet its own fiscal needs, there needs to be a mix of land uses including commercial development. Commercial development generates sales tax and provides income to the City that property tax from residential development does not. A tax base based solely on the income generated by residential property tax is not enough for a jurisdiction to provide all of the services that residents expect from the City. That is where commercial development becomes vital to the viability of a city.
The inherent problem is the impact of commercial and multi-use planned developments on equestrian neighborhoods that are quiet in nature. Traffic, noise, hours of operation, and light are just some of the possible impacts. These problems become more severe the closer together two different land uses become and/or the more intense a type of use becomes. With the equestrian
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
5
lifestyle, noise impacts that are standard in typical suburbs present an additional level of danger to equestrians. The City needs to maintain a land use plan that keeps commercial development and traffic routes as separate as possible from the City’s animal-keeping residential areas.
2.1.2	LIMITATIONS ON FUTURE GROWTH
The City of Norco is nearing buildout conditions in the agricultural residential zones, and has a limited supply of commercial and industrial zoned properties. Additionally, the City’s sphere of influence does not cover much more area than what is within the City’s limits. The significance being that under the existing political geography, there will not be significant areas in which the City can have future growth unless the City boundaries and/or the sphere-of-influence changes. Most of the available land for development consists of infill properties in the commercial and agricultural residential zones. In the industrial zones there are still large areas that are open, but the overall amount of industrially zoned land is small (see Table 3.1).
2.1.3	DEVELOPMENT AND PRESERVATION OF A UNIQUE LIFESTYLE The most important issue affecting the lifestyle that has been the center of community affairs since incorporation of the City is the maintenance of a residential community that keeps animals. As growth continues to place more demand for Inland Empire housing, the availability of large affordable lots grows increasingly smaller. The demand for “estate lots” increases along with the demand for “animal-keeping” lots, especially with Norco’s proximity to Los Angeles and Orange Counties. This is the same type of land use conflict that eventually changed original animal-keeping communities in those two counties. The maintenance of lot size, dimension, and setback requirements will help preserve lots that accommodate animal keeping. A coordinated land use pattern that takes into consideration the animal keeping needs of the community will also help to preserve the viability of that use in the City. The City shall continue coordinating closely with schools, the University of Cooperative Extension 4H, Future Farmers of America, and Grange for the continuation of school competitions, rodeos, and educational programs based on animal keeping and animal husbandry.
2.1.4	COMMUNITY DESIGN COHESION
Community design defines and enhances the character of a community through the interrelation of the built and natural environments. The elements of community design occur at different levels and from different perspectives. At the pedestrian scale, detailed articulation of building structures and landscaping provides a positive experience for users of the site and adjoining sites. Standard “modern California cookie-cutter” design may not be adequate. Each site needs
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
General
6
to be designed both as an individual unit and as part of an overall neighborhood and area, and not just as “another unit in a chain of stores.”
The scale and level of detail is different for pedestrian traffic than it is for street traffic, especially along the higher-speed corridors. Visual corridors, primarily along the major streets are often the most identifiable design elements of a community, but they do not allow for the absorption of small details that occurs at a pedestrian scale. As a vehicle travels, there are two views, the foreground view consisting of building facades, landscaping, and streetscape; and the background consisting of the mountains north and south, the hills to the east, Beacon Hill, and views of the valley from higher vistas. As such, visual corridors should be identified so that building and landscaping can be designed to protect as many vistas as possible.
The City promotes a design theme that is characterized as western and/or equestrian in nature. Some areas, however, have developed with more contemporary styles. Neighborhood and area identification play an important role in community identity, and it is not necessary that every neighborhood or area have exactly the same design styles. By establishing areas and neighborhoods as unique entities within the design framework of the community, the City helps establish and maintain the vitality and distinctiveness of a neighborhood. Coinciding with distinct neighborhood identities, historical and natural elements become important anchors.
The development and maintenance of a positive community identity is a combination of private and public efforts, but is primarily accomplished over the long term through incremental private investment in property improvements. Some large-scale public investment can occur, but these opportunities will be limited because of budget constraints.
2.1.5	PROTECTED HABITAT/SPECIES
The City along with the 14 cities of western Riverside County is a participating agency (Permittee) in the Western Riverside County Multi-Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP) which effectively transfers administration of land and conservation planning for endangered species from the federal and state governments to the local authorities. The Regional Conservation Authority (RCA) is a joint-powers authority that oversees the implementation of the MSHCP.
The species that benefit are those already listed as endangered, or are being proposed, or are those that are strong candidates to be proposed in the future. The purpose of the plan is to establish large areas, interconnected where feasible, that are most suitable for habitat preservation to the benefit of as many species as possible within the same conservation areas. The habitat plan builds off of the Stephen’s kangaroo rat (SKR) habitat conservation plan that was
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
7
completed in the 1980’s. At that time, Norco was outside of the historical habitat area for the SKR and so was not involved in that plan. Subsequently, SKR was found in the Norco Hills and land owners or developers had been required to obtain their own permits (Section 10a) from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). With the adoption of the MSHCP by the USFWS and the California Department of Fish and Game, “take” permits have been issued to the 14 Permittees of the MSHCP so that individual developers do not have to obtain their own permits anymore.
The only area identified as a core habitat area or an important habitat linkage area in Norco is adjacent to the Santa Ana River. In the draft MSHCP the Norco Hills area was identified as a “substantial habitat block” when determining what areas would be designated for core preservation. It was ultimately decided however that, while the Norco Hills may have a focus species of concern, or may have a variety of species, it is not large enough to support sustainable populations or does not have enough habitat to sustain a focus species in perpetuity.
The habitat and species in the MSHCP that are of concern to Norco are fish species and riparian habitat along the Santa Ana River and other habitats associated with the river. Since the river is identified as a core habitat area for preservation, the species and habitat will be protected upon implementation of the MSHCP.
2.1.6	BLIGHTED AREAS
Section 2.1.4 addresses the need for design cohesion within neighborhoods and within the overall community. One of the primary obstacles to achieving this, especially in commercial areas, is the existence of blight. Blight occurs in areas that are generally older and are not well maintained. The result is sporadic development, inconsistent design, and properties that do not achieve the highest and best use possible. One condition that helps blight to get established, and which is true in Norco, is small lot configurations with many different owners. Efforts to buy properties and/or develop a cohesive commercial center are hampered by many owners with different ideas and intentions for their property. Many times, the values of those properties are artificially escalated when interest of acquiring and assembling properties for development has been expressed. This only hampers the process further, encouraging the continuation of blighted conditions.
Two focus areas of concern are located along Hamner Avenue. The first is located in and around Acre Street where the topography of the land slopes down from Hamner Avenue and where access into some of the interior lots is taken from a private street (Acre Street), the legal ownership and use of which is

General Plan Land Use Element
General
8
unclear. Historically this has been an area of mixed commercial, residential, and outdoor storage uses. New development has occurred in this neighborhood but there is still a large area of underutilized and un-maintained property.
A second area of concern is the commercial district along Hamner Avenue between Third Street and Fifth Street. This area has a higher rate of land use than the Acre Street area, but the development pattern is inconsistent, and many properties between Hamner Avenue and the freeway have long deep lots, the rear portions of which have a tendency towards unsightly storage. Some lots in this area have sat vacant for many years because of a perceived lack of development value. Some new development has occurred in this section of Hamner Avenue that has greatly enhanced the visibility. There have also been somefagade improvements and some dilapidated structures removed. However, the overall pattern of inconsistent design and development remains.
Sixth Street is another commercial area that suffers from parcels that are narrow and deep with different owners and development patterns. Land use regulations prohibit new residential construction, and economic conditions are such that commercial construction has not been attracted to the area in large numbers. This is especially true on the eastern portion of the street where the lots are farthest away from the freeway and the Hamner Avenue commercial corridor. A new commercial center combined with other smaller commercial developments have established new focal points along the street but the pattern of underutilized parcels, nonconforming buildings, and inconsistent design prevails.
2.2	RESIDENTIAL-SMALL PLOT AGRICULTURE/ANIMAL-KEEPING GOAL
This goal promotes the health, safety, and well-being of the citizens of Norco by adopting standards for the proper balance, relationship, and distribution of residential land uses in accordance with the City’s small plot agricultural/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle (See also the Goals and Policies of the Housing Element and the Norco Redevelopment Project Area Plan)
2.2.1	RESIDENTIAL/SMALL PLOT AGRIGULTURE PROTECTION POLICY:
Replacement of residential development shall preserve existing single-family residential uses at similar densities.
Policy 2.2.1a. Existing A-1 zones and similar agricultural-residential specific plan districts with similar densities shall not be rezoned for higher intensity residential uses.
Policy 2.2.1b. Senior housing and senior care housing shall be allowed in all zones, but shall not be built at densities greater than what is compatible with the applicable zoning and area land use.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
9
Policy 2.2.1c. The City shall consider incentives to encourage the merger of vacant lots with adjacent residential lots that already permit animal keeping with the intent to promote larger equestrian ranches. Incentives could be in the form of increased animal unit allowances for larger lots, streamlined approval processes for caretaker units, etc.
Policy 2.2.1d. The City shall encourage residential open areas at a scale that encourages the small-plot agricultural/animal-keeping lifestyle.
Policy 2.2.1e. In residential zones that allow animal keeping, the City shall encourage lot development that adequately provides the necessary area and terrain to effectively maintain the health and safety of animals.
The objective of the residential-small plot agriculture/animal-keeping protection policy is to ensure that existing residential-small plot agricultural neighborhoods are not changed or impacted through increases in housing density. Likewise, it is to ensure that future single-family housing is built to protect adequate open areas that will accommodate animal keeping.
Responsible Agency: Planning Division
2.2.2	HOUSING DEVELOPMENT POLICY: Affordable residential housing units shall receive priority consideration in the implementation of any residential rehabilitation programs implemented by the City.
Policy 2.2.2a. The City shall encourage where appropriate public and private investment toward the upgrading and rehabilitation of older dwellings and toward the removal of substandard units.
Policy 2.2.2b. The City shall enforce property affordability requirements upon the sale of these units to ensure that existing affordable units stay in the City’s overall housing pool as is required by state law.
Policy 2.2.2c. The City shall use housing programs to retrofit and improve existing housing units.
Policy 2.2.2d. The City shall consider affordable-housing projects in commercial locations that will not adversely impact the animal-keeping lifestyle of existing agricultural low-density neighborhoods.
The objective of the housing development policy is to encourage the development of viable attractive neighborhoods, free from blight and

General Plan Land Use Element
General
10
deterioration, with units available for a variety of household incomes.
Responsible Agencies: Planning Division, Redevelopment Agency
2.3	ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GOAL
This goal promotes a stable tax base with a balanced mixture of commercial and industrial development taking advantage of increased regional interest in the 1-15 corridor. As part of this goal the City will seek to establish a hospitality district to take advantage of new regional attractions in the City including the Silverlakes Equestrian and Sports Park, the enhanced Ingalls Equestrian Events Center, and ultimately a restored Norconian Hotel and resort property.
2.3.1	ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT POLICY: The City will seek to establish a stable tax base by expanding the economic base of the community through active encouragement of commercial and industrial development so as to not adversely affect the viability of the community’s small plot agricultural/residential lifestyle.
Policy 2.3.1a. The City will facilitate as feasible, the retention and expansion of existing businesses within the community.
Policy 2.3.1b. All commercial facilities shall be built and maintained in accordance with Health and Safety Code Requirements and shall meet seismic safety regulations and environmental regulations including noise, air quality, water, and other environmental resources as they apply.
Policy 2.3.1c. Develop parking regulations/guidelines that encourage employers to provide incentives for using public transportation.
Policy 2.3.1d. The City shall encourage the rehabilitation of existing substandard blighted commercial and industrial uses through the combined efforts of private and public sectors to revitalize and upgrade aesthetic and functional deficiencies.
Policy 2.3.1 e. The City shall study the potential for mixed-use projects in commercial zones in areas that will not adversely impact animal-keeping properties.
Policy 2.3.1f. The City shall study potential zone changes in key locations, and zone code amendments as needed, to attract desirable commercial projects with a focus on hospitality uses (e.g. hotels, restaurants, and visitor-oriented amenities) along the northern Hamner Avenue/Beacon Hill corridor.

General Plan Land Use Element
General
11
Policy 2.3.1g. The City shall review the Gateway Specific Plan for possible modifications to accommodate mixed-use commercial-residential projects in the Industrial District, including the Norco Ranch property.
The objective of economic development policies is to achieve overall effective land use in the City by eliminating blight, and making commercial areas more marketable for development to ensure that the City can maintain its small plot agricultural lifestyle with a vibrant and growing tax base.
Responsible Agencies: Planning Division, Economic Development Department
2.3.2	HOSPITALITY DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT POLICY: The City will seek to
establish and promote the development of hospitality-related projects in those areas most conducive to drawing tourist traffic taking advantage of new regional attractions, the proximity of the Hamner commercial corridor to the freeway, and the close proximity of the City to Los Angeles International Airport-Ontario.
Policy 2.3.2a. The City shall establish districts for the development of hospitality-related uses, or new zoning as may be appropriate, where the district (or zoning) has some function and incentive towards the encouragement of these uses over other commercial uses.
Policy 2.3.2b. The City shall investigate and implement as feasible incentives to attract hospitality-related uses. Incentives could be in the form of zoning concessions, development assistance, etc.
2.4	COMMUNITY DESIGN GOAL
To achieve an overall design statement for the community that establishes it as a visually distinct and unique community.
2.4.1	COMMUNITY DESIGN POLICY: Development shall include elements of design that relate a particular project to its immediate neighborhood, district, street corridor, and community.
Policy 2.4.1a. New development in the City should incorporate western-themed architectural features and building style, the level of which will be determined based on the location of a building, the type of construction, and the use of a building.
Policy 2.4.1b. Freestanding signage shall be kept at a minimum and shall be designed to match building architecture with the incorporation of western design
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
General
12
features. Signage that does occur (exclusive of pylon and pole signs) shall be low in profile to preclude unnecessary clutter along the City’s visual corridors.
Policy 2.4.1c. Street and on-site landscaping shall be provided in such a way so as to create pleasing site-related aesthetics, but also to maintain visual corridors and vista points on a neighborhood and community scale as much as possible.
Policy 2.4.1d. The City shall identify prominent vista points and visual corridors for the purpose of preserving these vital elements of the community’s character.
Policy 2.4.1e. The City shall promote the development of high quality commercial and public facilities requiring landscaping, maintenance, and permanent upkeep on all new development.
Policy 2.4.1f. New office, research, and industrial projects shall be developed in accordance with approved guidelines and/or within height limits to minimize encroachment into expansive views of the horizon.
Policy 2.4.1g. Commercial development proposed in areas that adjoin residential development shall provide adequate buffering by landscaping, screening, or open space. Height limits shall be established in all commercial zones so as to protect the privacy and solar access on adjacent residential lots.
Policy 2.4.1 h. Outdoor storage shall only be permitted in appropriate zones and only as an ancillary use to an otherwise permitted land use and in the appropriate zoning district. Land uses for which parking and/or outdoor storage is the primary use shall not be permitted, or shall be substantially controlled through architectural and landscaping design.
Policy 2.4.1i. The City shall develop, maintain, and update as needed, architectural guidelines for the different areas of the City based on the overall western theme and taking into consideration surrounding development and land use.
Policy 2.4.1 i. The City shall seek opportunities to eliminate physical blight by removing or renovating deteriorated and functionally obsolete structures that lack historic or aesthetic value.
Policy 2.4.1k. The City shall implement new landscaping requirements increasing where necessary the amount of landscaping required for commercial development, especially for areas with significant public exposure.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
13
Policy 2.4.11. The City shall investigate and implement where feasible, a public open space landscaping program that could include preservation of existing native vegetation in new development, and the planting of (or preservation of) highly visible landscape pockets along major corridors that can identify the community.
The objective of the community design policies is to have each new development in the City contribute to an overall positive aesthetic experience, relating to site specific, neighborhood, district, and community scale aesthetics.
Responsible Agencies: Planning Division, Economic Development Department.
2.5	PUBLIC AND COMMUNITY USES GOAL
This goal promotes the construction of public facilities that provide for the varied needs of the community and establish the animal-keeping lifestyle that is central to its citizens. These facilities should set the example for architectural and landscaping design standards for the entire community.
2.5.1	EQUESTRIAN AND ANIMAL-KEEPING FACILITIES POLICY: The City shall construct and seek opportunities for assistance to construct and/or enhance facilities that preserve and encourage the equestrian lifestyle that is central to the identity of the community.
Policy 2.5.1a. The City shall construct adequate public arenas, stalls, and exercise areas within easy access of all neighborhoods and trails.
Policy 2.5.1 b. The City shall encourage and maintain staging areas in strategic locales in the City that will allow residents and non-residents with equestrian trailers to park trailers and have access to open space resources and training areas, as well as to the City’s extensive trail system.
Policy 2.5.1c. Where commercial and office development meant for general public access adjoins equestrian trails, or have trails easily accessible to the site, the project shall include such equestrian amenities as corrals, watering troughs, hitching posts, etc.
Policy 2.5.1d. The City should seek out museums and commercial venues that are compatible with the community and the neighborhood in which they are located that promote, support, remember, and/or encourage the equestrian heritage of the community and the historical west.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
14
Policy 2.5.1e. The City shall use minor plots of surplus property that are adjacent to trails for rest stops, corrals, watering troughs, etc. where the situation supports the development and use of these types of amenities.
Policy 2.5.1f. The City shall continue Capital Improvement Program phasing to construct equestrian fencing, mark trails, and prohibit parking along all of the trails in the City to encourage safe use of the facilities.
The objective of the equestrian and animal-keeping facilities policy is to develop a community fabric of all land uses that support and reflect the animal-keeping and equestrian nature of the City.
Responsible Agencies: Planning Division, Economic Development Department
GENERAL ANIMAL-KEEPING POLICY: The City shall construct necessary facilities within public areas to ensure that animal keeping as associated with a small plot agriculture/equestrian lifestyle can be supported in perpetuity (said facilities will include where appropriate animal control facilities and holding pens in parks and showing areas, etc.).
Policy 2.5.2a, The City shall maintain appropriate facilities within its Animal Control Division to offer support to the community for the keeping and maintaining of animals associated with a small plot agricultural lifestyle.
Policy 2.5.2b, The City will continually support and sponsor public events for the purpose of continuing education in animal husbandry.
The objective of the general animal-keeping policies is to ensure that facilities and resources are available for general public use to foster the development and maintenance of an animal-keeping lifestyle.
Responsible Agencies: Planning Division, Department of Parks, Recreation, and Community Services.
GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT POLICY: In conjunction with the goals and policies of the Housing Element to provide equal and affordable housing to all segments of the population, the City shall ensure that residential growth occurs in a responsible way consistent with the small plot agricultural lifestyle and with public facilities as appropriate to maintain that lifestyle. (See also Housing Element)
Policy 2.5.3a. For all new development, existing and projected design capacities for affected schools shall be determined.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
15
Policy 2.5.3b. The City will seek to maintain an on-going relationship with the school district for any proposed school construction, and to stay abreast of potential changes in school attendance boundaries.
Policy 2.5.3c. No new residential development shall be allowed until proof has been provided that school district impact fees have been paid in full, or the provision for the payment of fees has been agreed to by the school district.
Policy 2.5.3d. All new residential construction shall include the necessary infrastructure to provide services concurrent with City standards, including a lateral connection to the City’s sewer system for each single lot that is developed with a home (same as Housing Element Policy 2.3.3a).
Policy 2.5.3e. Senior housing complexes shall be permitted in all zones at densities that reflect the intensity of the underlying zone. The allowable densities should be similar in intensity to surrounding developments.
Policy 2.5.3f. The City shall study the potential for mixed-use projects in commercial zones in areas that will not adversely impact animal-keeping properties (same as Policy 2.3.1 .e).
The objective of the general residential development policies is to promote housing opportunities that will help the City meet its regional housing needs assessment (RHNA) consistent with the growth and development plans of the school district and the City’s infrastructure system.
Responsible Agencies: Planning Division, Economic Development Department, Public Works Department.
2.6	ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES GOAL
This goal promotes the wise use and management of the City’s land resources in conjunction with the Conservation Element and the Open Space/Parks Element.
2.6.1	LAND FORM CONSERVATION POLICY: In areas not already designated for permanent open space in the Conservation or Open Space Elements, land development should be done in such a manner that the City’s primary land forms and scenic vistas are protected.
Policy 2.6.1a. Residential development in hillside areas needs to first accommodate a grading scenario wherein adequate lot area is provided to preserve the City’s animal-keeping small plot agricultural heritage, while striving

General Plan Land Use Element
General
16
to maintain as much of the natural hillside area and the form of the hillsides as possible.
Policy 2.6.1b, The City should facilitate the development of a land use plan for the Beacon Hill area to determine where development should be allowed to occur, incorporating as feasible equestrian trails and open space, in a manner that protects and recognizes the historical nature of the hill in the City’s landscape.
Policy 2.6.1c. Building construction should be restricted within 20 feet of the crest of the Norco bluffs (generally from west of Hamner Avenue eastward to the City boundary).
The objective for the environmental resources goal is to ensure that development occurs consistent with the City’s land form resources, preserving to the greatest extent possible the City’s most identifiable natural landmarks that help give the community its sense of uniqueness; and to ensure that development does not occur where people could be injured as a result of improper development. (Also see Conservation and Open Space Elements).
Responsible Agency: Planning Division, Department of Public Works.
2.7	HISTORICAL RESOURCES GOAL
This goal preserves from development, to the extent possible, the City’s historical and archeological resources.
2.7.1	HISTORICAL BUILDING PRESERVATION POLICY: The City will identify and
preserve the unique historical buildings that significantly identify and establish the community’s history and character.
Policy 2.7.1a. Sites of significant historical, archaeological, and cultural value shall be preserved and/or incorporated into proposed new development with mitigation measures established through the environmental review process.
Policy 2.7.1b. Vegetation including street trees and public landscaping that help contribute to the City’s historical fabric and identity, should be preserved and incorporated into the landscaping plans for any new development that incorporate the particular site or is adjacent to it for public improvement purposes.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
17
Policy 2.7.1c. Rehabilitation of historical structures should be done so that the integrity of structures is not jeopardized with inappropriate additions or alterations.
Policy 2.7.1d. No demolition of any historical structure shall occur until an assessment of the cost of rehabilitation of the existing structure has been submitted to the City.
Policy 2.7.1f. Land use designations and regulations around historical structures should be conducive to the historical use of the structure so that the land value for maintaining the structure, as is, is not jeopardized.
Policy 2.7.1g. Community design adjacent to historical structures shall not impede the integrity of the historical structure, either through inappropriate design, building mass, landscaping mass, setbacks, etc.
The objective of the historical preservation policy is to provide the community setting, which supports the preservation and enhancement of the City’s historical buildings and sites.
Responsible Agency: Economic Development Department
2.7.2	ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURSES POLICY: The City will identify and catalogue any archaeological resources, and will take measures to preserve those resources that are considered unique and significant to the area’s history.
Policy 2.7.2a. The City should collect, record, and/or mitigate archaeological resources to the level consistent with the related value of each item in terms of historical significance and importance.
Policy 2.7.2b. New development requiring discretionary approval from the Planning Commission shall be approved with a condition that requires any construction activity to stop upon discovery of archaeological resources until such time as a qualified archaeologist, retained by the property owner or developer, has investigated the site and made recommendations regarding the disposition of any items. Human remains shall not be moved until the Riverside County’s Coroners Office has been notified.
Policy 2.7.2c. New development shall be coordinated with Native American tribes that have an historical presence and interest in the Norco region, or any other groups with historical interest.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
18
The objective of the archaeological resources policy is to ensure that any significant archaeological resources are preserved.
Responsible Agency: Planning Division.
2.8	GROWTH MANAGEMENT GOAL
This goal controls growth in the City so that the small plot agricultural/animal-keeping lifestyle remains the primary focus of the community.
2.8.1	ANNEXATION POLICY: The City will only consider annexations that are conducive to the maintenance of the small plot agricultural/animal-keeping lifestyle.
Policy 2.8.1b. The City shall support annexations and/or sphere of influence amendments that will add areas that, by their nature, support and enhance the City’s small plot agricultural lifestyle and protect significant open space elements. Such annexations can include areas that provide a good buffer to higher density non-animal-keeping neighborhoods in adjoining communities.
The objective of the annexation policies is to ensure that growth of the City’s land area only occurs so that the animal-keeping lifestyle is maintained and supported.
Responsible Agency: Planning Division
2.8.2	ANNEXATION/PUBLIC SERVICE POLICY: Logical annexation of adjacent unincorporated areas, including amendments to the City's sphere of influence boundary as necessary, will be encouraged when adequate service and proper land use plans have been developed, or when annexation is deemed critical to preserving the City’s small plot agricultural/animal-keeping lifestyle.
The objective of the annexation/public service policy is to facilitate the annexation of properties whose owners are conducive to annexation where City services are readily available; and for properties that will enhance the City’s small plot agricultural/animal-keeping lifestyle.
Responsible Agency: Planning Division
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
19
3.0 THE LAND USE PLAN
3.1	EXISTING SETTING
The City of Norco is approaching buildout conditions, and very little area remains in the sphere of influence where the City could annex potential large development areas. Additionally the City is physically defined by natural borders along its northwest side, and along the eastern boundary that separate it from adjoining communities. The City’s southern boundary is the City of Corona.
3.1.1	LOCAL SETTING
The City of Norco was incorporated on December 28, 1964 as a General Law City. On November 4, 2003 the voters adopted a City Charter, and on December 10, 2003 the Secretary of State received and filed the document making the City a Charter City for land use regulation. The difference between a General Law City and a Charter City is the level of local authority on municipal issues especially as they pertain to the function and organization of local government. The City must still operate under the general land use laws of the State.
The City consists of approximately 9,808 acres or 14.5 square miles, with approximately 56 acres within the “sphere of influence.” The dominant natural physical features are Beacon Hill, Norco hills on the east, and the Santa Ana River to the north. Lake Norconian of the old Norconian Country Club, now the property of federal and state agencies, is a man-made reservoir that is not readily accessible to the public. Primary features of the built environment include the I-15 Freeway that roughly splits the City into two halves, and the former Norconian Hotel, a large and historical Spanish/Mediterranean influenced structure that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Besides the original hotel use, the building has served as a hospital and a state penitentiary. The building is currently closed with restricted access.
The bluffs overlooking the Santa Ana River define the northeastern to southwestern physical edge of the City. A north-south chain of hills defines the eastern physical edge.
A rural standard street design that consists of equestrian trails and fencing, and large single-family lots give the City an open and rural appearance. The numerous trees along with the equestrian trails add a rustic quality that is associated with the animal-keeping lifestyle. The addition of hitching posts and watering troughs, with the extensive system of equestrian trails, helps emphasize this rustic lifestyle.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
20
The rolling hills divide the City into a number of small and discrete areas. The most dramatic of these is the Lake Norconian basin, a manmade improvement in the landscape that is primarily closed to the public. Another “defined” area is the hillside area between Norco and Riverside. Much of that hillside area has been developed with agricultural-residential housing since the last update to the Land Use Element in 2001. As a result approximately 446 acres have been dedicated as permanent open space.
Beacon Hill in the north central portion of the City is another major landmark. It is currently vacant with the exception of the lower slopes where some of the lots have been developed. The entire hill is zoned for commercial development with the exception of one vacant 12-acre parcel on the western flank of the hill which is zoned for agricultural-residential development and Snipes Park on the southern flank.
3.1.2	REGIONAL SETTING
Norco lies approximately 50 miles southeast of downtown Los Angeles. It is located on the northwest corner of Riverside County, near where Riverside, San Bernardino and Orange Counties come together.
To the north are the growing urban areas of Riverside and San Bernardino Counties which connect directly with Norco from the 1-15 Freeway. To the west and northwest are Orange and Los Angeles Counties that connect to Norco via the 91 Freeway and the 71 Expressway. Riverside City and eastern Riverside County lie directly east and connect to Norco from State Route 91 just south of the City and State Route 60 approximately five miles to the north. To the south is the City of Corona and the rapidly urbanizing area of southwestern Riverside County that connect to Norco from the 1-15 Freeway.
While it is located in an urbanizing region of metropolitan Los Angeles, Norco is a unique community which still maintains a strong local small plot agricultural/equestrian land use pattern with a large amount of recreational areas and other open spaces. Previous dairy and other agricultural lands north of the City have mostly been replaced in the last ten years with suburban residential developments that are typically at higher densities than Norco.
Desert resort areas are located farther east in eastern Riverside County, the Cleveland National Forest and the Santa Ana Mountains to the southwest, and a large flood control basin (Prado Dam) along the Santa Ana River to the west.
Freeways and public transportation directly link Norco with the metropolitan circulation network and therefore it has become a place of residence for persons
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
21
working in Riverside, Orange, Los Angeles, and San Bernardino Counties. The freeways bring the City within commuting distance of all four counties.
3.2	MAJOR LAND USE PATTERNS
Norco, as a small plot agricultural community does not have the range of land uses that are typical for most other cities. The focus of all land uses is the support of the small plot agricultural lifestyle that defines the community.
3.2.1	MAJOR LAND USES
There are approximately 9,808 acres of land within the incorporated boundaries of Norco. While large-scale commercial agriculture does not exist, many residences partake in a small plot agricultural lifestyle. This is reflective in the relatively low-density atmosphere of the City. In addition, domestic commercial agriculture, including the keeping of horses and other animals, is widely practiced on many of the larger parcels.
Residential development in Norco has primarily been in zones where the lots are 20,000 square feet and over. Such large lot residential zoning now comprises almost half of the incorporated land area in Norco (46 percent). However, about twenty percent of the lots in this land use category are less than 20,000 square feet.
Currently, 13.3 percent of the City’s area is used for commercial and industrial activities and for such public institutions as schools and parks. Commercial establishments are generally strung in clusters along Hamner Avenue, because it has the largest volume of through traffic in the City. Sixth Street is another important commercial corridor with a heavy emphasis on animal-keeping related businesses.
Wyle Laboratories began operating a 429-acre aerospace rocket testing facility in the southeast part of the Norco in 1957 before the City incorporated. The facility ceased operations in 2003. The entire 429 acres, with the exception of 60 acres along the southern boundary, are zoned M-2 (Heavy Industrial). This is the only area of the City zoned for heavy industrial. The 60 acres along the southern boundary (adjacent to Norco Hills Specific Plan) are zoned Hillside.
There are two major federal and state institutions, the Naval Surface Warfare Center (NSWC) and the California Rehabilitation Center that are approximately 650 acres or 7 percent of the City’s area. The two facilities form a major physical element to be considered in planning for future development in Norco, especially since the area includes the historic Norconian Hotel, other related buildings, Lake Norconian, and the former resort area.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
22
TABLE 3.1
LAND USE BY ZONING
(Acreage is approximate)
LAND USE/ZONING DESIGNATION	ACREAGE	% OF TOTAL
RESIDENTIAL		
A-E (Agricultural Estate)	164	1.8
A-1-40 (Agricultural Low Density)	146	1.6
A-1-20 (Agricultural Low Density)	3,917	42.4
A-1-10 (Agricultural Low Density)	21	.23
HS (Hillside)	331	3.6
R-1-10 (Residential Single Family)	160	1.7
Norco Hills Specific Plan (Single Family)	282	3.0
Norco Ridge Ranch Specific Plan (Single Family)	444	4.8
RESIDENTIAL TOTAL	5,465	59.1
COMMERCIAL		
C-0 (Commercial Office)	12	.1
C-G (Commercial-General)	271	3.0
C-4 (Commercial)	98	1.1
Auto Mall Specific Plan (Commercial)	55	.6
Gateway Specific Plan (Commercial)	105	1.1
Gateway Specific Plan (Office Park)	26	.3
Norco Hills Specific Plan (Commercial)	4	.04
COMMERCIAL TOTAL	571	6.2
INDUSTRIAL		
M-1 (Light Manufacturing)	163	1.8
M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing)	362	3.9
Auto Mall Specific Plan (Industrial)	19	.2
Gateway Specific Plan (Industrial)	112	1.2
INDUSTRIAL TOTAL	656	7.1
OTHER		
LD (Limited Development)	459	5.0
OS (Open Space)	885	9.6
Streets and Freeway	754	8.1
Norco Hills Specific Plan (Open Space)	1	.01
Norco Ridge Ranch Specific Plan (Open Space)	446	4.8
TOTAL OTHER	2,545	27.5
CITY TOTAL	9,808	
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
23
The NSWC had been on a list of potential bases being considered for closure or re-alignment through the Base Realignment and Closure Commission (BRAC). Ultimately NSWC was removed from the list. The legislation for the BRAC has since expired and would need to be re-authorized by Congress. While a BRAC is not needed to close or re-align a base, there is no indication of any action to reduce or change the stature of the base at this time.
3.2.2	PLANNED DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITIES
Currently there are four major approved specific plans that affect the physical structure within the City of Norco (See Exhibit 3.1). Upon buildout, each specific plan will not only contribute to both the overall quality of life, but could also have a significant effect on potential land uses for adjacent areas. The four major specific plan developments are as follows:
Gateway Specific Plan A specific plan designed around the Hidden Valley Parkway interchange with 1-15 Freeway and the southern gateway to the City along Hamner Avenue, taking advantage of future community and sub-regional growth for expansion of the community’s economic base (See Exhibit 3.2). The primary purpose of the Gateway Specific Plan is to facilitate private development projects, public infrastructure and roadway improvement projects that will generate positive impacts and interest in the Project Area and create a dynamic gateway entry for the City.
The Specific Plan Project Area encompasses approximately 345 gross acres. The Project Area is located within the southern most portion of the City and incorporates territory east and west of Hamner Avenue, directly west of Interstate 15. Existing land uses within the Project Area include commercial, industrial, park, pasture/agriculture, quasi-public and vacant land (See Table 3.2).
TABLE 3.2
SPECIFIC PLANS
SPECIFIC PLAN	LAND USE BREAKDOWN BY PERCENTAGE				
	RESIDENTIAL/ AGRICULTURAL	COMMERCIAL	INDUSTRIAL	OPEN SPACE	OFFICE/OTHER
Gateway S.P.	2.1%	49.6%	38.4%	—	9.9%
Auto Mall S.P.	—	93.2%	—	—	6.8%*
Norco Hills S.P.	92.9%	1.6%	—	.5%	—
Norco Hills S.P. Amendmentl	100%	—	—	—	—
Norco Ridge Ranch S.P.	54.5%			45.5%	
	* Overlay Zone, also allows commercial uses				
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
24
The Commercial District comprises 80 acres of the Specific Plan and was approximately 90 percent built out at the writing of this update. The Industrial District comprises 91 acres and was approximately 47 percent built out (includes the Norco Egg Ranch operation). The remainder of the Specific Plan area comprises existing residential and a large church site, all of which is built out.
Norco Auto Mall A Specific Plan created to take advantage of the freeway exposure the City has to attract new auto dealers, and associated commercial businesses. The area of the Specific Plan is generally along Hamner Avenue bounded on the south by Second Street and on the north by Third Street. Besides automobile dealers, the existing zoning at the time of the adoption of the specific plan was maintained as an overlay zone with special provisions, for parcels that do not develop as auto retail sites (See Exhibit 3.3).
Norco Hills Specific Plan A planned residential community with a small commercial site, Norco Hills is a low-density, residential community located in the southeastern portion of the City of Norco. The Specific Plan consists of 235 acres for 217 residences, a 4.0 acre neighborhood commercial center, and a 1.0 acre neighborhood park.
The project is set in a hillside area taking advantage of the view opportunities provided by the hills. Equestrian Trails connect every lot and tie into the City’s existing trail system. Most of the lots have enough room to contain paddocks for animal keeping; however, not all lots were graded with enough flat pad area to accommodate animal keeping. Steeper slopes and rock outcroppings were preserved in the development of the Specific Plan (see Exhibit 3.4).
Norco Hills Specific Plan, Amendment One A planned residential development adjacent to the northeast boundary of the Norco Hills Specific Plan. Amendment One is likewise a low-density, equestrian-oriented, residential neighborhood located in the southeastern portion of the City. Amendment One differed in its intentional design in that the site was mass graded eliminating all of the original topography so that flatter pads could be created that would better accommodate animal keeping. Amendment One added an additional 88 lots on 58 acres to the Norco Hills Specific Plan (see Exhibit 3.4, Table 3.2) with a minimum flat pad area of 12,000 square feet on each lot.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
25
Norco Ridge Ranch Specific Plan Primarily a residential project designed in the hillside areas along the City’s eastern boundary consisting of 978 acres for 588 single-family residential/equestrian lots. In addition to the residential uses, Norco Ridge Ranch includes 425 acres of natural open space and trails, as well as approximately 21 acres of community parks.
Like Amendment One of Norco Hills Specific Plan, Norco Ridge Ranch was designed to be mass graded reforming much of the natural topography to accommodate larger pads for adequate animal keeping areas. Unlike Amendment One though, Norco Ridge Ranch, because of its size and topography, had many more areas preserved in open space (See Exhibit 3.5).
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
26
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
27
EXHIBIT 3.1
SPECIFIC PLANS
Existing Development n (not assigned to a land use distirct)
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
EXHIBIT 3.2
GATEWAY SPECIFIC PLAN
28
			n	
			
			
			
O Norco
Area C
Business Related Services
Not A Partr (NAP) t
□ □
Underlying Zone (uses permitted by CUP) M"1
Area A Auto Dealerships
Area B
Other Vehicles; Vehicle Services
General Plan Land Use Element
EXHIBIT 3.3
AUTO MALL SPECIFIC PLAN
29
Residential
Residential Amendment 1
□
Park Open Space
Worco
General Plan Land Use Element
EXHIBIT 3.4
NORCO HILLS SPECIFIC PLAN
30
Passive Open Space
Active Open Space
Equestrian
Residential
^’60
V—x General Plan Land Use Element	31
□ □
Telecommunications
Not A Part
EXHIBIT 3.5
NORCO RIDGE RANCH SPECIFIC PLAN
I
3.3 ECONOMIC BASE
Norco has undergone a significant economic transformation since being an
unincorporated community in the county, and later as an incorporated city. The largely animal-based commercial core that existed for much of the City’s history continues to be augmented by commercial development with the intent to serve a more regional need. Two specific plans have been primary catalysts for some of this commercial development in the south end of the City (Auto Mall and Gateway Specific Plans, see Table 3.2 above). More recently commercial development and renewal has come to the north end of Hamner Avenue and to Sixth Street which is the City’s historical commercial corridor.
The primary forces that continue to fuel this transformation are the continued overall population growth and job creation in the metropolitan region that is expected to continue into the foreseeable future. The pattern of growth of the Los Angeles metropolitan area has continued to create job/housing imbalances in newer growth areas. It is typical in an area that has sustained continued growth over a long period that the growth of a city or community occurs in phases which can produce that imbalance.
Areas originally considered outlying like Norco and western Riverside County grew from rural-agricultural areas with some larger central communities into expanding suburban areas for commuters to central job cores like Los Angeles. When a significant number of residents locate to one area, and as land values continue to increase in the core areas, retail establishments move closer to the residential population in the outlying areas. As the outlying populations continue to increase, job intensive, production type businesses follow to where most of their employees are coming from. Rising land values in the core also contribute to the need for these job-intensive, and often landintensive, uses to locate in outlying areas when expansion is needed. As economic development continues in outlying areas, they become more attractive to more intensive commercial growth in the form of office and professional facilities. Given enough time, outlying areas can become cores in and of themselves. Orange County is an early example of this. Western Riverside County and Norco is now growing into that same phase of development. These factors will be discussed below, and are followed by an inventory of existing and projected commercial and industrial facilities in the City.
3.3.1	EXISTING COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Sixth Street is considered by most to be Norco’s historical commercial zone, although the early center of the community was where the library is currently located on Old Hamner Avenue near where Sixth Street intersects. From its early days when growth began in the valley, Hamner Avenue has been the primary arterial and hence it’s primary commercial corridor. As more animal-
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
General
32
keeping families were given opportunities to buy property and locate here, Sixth Street grew to become the focus of the animal-related retail, because of the lower amount of traffic and slower overall speed than Hamner Avenue. High traffic retail and commercial uses are located along Hamner Avenue with retailers concentrated along the southern half of the street (Gateway Specific Plan). Because of its focus on animal-keeping retail and with adjacent equestrian trails, Sixth Street grew into a western-themed street whereas Hamner Avenue has been developed with a mix of western-themed architecture and traditional contemporary California-themed designs.
Exhibit 3.6 shows the overall sales pattern for the fourth quarters in five year increments starting in 1998. One noticeable difference is the reduced percentage that “Autos and Transportation” category represents in 2008 as opposed to 1998 and 2003 which is reflective of an economic downturn in the purchase of vehicles that occurred nationwide. Exhibit 3.7 shows the rise in per capita sales that occurred in Norco for the years 1997-2000 as compared to other jurisdictions in the region and Exhibit 3.8 shows how per capita sales changed following 2000.
EXHIBIT 3.6
4th quarter taxable sales trends
1998
co
TOTAL QUARTERLY TAXABLE SALES: $732,140
2003
2008
TOTAL QUARTERLY TAXABLE SALES: $1,167,457
TOTAL QUARTERLY TAXABLE SALES: $934,478
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
33
EXHIBIT 3.7
REGIONAL GROWTH IN PER CAPITA SALES (1997-2000)
30000
—Temecula
Chino
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
1
2	3	4
■■■““ Ontario
-a- Norco
_ Orange County
Corona
San
Bernardino
Riverside
Riverside
County
Rancho
Cucamonga
Fontana
Yorba
Linda
Murrieta
Rialto
Moreno
Valley
Chino
Hills
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
Sources: CA Dept. of Finance, City Population and Housing Estimates. Rev CA State Board of Equalization, Taxable Sales in California
34
EXHIBIT 3.8
REGIONAL GROWTH IN PER CAPITA SALES (2001-2007)
General Plan Land Use Element
35
3.3.2	COMMERCIAL ZONING DESIGNATIONS
A total of 571 acres (6.2%) are zoned for commercial land use in Norco (See Table 3.4). There are seven commercial land use designations. The following is a discussion of each type of land use.
Commercial Office (C-O)
This zone is intended to provide for the development of integrated office and professional areas wherein related types of uses and facilities may also be located. Uses permitted in this zone include a mixture of office uses such as financial institutions, legal services, medical, and travel services. The zone can serve as a buffer land use between heavier commercial districts and residential zones. All lots created in this zone shall contain a minimum of 13,125 square feet.
Commercial (C-4)
This zone is to provide a rural, small town atmosphere that provides a distinguishing quality to the City of Norco. The uses vary to provide many opportunities for shopping services and employment. To provide an open character and compatibility with nearby residential uses, the zone is designed to encourage landscaping in the front yards, pedestrian walks, equestrian trails, carefully situated parking areas, discreet signage, a definite “western” motif in building design and any other amenities as determined desirable to carry out the western theme.
Commercial General (C-G)
The Commercial General zone allows retail and commercial uses that are centered around retail, eating and drinking establishments, and entertainment to serve the needs of the community. This zone is to provide a general commercial atmosphere that is geared toward accommodating national retailers, restaurants, tourist commercial uses, and businesses that can take advantage of the proximity and visibility from the 1-15 Freeway. This zone is to incorporate the western design theme more generally taking into consideration the design of adjoining development, corporate architectural identities, land uses, etc. The level of incorporation of western architectural design shall be determined on a project-by-project basis. This zone is to be more accommodating to national retailers and businesses with established corporate architectural identities. Gateway Specific Plan (Commercial District)
The Commercial District shall contain a variety of commercial uses designed to promote diverse and unique shopping environments. In general, commercial land uses within the specific plan area will range in size, type, and character, based upon their respective relationship and location to the freeway, other roadways, and market conditions.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
36
Gateway Specific Plan (Office Park District)
The Office Park District is intended to serve local and sub-regional
professional/administrative office and office park needs and shall include garden and single-occupant facilities, as well as ancillary uses such as restaurants, cafes, copy shops, and activities related to business support and personal services. This classification is closely related to the C-0 designation above. Norco Auto Mall Specific Plan
The specific plan is intended for the purpose of creating an area that encourages the location of new auto dealers and associated uses to provide compatible development.
The primary sites along Hamner Avenue are for new automobile dealerships and accessory uses as integral parts of the new dealership operations The Specific Plan also provides for other permitted uses in the underlying C-G zone, as well as used car dealerships, boat, camper, motorcycle, and other vehicle sales.
The secondary sites along Four Wheel Drive also include as primary permitted uses the following as they pertain to vehicles: repair, parts and supplies, renting, washing, storage, and diagnostic labs. The Specific Plan also makes provision for other uses that are permitted by the underlying M-1 and C-G zones.
Norco Hills Specific Plan (Commercial District)
This 3.9-acre site is intended to provide neighborhood support commercial services for the residents of Norco Hills and surrounding neighborhood.
TABLE 3.3
COMMERCIAL LAND USES
ZONE/LAND USE DISTRICT		ACREAGE	% OF TOTAL
C-0	Commercial Office	12	2.1
C-G	Commercial General	271	9.88
C-4	Commercial	98	17.2
SP	Gateway Specific Plan/Commercial	105	18.4
SP	Gateway Specific Plan/Office Park	26	4.5
SP	Auto Mall Specific Plan	55	9.6
SP	Norco Hills Specific Plan/Commercial	4	.7
TOTAL COMMERCIAL ACREAGE		571	
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
37
3.3.3	EXISTING INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT.
There have been four primary nodes of light and heavy industrial manufacturing and processing in Norco. The first and largest, that already existed when the City incorporated, was Wyle Laboratories which has since ceased operations. The second is the Industrial District of the Gateway Specific Plan that includes the processing of agricultural products associated with Norco Egg Ranch that also already existed when the City incorporated. Norco Egg Ranch still has an egg processing operation and much of the surrounding property is still vacant or being used for non-conforming residential uses. Congregations of smaller industrial businesses have developed along Industrial Way and around the intersection of Fifth Street and Horseless Carriage Drive.
3.3.4	INDUSTRIAL ZONING DESIGNATIONS.
A total of 656 acres (7.1%) are zoned for industrial land use in Norco (See Table 3.5). There are four industrial land use designations. The following is a discussion of each type of land use.
Heavy Commercial/Light Manufacturing (M-1)
This zone is intended to provide orderly development of heavy commercial and light manufacturing uses in harmony with each other and the rest of the community. Provisions of this zone are designed to ensure that said uses will be protected from inharmonious uses, and will be designed to minimize the undesirable effects of heavy traffic and other operating characteristics. Commercial Transition Overlay (CTO)
A Commercial Transition Overlay zone has been applied to existing M-1 zones along Hamner Avenue to transition affected properties to the more appropriate Commercial General (C-G) zone. Changes to the M-1 zone necessitated the creation of the CTO zone. Previously, the M-1 Zone was an all-inclusive industrial/commercial zone in a land use hierarchy wherein all of the uses permitted in the commercial zones, were also permitted in the M-1 Zone. The originally-permitted commercial uses have since been eliminated necessitating the need for a more accommodating and compatible zoning on these properties along Hamner Avenue. The CTO zone allows property owners maximum flexibility to maintain their current land uses in the M-1 zone while providing for the transition to commercial uses that are more consistent with the long-range vision of Hamner Avenue.
Heavy Manufacturing (M-2)
This zone is intended for the orderly development of manufacturing, research and development, wholesale and distribution, warehousing, and other compatible uses within the community. The provisions are designed to provide adequate space to protect adjacent land uses from inharmonious impacts and conflicts.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
38
Only one area in the City is zoned M-2, and it corresponds to the previous user (Wyle Laboratories) that existed when the City incorporated. Wyle Laboratories has since closed the operation in Norco and at the writing of this update, a cleanup of the site is being overseen by the State Department of Toxic Substances Control.
Gateway Specific Plan (Industrial District)
The Industrial District is intended to facilitate the economic development of the City by creating an expanded employment base. This district provides for the development of light industrial land uses which generally includes research and development facilities, light manufacturing activities, custom manufacturing, assembly, fabrication and wholesaling, with related office and administrative functions.
Consistent with Policies 2.2.2d, 2.3.1e, and 2.3.2g discussed in the Land Use Element, the City shall consider the Gateway Specific Plan for possible modifications to accommodate mixed-use commercial-residential projects in the Industrial District, including the Norco Ranch property.
TABLE 3.4
INDUSTRIAL LAND USES
ZONE/LAND USE DISTRICT		ACREAGE	% OF TOTAL
M-1	Light Manufacturing	163	1.8
M-2	Heavy Manufacturing	362	3.9
SP	Auto Mall Specific Plan/M-1 Underlay (Area B)	19	.2
SP	Gateway Specific Plan/lndustrial	112	1.2
TOTAL INDUSTRIAL ACREAGE		656	
3.3.5	REDEVELOPMENT
Redevelopment uses a municipality’s police and corporate powers to provide incentives and resources to spur development in blighted areas. As an aid to property owners it is one of the most powerful tools available to local governments. Where the private sector is unable to or unwilling to assemble land and invest the necessary capital for revitalizing blighted areas, redevelopment is a means of focusing community resources to transform deteriorating or underutilized areas to more productive use. Under California Community Redevelopment Law, redevelopment agencies, in carrying out a redevelopment program, are empowered to buy and move structures, provide public improvements in support of development activities in a “Project Area,” or assist the private sector in financing the preceding activities.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
39
The law provides that a redevelopment agency may obtain financing from any legal source. One common practice of redevelopment agencies is the use of tax increment financing as a primary source of funding. Under this method, the assessed value of all properties in the project area, and hence the amount of property taxes being paid, is frozen at a base level the time the redevelopment project area is established. This means that the amount of property taxes going to the various taxing agencies does not increase above the base level even though the amount of property taxes being generated continues to rise as property values increase from infrastructure investment and property development.
The property taxes being generated that exceed the base level for taxing agencies are called the “tax increment” and go to the Redevelopment Agency for re-investment in the project area. The re-investment occurs in the form of infrastructure improvements and development assistance that eliminates blight and creates economic synergy where it otherwise would not occur without the assistance. This continues through the life of the Redevelopment Plan which for Norco expires in the year 2021.
In addition to using tax increment financing, the agency may accept loans or grants from agencies of the federal and state governments, or any other public agency. Another major source for redevelopment has been the federal Community Development Block Grant Program.
The Norco Redevelopment Project Area comprises a large area in the City. It generally covers the entire City with the exception of Norco Ridge Ranch Specific Plan and the former Wyle Labs property; and the neighborhoods generally along Norco Drive/Corydon Avenue between Hamner Avenue and the western City boundary. The Norco Redevelopment Agency oversees all redevelopment projects and programs within the project area.
The Community Redevelopment Agency’s current Five Year Implementation Plan lists the activities that are anticipated to be accomplished through redevelopment activities including community development goals ranging from development incentives to infrastructure improvements, business retention/recruitment, and housing programs.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
40
3.4 RESIDENTIAL BASE
One of the first indications of a community’s desirability as a place to live and do business is reflected in the nature and availability of its housing stock. The overall quality of housing, its general appearance, the range and availability of housing for single persons, families, and retired persons, as well as the range and availability for both workers and executives, are all significant elements of the decision-making process affecting individuals, businesses, and industrial firms which may consider Norco as a location. Norco with its unique small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle offers another incentive not generally available in other communities.
Norco’s population and housing growth escalated in the decade between 1999 and 2009. There were 25,476 people and 6,116 dwelling units in the City of Norco in 1999. In 2009 those numbers increased to 27,160 and 7,229 respectively. Future growth is expected to occur with a projected buildout total of 30,005 people and 7,442 dwelling units that is expected to be reached by the year 2015, prior to the next Land Use Element update.
Several factors will moderate the year-to-year performance of the residential market in Norco which may affect the realization of the projections cited above. First, home loan interest rates fluctuate and are not subject to local control. When interest rates are relatively low, home sales are accelerated. Higher interest rates impact both home loans and construction lending, thereby dampening both home sales and the production of new units.
Local regulation and developer fees can also affect land values and housing prices, which in turn can influence housing production. When regulations and fees substantially exceed the norm for the subregion, it may lead to slower housing starts and higher sales prices, which can depress the local residential market. City fees are updated yearly and comparative research continues to indicate that developer fees in the City of Norco are similar to other agencies in the area, and therefore do not create any unusual or excessive constraints to the production of housing.
All new single-family residential development in the City of Norco needs to
accommodate animal keeping and the lot and pad size requirements needed for that. Minimally, the lots need to have adequate room for animal keeping, which generally means large, deep rear yards where animals can be accommodated with appropriate room for the health and safety of the animals. All new lots in the Agricultural/Residential zones are required to have recorded primary animal-keeping areas to preserve an adequate area of open space for animal-keeping. Also important is the ability to provide adequate access to the rear yard. Sixty percent of the City is zoned for residential
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
42
development with most of that acreage in Agricultural Low Density designations that accommodate animal-keeping.
3.4.1	EXISTING RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
By the time of its incorporation, the land use trend for animal keeping in Norco was well established. Norco’s residential land use is comprised of predominantly single-family residential development, at an overall average of approximately two dwelling units per acre. Most of the housing stock has been built since 1960 and approximately 69% of the existing housing supply is between 20 and 50 years old.
3.4.2	RESIDENTIAL ZONING DESIGNATIONS
The land use analysis (Table 3.1) shows that the majority of the City (5,465 acres) is devoted to residential land use. The following is the various land use designations for the residential zones.
Agricultural Estate (A-E)
This zone is intended to provide and encourage the development of agricultural estate areas, designed to take advantage of the rural environment, as well as the outdoor recreation potential of the community. This zone is primarily located along the Santa Ana River where significant open space recreational land uses are located.
Agricultural Low-Density (A-1)
This zone is intended to provide and encourage development of agriculturally oriented low-density living areas designed to take advantage of the rural environment, as well as the outdoor recreation potential of the community. This is the primary residential zone of the City. Lots in this zone have access to recreational open space areas, but are not necessarily adjacent to them. Residential Single-Family (R-1)
This zone is intended to provide for the development of single-family residential areas and to designate appropriately located areas for single-family living at a higher density. The provisions of this zone are intended to ensure that the residential character of such areas will be stabilized and maintained. They are further intended to provide a basis for planning of related amenities such as parks, schools, public utilities, streets and highways, and other community facilities.
This zone corresponds with neighborhoods that had already started being developed at the higher density than the density at which animal-keeping neighborhoods were being developed when the City incorporated. No lots in the R-1 Zone are allowed to keep large animals with the exception of those lots that
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
43
are over 20,000 square feet in size, or lots where an overlay zone that allows animal-keeping has been approved.
Animal-Keeping Overlay (AKO)
This zone was created and is intended to designate certain properties in the R-1-10 zone as animal-keeping properties while maintaining the underlying zoning. The purpose is to protect the existing land uses while allowing and encouraging animal-keeping on those properties that meet established criteria. The AKO zone shall be used in combination with base districts/zoning regulations and will not change the underlying zoning category.
Hillside (HS)
The hillside zone is intended to provide for the development of agricultural and low-density residential uses in a safe, orderly, and aesthetically appealing manner in hillside areas, by establishing a more comprehensive review procedure and flexibility in development standards to accommodate the varied conditions of the hillside areas. It is intended to ensure that hillside areas are developed in a manner that will recognize the unique character and problems of hillside development.
The HS Zone is a “holding” zone where development cannot occur until a specific plan has been approved for any proposed subdivision of land or any proposed grading in excess 25,000 cubic yards within at least a 10-acre area, or a grading project where the City determines that there will be a long-term effect on the future land use of the area. Once a specific plan is approved it replaces the HS Zoning designation. The zoning regulations in a specific plan for a Hillside zone should discourage mass-grading generally to protect hillsides, but tempered with the overall goal and purpose of the City which is to preserve a small plot agricultural/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle.
Norco Hills Specific Plan (Residential District)
The residential district of the Norco Hills Specific Plan (NHSP) occupies 92.9 percent of the specific plan area. The intent was to provide a low intensity land use, in order to restore and preserve the beauty of the hills. Originally the project was to be custom lot development with minimum grading. The specific plan was approved in 1991 and development started approximately ten years later and is now built out. Grading was minimized on some of the lots that had the effect of restricting the animal-keeping potential on those same lots. The loss of animal keeping set that stage for future projects in the HS Zone to accommodate more grading in order to achieve larger pad sizes for animal keeping. The specific plan approved 217 residential lots with a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet. The number of animal units allowed has been recorded on each lot based on the amount of slope versus the flat pad area of that lot.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
44
NHSP Amendment 1
This specific plan was proposed as an amendment to NHSP being located adjacent on the northeast edge. The overall project concept of Amendment 1 was to provide high quality residential product consistent with that standards of NHSP, but with increased pad sizes to accommodate more animal keeping. The amount of animal units allowed reflects the same standard as the A-1 zone. The project site for NHSP Amendment 1 was mass-graded to achieve a minimum flat pad area of 12,000 square feet on each lot. Amendment 1 added 58 acres to NHSP and an additional 82 single-family homes and has been built out.
Norco Ridge Ranch Specific Plan
The Norco Ridge Ranch Specific Plan (NRRSP) was designed specifically to be an equestrian-oriented, animal-keeping hillside community along the ridgeline that divides the cities of Norco and Riverside. The intent of the specific plan was to provide lots specifically designed for animal keeping using innovative lot, equestrian trail, and layout design to preserve significant natural features and identified wildlife habitat, while still providing adequate area on every lot to support animal keeping. The entire project site consists of 978 acres, of which 444 acres were approved for residential development, most of which have been developed. Residential development is the only other land use in the specific plan besides open space and park areas.
Gateway Specific Plan (Residential District)
The Gateway Specific Plan is primarily commercial and industrial. However, it did include 4.7 acres for new single-family residential development.
Only two vacant lots in the specific plan were designated for residential development primarily to be consistent with existing nearby residences. The specific plan incorporated approximately 14 acres of existing residential development into the plan to be maintained as such. In addition, the specific plan surrounds on three sides an existing residential neighborhood along Three Bar Lane. Residential zoning was placed adjacent to this neighborhood for maintenance and enhancement of that neighborhood. Any residential development is subject to the same zoning requirements as the A-1zone.
Senior Housing
The Zoning Code allows for the development of senior housing in any zone upon approval of a conditional use permit. Density is determined based on the underlying zoning designation. Because of that high-density projects can only be permitted in commercial zones. Senior housing is also allowed in residential zones, but must be compatible to the underlying and surrounding low density.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
45
3.4.3	FUTURE RESIDENTIAL GROWTH
As indicated in Section 2.1.2 the City of Norco is nearing buildout conditions in its residentially zoned areas and there is little area in the City’s sphere of influence for future annexation. The only vacant land falls within two categories, large pieces of property that can still be subdivided for development of planned residential neighborhoods, and small vacant or underdeveloped parcels within existing residential areas that are still unused or can accommodate more housing units. The Housing Element identifies parcels that are vacant or underutilized for the development of more housing units and gives projected housing development to the year 2025 when buildout of large vacant parcels is anticipated. Buildout may occur as early as 2015 depending on market conditions and continuation of current growth trends.
Consistent with Policies 2.2.2d, 2.3.1e, and 2.3.2g discussed in the Land Use Element, the City shall consider the Gateway Specific Plan for possible modifications to accommodate mixed-use commercial-residential projects in the Industrial District, including the Norco Ranch property.
TABLE 3.5
RESIDENTIAL LAND USES
ZONE/LAND USE DISTRICT		ACREAGE	% OF TOTAL
A-E	Agricultural Estate	164	3.0
A-1	Agricultural Low Density	4,084	74.7
R-1	Residential Single-Family	160	2.9
HS	Hillside	327	6.0
SP	Norco Hills Specific Plan/Residential	282	5.2
SP	Norco Ridge Ranch Specific Plan	444	8.1
SP	Gateway Specific Plan/Residential	4	.07
TOTAL RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE		5,465	
3.4.4 INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE FOR NEW RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT General obligation bonds were historically used to fund community facilities including those needed to accommodate new growth areas. The repayment of bonds came from the general fund of the jurisdiction doing the improvements. The adoption of Proposition13 established a cap on property taxes with restrictions on the rate of annual increase. It also took authority away from elected local officials to raise or establish special taxes requiring a 2/3 majority approval of voters instead. Without being able to easily fall back on property taxes the feasibility of a jurisdiction to pay bond issues backed by general funds was diminished.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
46
Assessment Districts are charges for public improvements or services that provide a specific benefit to property within a pre-determined area. Instead of being based on property values like taxes, assessment districts are set based on the amount of benefit a property receives from the proposed improvement. State law allows for assessment districts to be set up with bond financing or through levy assessments. Properties are only subject to assessment if there is a direct benefit. Properties that are only generally benefited cannot be assessed.
Different classes of properties pay different assessment amounts based on the benefit received. Any new assessment requires approval of a majority of returned ballots and once created, the assessment applies to all new lots and homes created in the assessment district.
Similar to assessment districts are landscape and lighting districts which are formed and operated primarily the same way. The main difference is assessment districts are usually bonded for major improvements, and landscape and lighting districts are on-going maintenance costs and generally not bonded.
A more recent and popular form of financing public improvements especially for new large-scale developments is with Mello-Roos bonds through a community facilities district (CFD). Mello-Roos bonds, like taxes, are based on the value of the land and are applicable to all properties in the district. With a CFD there is no need to perform a benefit assessment analysis that is required when forming an assessment district. Mello-Roos bonds are especially effective for large vacant tracts of land where new development is being proposed because the law states that a vote of property owners is all that is needed if the number of registered voters in the proposed district is less than 12. State law requires disclosure of existing Mello-Roos taxes when a house is sold.
3.5	PUBLIC LAND USES
The State provides for open space by mandating comprehensive planning for open space by local governments, and by granting express authority for open space implementation and financing mechanisms, including open space maintenance districts, open-space easements and mandatory dedications/in-lieu fees for parks and recreational open space. The City’s wealth of parks and open space areas provide evidence of the high value that the City places on open space. According to the Urban Land’s Institute’s research team report, a fairly large percentage (9.6%) of the City’s acreage is presently open space. However, the prevalent open space surrounding the City that is attractive to new residents in and around Norco is primarily privately owned. Much of the open spaces north of the City have disappeared in the last several years in the face of urban expansion eastward from Los Angeles County.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
General
47
Because of its unique setting and lifestyle the City has a functional system of open space areas. Generally, open space as a land use is used to preserve areas of significant biological resources or areas of significant cultural and aesthetic value to the community. Open space can either be passive or active. With the Santa Ana River on one boundary already identified and set aside as an open space resource and the Norco Hills on another with approximately 446 acres of dedicated open space, the City has taken advantage of a great opportunity to preserve elements that identify the community, and that also provide useable recreational resources. The City maintains an extensive system of parks to meet the needs of its citizens, ranging from public equestrian facilities and open space to lighted ball fields.
3.5.1	OPEN SPACE FOR THE PRESERVATION OF RESOURCES
Open space lands for the preservation of resources are those lands, which possess significant natural or man-made value. A substantial portion of the City’s open space consists of such lands. The Santa Ana River and bluffs area typifies the type of open space for natural resources. As a primarily open corridor, the river and associated waterway provides habitat to some sensitive species including the willow flycatcher, arroyo chub, least Bell’s vireo, the coast range newt, the yellow-breasted chat, and the Santa Ana sucker. These species have not been found in the City of Norco, but are known to occur along the Santa Ana River, and areas along the river have been identified in the Western Riverside County Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP) to preserve habitat and foraging areas that support them.
The only sensitive species that has been identified in the Norco Hills is the Stephen’s kangaroo rat. The City of Norco is not within the historical habitat area of this species, and therefore the City was not part of the original habitat impact mitigation/conservation plan. Development in the hills required the developer to obtain their own “Section 10A Permit” from the United States
Department of Fish and Game (USF&G). The conclusion of USF&G in issuing the permit was that the Norco Hills do not support enough habitat to permanently sustain a population of Stephen’s kangaroo rats. Likewise in the MSHCP, none of the hillside areas were identified for conservation due to the lack of a large enough habitat area to sustain a community of any species of interest.
Significant man-made resources include areas that contain significant archeological or historical aspects of the City’s past. There are no known significant archeological resources within City limits; and historical resources are limited. One significant historical resource is the former Hotel Norconian and resort area that now serves as the California Rehabilitation Center (CRC). The hotel building is listed on the National Register of Historic Sites. Since the building is owned and operated by a State agency, the City does not have authority over its use.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
48
The CRC previously used inmates to keep the building maintained in its historical form, and restoring features as time and money allowed. The facility is no longer being used, however, and has been boarded up with little or no access allowed. Two other historical sites are the first schoolhouse at 3900 Acacia Avenue and an original store at 3954 Old Hamner Avenue, neither of which are listed nationally but have significance to Norco. Both are currently_being maintained in their historical context as public buildings (community center and library respectively).
The Conservation Element outlines in detail the habitat and wildlife resources that are protected, or need to be protected, in open space resources.
LAND USE PRESERVATION
The state encourages the protection of viable agriculturally productive lands. Agricultural lands are a vital economic, open space and environmental resource for jurisdictions where they occur. Pursuant to the State Department of Conservation the only significant farmland in the City occurs in acreage that was annexed north of the river for the Silverlakes Equestrian and Sports Park with 61.77 acres of Prime Farmland, 18.21 acres of Farmland of Statewide Importance, and 2.55 acres of Unique Farmland. Since the Silverlakes Equestrian and Sports Park is mostly open park and grass, these areas are not being removed from potential agricultural production.
The General Plan envisions the small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian land use as a permanent part of the City’s overall land use pattern. That land use has helped shape an important part of the City’s history and identity. In addition to the family economic benefits of a small plot agricultural land use, it can provide indirect benefits of enhanced air quality, reduced congestion, and heightened community aesthetics. Many residences in Norco practice small plot agriculture and/or an animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle and the City strives to preserve, encourage and assist the retention of that land use.
OPEN SPACE FOR OUTDOOR RECREATION
Public parks and recreation areas are an important and necessary element of the urban community, meeting many of its residents’ needs for leisure activities.
They also serve as major aesthetic amenities, which help to give character and form to the physical environment. Major open spaces can serve as gateways, helping to visually define the scope of the City.
The City of Norco has, or is in close proximity to, approximately 15 outdoor recreation parks. Rivertrails Park is the largest city park (277 acres) and is located in the northeastern portion of the City. The park is owned and operated by the City of Norco and supplements other riverbottom preserves that are
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
49
administered by the County and the State. In addition to Rivertrails Park, Ingalls Park provides premier equestrian facilities for the citizens of Norco and for major events. Nestled in the foothills of the Norco Hills, Ingalls Equestrian Event Center has become a symbol representing the City’s animal-keeping character.
Because of some large park facilities (Rivertrails and Ingalls) Norco has a high ratio of park acreage compared with other cities. These two large parks, however, do not provide active ballfield and playground areas. Portions of the City currently lack in having that type of active park facility nearby. A new sports park adjacent to Ingalls Equestrian Event Center (Pikes Peak Park) provided some of these needed facilities. Silverlakes Equestrian and Sports Park will also provide more active park area.
In addition to open space, the City has significant areas that are designated Limited Development because of the unique nature of the land use involved. 459 acres in the City are designated LD (Limited Development)). This designation includes school sites, the California Correction Center, Naval Surface Warfare Center, and the Norco campus of Riverside Community College. All of these facilities are maintained by other government entities, or by the Corona-Norco Unified School District. Table 3.7 shows the various land use zones that are either maintained as public facilities, or are areas where the City does not have primary authority on approval of new construction.
TABLE 3.6
PUBLIC USES/OPEN SPACE/ LIMITED DEVELOPMENT
ZONE/LAND USE DISTRICT		ACREAGE	% OF TOTAL
OS	Open Space	785	30.9
OS	Open Space (Riverside Community College)	100	3.9
LD	Limited Development	459	18.0
SP	Norco Hills Specific Plan/Open Space	1	.1
SP	Norco Ridge Ranch Specific Plan/Open Space	446	17.5
	Streets and freeway	754	29.6
TOTAL PUBLIC USE/OPEN SPACE ACREAGE		2,545	
3.6	COMMUNITY DESIGN
The purpose of the Community Design Section is to direct development towards a goal that unifies the community through design cohesion between the natural and the built environment. One part of the equation is the physical setting of the City and the features of the landform that define it. The other is how the built environment relates to
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
50
these features, and then the inter-relationships of the different elements of the built environment. It is also important that certain individual neighborhoods maintain a uniqueness that sets them apart from other neighborhoods, but still weaves them into an overall statement of the community. By doing so, residents, and/or businesses, take a particular pride of location with the corresponding individual responsibility to maintain that neighborhood to the betterment of the entire community.
3.6.1	LANDMARKS AND COMMUNITY FOCAL POINTS
As has already been described in Section 2.1.4, the City of Norco has significant landforms with which to identify the community. These occur both at the community level, and at a regional level such as the San Gabriel, San Bernardino and Santa Ana Mountains. While the Santa Ana River does not provide the same broad vista from many points of the community like the mountains do, it provides a significant site level focal point for the community that can help contribute to a general overall good feeling about the city. In conjunction with the natural environment, the built environment plays a key role in establishing a general “feel" for a city.
3.6.2	VISUAL CORRIDORS/VISTA POINTS
Key to vista points is the ability to view them. The mountains are generally viewed from most points in the City; and for most people this occurs from the car as they travel the City’s streets. Some streets because of their grade, elevation, and orientation provide better opportunities for viewsheds. For streets that have nice viewsheds, the City should adopt street tree planting standards that do not detract from this resource.
3.6.3	RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN
As an equestrian community, the City of Norco already has design and function features that set its neighborhoods apart from adjacent communities in the form of the extensive trail system. The City has been on a multi-year program to install equestrian trail fencing alongside all trails in the City. This program should continue until all trails have fencing. This is a significant design feature that unifies the uniqueness of the community and defines where the trails are actually located. In addition to trail fencing, the City should take all opportunities to obtain grants, and to appropriate City funds as they can be available, for the planting of street and trail trees. These, along with the trail fencing, help define the rural image of the streets and neighborhoods. Outside of the trails and trees, most neighborhoods do not have unique features that set them apart from other neighborhoods in the City. The one exception would be planned communities that have specific themed entry points.
Undeveloped residential property and/or future residential property should
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
51
incorporate more western-style ranch themes in the design of homes. This style consists of mostly one-story structures, wood facing, and bungalow-style ornamentation on roofs, eaves, porches, and windows. Large porches, multi-paned windows, and gabled window roofs also accentuate this style.
3.6.4	COMMERCIAL NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN
Commercial neighborhoods, because of their visibility provide great opportunities for the City to showcase itself, and for individual neighborhoods to set apart their own identity. The most obvious of these is the Sixth Street commercial district. As stated earlier, this street is the primary focus for equestrian and animalkeeping retail in the City, and as such has a distinct small-town western feel to it (Section 3.3.2). In addition to the City’s architectural standards the City and property owners should work together to locate outdoor art that can support and encourage the equestrian and western themes. Street trees should be planted and properly maintained to help better establish the western small-town atmosphere. The City should also continue efforts to get regional road and bridge improvements, specifically an additional bridge over the Santa Ana River in the vicinity of Arlington Avenue (western Riverside) to take some of the commuter traffic off of Sixth Street.
Some of the commercial areas are not as uniquely identified in terms of architectural style or theme but are more a function of the use (i.e. The Auto Mall). Most of the development that has occurred along the southern portion of Hamner Avenue (Gateway and Auto Mall Specific Plans) has been typical California contemporary retail architecture.
Architecture north of Third Street, especially more recent architecture, has incorporated more western features to varying degrees depending on the use and locations where new development has occurred. As Hamner Avenue approaches Sixth Street there is a stronger influence of western architectural themes that transitions to the overall western and rural character of Sixth Street.
Because of high visibility, all of the commercial areas present an excellent opportunity for the City to establish public art programs and infrastructure design features that will reflect the western and equestrian lifestyle and form a unifying design theme throughout the City. These programs can be implemented through a variety of mechanisms including public-funded projects and requirements placed on new private development projects.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
General
52
4.0 IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
4.1	PROJECT REVIEW/PERMITTING PROCESS
The entitlement process allows for ample opportunity to ensure that proposed development is consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan, and compatible and complementary to existing development, and to neighborhoods. Site design is important to the functionality of a development and contributes to the overall “feeling” that one leaves with, but it is architecture that provides the enduring image to everyone passing by on the street. It is important that precise architectural standards be expressed early in the project review process. The Planning Commission also serves in its capacity as the architectural review board for the City. Architectural review should occur early in the project design process.
After project review and approval, the building permit process ensures that development meets standard safety provisions and is consistent with the project as approved.
4.2	CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
The Capital Improvement Program is an annual revolving five-year plan for the expenditure of City funds for public improvement projects. The first year list includes those projects to be funded in the current fiscal year, and second year projects move to first-year projects in the following fiscal year. Trail fencing and trail maintenance receives an annual allotment, as well as various street and other public safety projects. The City shall continue funding trail improvements as part of the overall land use implementation as a lasting recognizable feature of the City. Other public projects that celebrate and increase the awareness of the uniqueness of Norco’s lifestyle, such as public art and parkway tree planting shall also be considered.
4.3	GRANT COORDINATION
State and Federal grants represent another opportunity for the City to further its efforts to implement the goals and objectives of the Land Use Element as they pertain to community identity. Several projects over the last phase of the Land Use Element have been completed through federal and state grants including street trees planted through urban forestry programs, the bluff stabilization project, the Corydon staging area, park projects, road projects, trail projects, public safety programs, and others. The City shall continue pursuing grants as they become available.
4.4	REDEVELOPMENT FUNDING
The City’s Redevelopment Agency and Redevelopment Project Area were established in 1981. The project area and plan have been amended three times. The original
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
53
Project Area consisted of approximately 250 acres all contained within the Gateway Specific Plan which is 317 acres (ref. Exhibit 3.9, Redevelopment Project Area). Amendment Number One to the Redevelopment Plan added approximately 5,400 acres and included most of the area of the City generally bounded by Crestview Avenue,
River Drive, Norconian Drive, Western Avenue, Parkridge Avenue, and Hillside Avenue(south of Fifth Street). Amendment Number Two subtracted approximately 712 acres that were located in an area that was detached from the City and annexed into the City of Corona. Amendment Number Three added approximately 13 acres located south and east of Hamner Avenue and Hidden Valley Parkway associated with a detachment from the City of Corona and annexation to Norco. Approximately 5,400 acres or 56 percent of the City is within the Redevelopment Project Area.
Redevelopment Agency funds have been successfully used to meet goals of the General Plan and the Land Use Element including the preservation of affordable housing, assistance to low income households, senior housing, as well as significant commercial development in all parts of the City. The City should continue to assist property owners to bring in new businesses that will help to increase property values and thereby increase the incremental tax values in the project area. This will provide more resources to meet additional goals of the Land Use Element.
4.5	ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Economic development is a vital element to the sustenance of a community, especially one with the uniqueness of Norco. Generally, residential property taxes do not provide enough revenue for a City to provide all of the services that residents expect. In Norco, this is exasperated by all of the additional trail maintenance and animal services that need to be provided. Economic development and the resulting sales tax helps fund many City services that would otherwise have to be curtailed or eliminated, or off-set by additional fees to pay for the services.
4.6	COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Community Development consists of all phases of entitlement from site planning and construction, to the enforcement of code provisions when projects are completed. Community Development is the primary vehicle to ensure that new development meets the goals of the General Plan Land Use Element, and that land uses continue to operate within the context of those goals.
Norco
General Plan Land Use Element
54﻿GENERAL PLAN
NOISE ELEMENT
UPDATE ADOPTION DATE: March 5, 2003
NOISE ELEMENT
ADOPTED BY CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION NO. 2003 - 20 March 5, 2003
CITY COUNCIL Harvey C. Sullivan, Mayor Barbara Carmichael, Mayor Pro Tem Hal H. Clark Frank Hall Herb Higgins
PLANNING COMMISSION
David Henderson, Chairperson Greg Newton, Vice Chairperson Wayne Hinson Paul Ryan James M. Wilson
STAFF
Ed Hatzenbuhler, City Manager James E. Daniels, Director of Community Development Steve King, Senior Planner
Alma Robles, Assistant Planner Michelle Weaver, Assistant Planner
TABLE OF CONTENTS:
TITLE
PAGE NUMBER
1.0 INTRODUCTION TO THE NOISE ELEMENT.............................1
1.1	Purpose of the Noise Element............................1
1.2	Scope and Format of Element.............................1
2.0
NOISE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES.................................
2.1	Noise Issues and Problems.................................
2.1.1	Freeway Noise......................................
2.1.2	Noise Impacts on Animal Keeping....................
2.1.3	Noise Impact from Animal Keeping...................
2.1.4	Special Event Noise................................
2.1.5	Industrial/Commercial Noise........................
2.1.6	Large truck/bus engine Noise Adjacent to Residential
2.1.7	Truck Traffic on Residential Streets...............
2.1.8	Aircraft Noise.....................................
2.2	Exterior Noise Control Goal...............................
(Goals and Policies)
2.3	Interior Noise Attenuation Goal...........................
(Goals and Policies)
2.4	Animal-Keeping Noise Control Goal.........................
(Goals and Policies)
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
4 4
6
6
3.0	NOISE CONTROL PLAN........................................................7
3.1	Noise Fundamentals.................................................7
3.1.1	Methods for Noise	Level Rating...............................7
3.1.2	Human Reaction to Noise Levels..............................9
3.1.3	Harmful Effect of Noise.....................................10
3.1.4	Community Reaction to Noise Levels..........................10
3.1.5	Animal Reaction to Noise Levels.............................13
3.2	Existing Setting..................................................14
3.2.1	Significant Noise Generators in the Community...............14
3.2.2	Noise Generators from Outside the Community.................19
3.2.3	Sensitive Receptors in the	Community..................24
3.3	Land Use and Noise Compatibility Standards........................24
3.3.1	Federal Standards...........................................24
3.3.2	State Standards.............................................27
3.3.3	Local Standards.............................................28
3.4	Noise Attenuation.................................................30
3.4.1	Natural Attenuation.........................................30
3.4.2	Building and Site Planning	Attenuation Techniques...........31
3.4.3	Traffic Speed Control.......................................32
3.5	Projected Noise Levels............................................33
4.0 IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES......................................37
4.1	Noise Ordinance........................................37
4.2	New Project Development Review...............................37
4.3	State and Federal Funding for Community Noise Sources........37
4.4	Freeway Noise Wall...........................................37
4.5	Traffic/Access/Speed Controls................................37
4.6	Special Event Permits........................................37
4.7	Ontario Airport Noise Advisory Committee.....................38
LIST OF EXHIBITS:
EXHIBIT	PAGE NUMBER
3.1	Effects of Noise on Communication...........................................12
3.2	Noise Monitoring Locations..................................................16
3.3	Typical Traffic Noise Levels................................................17
3.4	Typical Freeway Noise Contours..............................................20
3.5	Ontario International Airport Take-off Patterns.............................22
3.6	Sensitive Receptors.........................................................25
3.7	Traffic Noise Impacted Areas Existing Conditions............................34
3.8	Traffic Noise Impacted Areas 2020 Buildout..................................36
LIST OF TABLES:
TABLE	PAGE NUMBER
3.1	Human Reaction to Noise Levels...............................................9
3.2	Familiar Noise Levels.......................................................11
3.3	Effects of Noise on Community...............................................13
3.4	Long-term Noise Monitoring Results..........................................18
3.5	Short-term Noise Monitoring Results.........................................19
3.6	FHA Noise Design Levels.....................................................26
3.7	HUD Housing Criteria........................................................27
3.8	Land Use Compatibility......................................................29
3.9	Normalized CNEL Corrections.................................................30
3.10	Existing and Future Traffic Noise...........................................35
1.0 INTRODUCTION TO THE NOISE ELEMENT
The City of Norco was incorporated to preserve a small plot agricultural/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle. Primary to this goal is the maintenance of residential neighborhoods that will accommodate and encourage animal keeping and agriculture at a family scale, a concept that dates back to colonial times. The Land Use Element establishes the primary goal of the community, which is the maintenance of that kind of lifestyle. The Noise Element works in conjunction with the Land Use Element in providing the life quality standards that will sustain the community, and support the preservation of the small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle, as a viable primary land use.
1.1	PURPOSE OF THE NOISE ELEMENT
In an urban setting, the City of Norco provides a unique opportunity to maintain this lifestyle that is not readily available elsewhere in the region. The urban setting, however, also presents challenges to maintaining a community that is conducive to the keeping of animals, especially if the use or keeping of animals may be impacted by noise occurrences. The Noise Element provides the guidelines for establishing ordinances and policies that protect sensitive land uses and citizens from other more intensive land uses, and from point sources that produce high levels of noise.
The State has mandated that the General Plan address noise issues so as to protect the community from excessive noise levels. The Element must be consistent with the guidelines established in Section 46050.1 of the State Health and Safety Code, quantifying existing and projected noise levels and the number of people that will potentially be exposed to excessive noise levels. The Noise Element addresses sources of noise that are relevant to the City of Norco, whether the noise source is inside the City, or outside of its borders. The element needs to accomplish the following:
■	Measurement of existing and projected noise levels,
■	Establishment of noise standards,
■	The control and mitigation of major noise sources, and
■	Planning for land use patterns that provide protection from noise impacts.
Based on the Noise Element policy statements and standards, the noise ordinance will provide the enforceable codes that will insure, to the best level that can be obtained, that noise nuisances are eliminated or at least controlled to acceptable levels.
1.2	SCOPE AND FORMAT OF ELEMENT
The element is composed of four sections. The first section includes a description of the Element’s purpose and background for inclusion in the General Plan. The second section contains the City’s goals and policy statements intended to protect the
Norco
1
General Plan Noise Element
community from excessive noise levels. The third section is the plan by which the City will control noise and protect the various land uses in the Land Use Element, especially the small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle that defines the community. The fourth section of the Noise Element contains the implementation measures to accomplish the stated goals and policies.
2.0	NOISE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
2.1	NOISE ISSUES AND PROBLEMS
2.1.1	FREEWAY NOISE
In 1991, CALTRANS completed the “Norco Reach” of the Interstate 15 Freeway thereby completing the only north-south freeway in the Los Angeles metropolitan region that connects Las Vegas and San Diego. The freeway physically divided the City, and created the situation where existing animal-keeping residences were now backing up to the newly created route. On the west side of the freeway, the property was and is zoned for commercial land uses and has been developing as the main commercial corridor in the City along Hamner Avenue. Noise is generally not an impact to commercial uses. The visibility provided by the freeway generally provides a positive benefit for these land uses. Properties on the east side, however, are and will remain in small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian land uses. The impact of freeway noise on these land uses is an issue.
2.1.2	NOISE IMPACTS ON ANIMAL KEEPING
As a community dedicated to preserving small-plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle there is concern about the impacts from noise sources, specifically noise from increasing street traffic, on the long-term health of animals. The concern is not just limited to traffic noise. Industrial and commercial noises, if too close to residential areas, may create impacts that are not safe for the keeping of animals on adjacent residential lots.
2.1.3	NOISE IMPACT FROM ANIMAL KEEPING
While the overall community goal is to establish, protect and promote the agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle that is unique in Southern California, animal keeping, as a land use, can affect adjoining land uses with noise impacts depending on the density and type of animals being kept. Certain animals when kept in large numbers can negatively influence the community because of the noise impacts created by that specific land use.
Norco
2
General Plan Noise Element
2.1.4	SPECIAL EVENT NOISE
Because of its small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle, the City wants to maintain streets and neighborhoods that are quiet during late evening and nighttime hours. The minimization of street lighting on many of the residential streets helps to maintain this quiet atmosphere. Special events, whether they be annual events, one-time celebrations, or on-going entertainment, can have disruptive influences to that aesthetic value if the noise impacts are allowed to occur uncontrolled.
2.1.5	INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL NOISE
Depending on the use, there is potential that occupants in commercial and industrial buildings and office parks will create noise levels that are incompatible to the raising and keeping of animals, and that may be incompatible to residential neighborhoods. Generally, the City’s commercial and industrial zones are located along the Interstate 15 Freeway-Hamner Avenue corridor. Mostly these zones are in areas that are not near residential areas, but there are locations where industrial/commercial zones back up to residential zones. These are the areas where the greatest potential impact can occur. Many of the potential noise impacts from commercial and industrial uses come from the extra-commercial activities that occur in the off-retail hours, such as the cleaning of parking lots, and the loading and unloading of trucks or temporary storage containers.
2.1.6	LARGE TRUCK/BUS ENGINE NOISE ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL
The parking of semi-trucks and other large vehicles is restricted to commercial and industrial zones primarily for aesthetic reasons. This also helps to reduce the noise impacts that can occur, especially adjacent to residential areas when vehicles are started up in early morning hours where they can be left running for many minutes to warm up. The City also allows 75 residential commercial truckparking permits to be issued per year. This also has the potential to create residential noise impacts, especially during quiet late night or early morning hours.
2.1.7	TRUCK TRAFFIC ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS
The Circulation Element lists the established truck routes in the City (p. 24 of the Circulation Element). Some of the routes have existing residences along them, and there is an on-going concern for the noise impact to these residences.
Some of these residences are located in commercial zones and will eventually be replaced by commercial uses. Others of these residences, though, are located in residential zones that are not anticipated to change. Of equal concern is truck traffic on streets that are not designated truck routes, but because they provide easy through routes, have the potential to attract truck traffic. Example streets
Norco
3
General Plan Noise Element
include Parkridge Avenue and Second Street from Mountain Avenue west to River Road. The State Vehicle Code requires that trucks be allowed to travel on roads that will provide the most direct line of travel to a given destination from a given origination point.
2.1.8	AIRCRAFT NOISE
The City of Norco is not located within the Airport Land Use Compatibility Zones for any of the airports in the region (Ontario, Riverside, Chino, Corona) but because of the take-off patterns from Ontario International Airport that outgoing flights have to take, there is some overflight noise impact that can occur depending on the air traffic and the weather patterns that affect the air patterns. Norco is also below one of the approach patterns for flights into Los Angeles International Airport, but planes on approach to that airport are still generally high enough in the air that any noise impact is not considered a significant impact.
2.2 EXTERIOR NOISE CONTROL GOAL: CONTROL OUTDOOR NOISE LEVELS TO SAFE AND COMFORTABLE LEVELS THAT PROTECT RESIDENCES AND THE SMALL PLOT AGRICULTURE/ANIMAL- KEEPING/EQUESTRIAN LIFESTYLE IN THE COMMUNITY.
2.2.1	COMMUNITY NOISE CONTROL POLICY: As becomes necessary, the City may consider the adoption of regulations to control noise impacts
Policy 2.2.1a: One option the City may consider is the adoption of a noise ordinance to regulate the impacts of noise on residential neighborhoods and the small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle of the community.
Policy 2.2.1b: General Plan land uses should be located, as can be reasonably accomplished, to minimize the noise impact conflicts between noise sensitive land uses and noise generators.
Policy 2.2.1c: The City should regulate as is feasible the use of motorized vehicles within the City’s equestrian-pedestrian zones, and in undeveloped and/or vacant land.
Policy 2.2.1d: The City may consider establishing an inventory of noise generators and noise sensitive land uses in the community and develop mitigation strategies as become necessary.
2.2.2	CONSTRUCTION NOISE CONTROL POLICY: The City should consider adopting and updating as necessary, regulations to minimize noise impacts from construction sites and equipment to residential areas.
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	4
Policy 2.2.2a: New development projects near developed and occupied residential areas should be evaluated for possible submittal of a noise reduction plan prior to the issuance of grading permits.
Policy 2.2.2b: All construction equipment should be equipped with noise attenuation features including mufflers and engine shrouds that are at least as effective as original manufacturer equipment.
Policy 2.2.2c: The City should regulate wherever feasible the hours of operation for construction areas including haul routes that may include residential streets and/or sensitive land uses.
OVERFLIGHT NOISE CONTROL POLICY: The City should work with the Los Angeles Department of Airports, and monitor developments related to the operation of Ontario International Airport on the best ways to protect the City from overflight noise impacts from low-flying approaching and departing jets.
FREEWAY NOISE CONTROL POLICY: The City should continue to work with CALTRANS for the construction of sound barrier walls along the east side of the freeway adjacent to residential properties.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE NOISE CONTROL POLICY: The City may want to consider regulations to control the operation of commercial vehicle engines, including buses, and including operations such as engine start-ups, maintenance, and refrigeration units in or near residential zones.
SPECIAL EVENT NOISE CONTROL POLICY: Outdoor special events should be located, planned, and timed to minimize potential noise impacts to nearby residential areas.
Policy 2.2.6a: The City should consider, where feasible, measures to control noise at special events that include outdoor entertainment. Acoustical studies, indicating typical noise levels to be anticipated from such events, and the measures to minimize said impacts, may be required by the City prior to issuance of a permit.
COMMERCIAL NOISE CONTROL POLICY: The City should incorporate as feasible, measures to minimize noise impacts from commercial and industrial zones that are near residential areas.
Policy 2.2.7a: The City should monitor existing excessive noise generators, and where feasible and practical, encourage the installation of additional buffering and noise reduction mechanisms when such operations are located near developed and occupied residential districts.
Norco
General Plan Noise Element
5
Policy 2.2.7b: The City should encourage measures to minimize noise impacts from loading/unloading activities and stock storage containers in commercial and industrial zones that are near developed and occupied residential districts.
2.2.8	ROADWAY NOISE CONTROL/MITIGATION POLICY: Incorporate, where
feasible and practical, measures to control and or mitigate noise impacts to noise sensitive land uses that are associated with new road development in the City, especially for secondary and arterial roads. Where excessive impact to residential areas already occur from existing roadways, the City may want to consider future measures and the appropriate funding mechanisms, where feasible, to reduce said impacts.
2.3	INTERIOR NOISE ATTENUATION GOAL - CONTROL OF INTERIOR RESIDENTIAL NOISE LEVELS TO COMFORTABLE LEVELS.
2.3.1	INTERIOR NOISE ATTENUATION POLICY: The City should adopt and implement construction standards to reduce interior residential noise levels on new residential development from outside sources to 45 dB(A)or lower.
2.3.2	NOISE-IMPACTED AREAS POLICY: New residential development in areas that already are impacted by noise levels 65 dB(A) or greater should be required to incorporate, as feasible and practical, additional noise attenuation measures to effectuate an interior noise level of 45 dB(A) or lower using such things as double glazing of exposed windows, and the requirement for air conditioning to minimize the need to keep windows open. Exterior noise levels shall be mitigated as much as possible using landscaping and site grading to reduce noise impacts.
2.3.2a: Acoustical studies should be required for all new residential development in noise impacted areas.
2.4	ANIMAL-KEEPING NOISE CONTROL GOAL- In instances where it becomes necessary, the City should implement, as feasible, measures to control noise impacts in residential zones from overly intensive animal-keeping activities from certain types of animals (birds and dogs as examples.)
2.4.1	ANIMAL UNIT DENSITY CONTROL POLICY: Where it has been determined by the City that certain species of animals can be a noise impact in residential areas when present in excessive numbers, the City may want to consider feasible measures to control the noise impacts from these particular species.
Norco
6
General Plan Noise Element
3.0 NOISE CONTROL PLAN
3.1	NOISE FUNDAMENTALS
Noise is unwanted sound; and physical health, social cohesion, property value and economic productivity are all potentially affected when noise levels are excessive. The negative impact from noise can range from moderately annoying to discomfort to health threatening, and the intensity of the impact can vary from one individual to another. While most environmental noise is not at hearing damage levels, there can be an impact to the perceived quality of life.
Noise levels generally increase as urbanization increases. Most of the increase in noise comes from the increased amount of traffic on community streets and on freeways. The City of Norco considers itself a rural community, but Western Riverside County is rapidly urbanizing on all sides of the City. The demand for commercial development and the desire of the City to secure financial stability for the future with a strong commercial tax base, and the need for regional transportation access brings some of that urban traffic into the City. As with other urbanizing areas, the largest source of noise increase in the community is the increase in traffic.
Unlike water and air impacts, the issue of noise impacts has not received the same level of study and research to determine what the negative impacts are to humans and/or to the environment. This is primarily because humans as well as animals tend to adapt to noise levels that are not at harmful levels, and since the impacts are not seen, the incremental increases often go unnoticed over the span of time. Generally when noise does become an issue, it is only after a significant generator has located in the community, or an existing source has grown in intensity over a time span. In both cases adequate planning can help prevent some incompatible situations from occurring.
3.1.1	METHODS FOR NOISE LEVEL RATING
Sound is the energy that is transmitted by pressure waves created when air is compressed. The rate of oscillation determines the different sounds that we hear. The parameters that define oscillation are the distances between peaks and troughs, the rate of propagation, and the pressure level. When the parameters fall below or above certain levels, the sound created goes outside of normal human perception ranges.
There are various methods for measuring sound, however, pressure level is the most common descriptor used to determine the “loudness” of a sound. The decibel (dB) scale is used to quantify the pressure, or intensity of sound. It is a logarithmic scale, similar to the Richter Scale for earthquakes, where sound levels can increase a million fold within the normal range of human hearing.
Since the human ear is not equally sensitive to all sound frequencies within the auditory spectrum, the human response is factored into the decibel scale by
Norco
7
General Plan Noise Element
weighting sounds within the maximum range of human sensitivity more heavily. This is known as the A-weighted decibel (dBA) scale.
Environmental noise levels fluctuate over time within a 24-hour period and different descriptors are used to account for the variability. Time variations in noise exposure are typically expressed in a steady-state noise level that represents the entire energy content of a sound wave over a given time period (called Leq). Since noise occurrences seem greater during quieter times of the day, noise levels are weighted to reflect duration, frequency, and time of occurrence. State law requires that noise levels be weighted with an artificial dB increment for evening and nighttime hours.
Examples of how true noise levels are weighted to reflect different background situations are as follows. A noise impact that occurs only once briefly is not perceived to be the nuisance that it would be if it were occurring all day long, even if the noise thresholds were acoustically the same. Additionally, a noise is perceived to be more of a nuisance at night when background environmental sound levels are less than they are during the daytime. The acoustical scales that “weight” noise levels are as follows:
Energy equivalent sound levels (Leq): the constant level averaged over a given time period that transmits the same acoustical energy as the actual sound as it occurred in the time that it occurred.
Day-Night average sound levels (Ldn): based on the Leq, this scale assigns a 10 dB(A) “penalty” for noise that occurs in quieter hours to take into consideration the lower ambient noise levels.
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL): a metric scale that is primarily the same as the Ldn factor, but with a greater weighting factor applied that has replaced the Ldn as the most common weighting scale used to calculate noise impacts.
The CNEL value at any given location will exceed the Ldn value, and likewise the Ldn value will exceed the Leq value because of the different weighting factors that are involved. Because the CNEL and the Ldn values usually vary only within 1.0 dB(A) of each other, they are many times interchangeable, and it is safe to assume that a scale based on Ldn values, reflects similar values on a CNEL scale.
The application of the CNEL scale on rating noise impacts in the community is based on a combination of existing ambient noise levels and the duration of noise impacts being considered. Once a community noise level standard has been established (60 dB[A] CNEL, for example) the amount of noise that can be added cannot create a CNEL level greater than that, when figured with existing
Norco
General Plan Noise Element
8
conditions. This method of determining the impact of noise allows agencies the opportunity to control the time and duration of significant noise generators.
If the existing ambient CNEL level is 55 dB(A) and the standard is 60, new noise could not exceed a 5 dB(A) CNEL increase. In this example, a noise impact of 65 dB(A) for six hours during the day, or 12 hours during the evening, or 2 hour during the night, would equal an increase of 5 dB(A) CNEL for an ambient noise level of 60 dB(A). If an impact of 75 dB(A) is introduced, it could only operate for 2 hour during the day, 10 minutes during the evening, or 3 minutes during the night without additional attenuation measures to reduce the impact.
An additional noise measurement scale is the Single Event Noise Exposure Level (SENEL). This measurement is also given in decibels and is used to determine the impact of a single event. To use the SENEL measurement effectively, the City would need to adopt a Noise Ordinance that establishes a threshold noise limit for special events.
Single Event Noise Exposure Level (SENEL): the noise exposure level of a single event measured in the time between the beginning and end of the event when the noise level exceeds an established threshold.
3.1.2	HUMAN REACTION TO NOISE LEVELS
Table 3.1 lists recommended noise levels at the corresponding reaction points for humans. These are useful when considering noise control regulations. Human response to noise is subjective and can vary from person to person for the same incident.
TABLE 3.1
HUMAN REACTION TO NOISE LEVELS
NOISE LEVEL	EFFECT
75 dB(A) (avg., 8 hours)	Negligible risk of hearing impairment
70 dB(A) (avg., 24 hours)	Negligible risk of hearing impairment
60 dB(A) (continual)	Difficult speech intelligibility
55 dB(A) (continual)	Fairly good speech intelligibility
45 dB(A) (continual)	Some interference in speech intellibility
45 dB(A) (single event)	No sleep disturbance
45 dB(A) (continual) (outside bedroom)	No sleep disturbance
30 dB(A) (continual) (inside bedroom)	No sleep disturbance
30 dB(A) (continual)	Excellent speech intelligibility
The adverse effects of noise can impact concentration, communication, and sleep. In the dB(A) scale, human audibility begins at 1.0 dB(A). At 140 dB(A)
Norco
9
General Plan Noise Element
the noise level approaches a threshold that can cause physical pain. Every increase of 10 dB(A) represents ten times the previous noise level and is perceived to be twice as loud by the human ear. The World Health Organization has reviewed a large number of reports and has recommended maximum noise levels for different environmental situations. Table 3.2 shows typical noise levels for familiar environmental noises measured in dB(A).
3.1.3	HARMFUL EFFECTS OF NOISE
Noise can cause both physical and psychological effects in humans, be they temporary or permanent. Temporary physical reactions to sudden noise occurrences besides the visible startle reflex can include the constriction of peripheral blood vessels, secretion of saliva and gastric juices, changes in heart rates, altered breathing patterns, visual and equilibrium impacts, and changes in the composition of blood and urine. Chronic reoccurrence of these can aggravate headaches, fatigue, heart disease, and circulatory and equilibrium disorders. Psychological impacts can range from immediate irritability and distraction to long term anger, depression, and retarded learning and accuracy.
The most common effects that usually are not harmful, but can be at extreme levels, are the disruption of speech and sleep. Exhibit 3.1 shows the range of communication that can occur at different noise levels and different distances. Speech interference begins at 40-45 decibels and becomes severe at about 60.
3.1.4	COMMUNITY REACTION TO NOISE LEVELS
As indicated, human response to noise can vary from one person to another. According to noise studies done for Caltrans to develop standards in their Noise Manual, approximately 10% of the population has such a low tolerance for noise, that any noise not created by them becomes a nuisance. At the other end of the spectrum are individuals who will not complain even under extreme noise conditions. Therefore, a noise element and the corresponding implementing ordinances, needs to develop standards and thresholds that apply generally to the biggest group of citizens in the middle of the spectrum.
Based on these same studies, it was found that for most of the population, an increase or decrease of 1.0 dB(A) is not perceptible except in a carefully controlled lab environment. An increase of 3.0 dB(A) is barely noticeable outside of the lab under normal environmental conditions; and usually it is necessary for there to be an increase of at least 5.0 dB(A) to create an impact enough that will generate complaints from the community.
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	10
TABLE 3.2
FAMILIAR NOISE LEVELS (dBA)
Human Ear Sensibility	dB(A)	Noise Source
	145	
Physically Painful	140	Sonic Boom
Extremely Loud	135	
	130	
	125	Jet Takeoff at 200’
Discomforting	120	Oxygen Torch
	115	Discotheque
	110	Motorcycle at 15’ (unmuffled)
	105	Power Mower at 3’
Very Loud	100	Newspaper Press
	95	Freight Train at 50’
	90	Food Blender
	85	Electric Mixer, Alarm Clock
	80	Heavy Truck at 50’
	75	Busy Street Traffic at 50’
	70	Average Traffic at 100’
		Vacuum cleaner
Loud	65	Electric Typewriter at 10’
	60	Dishwasher at 10’
		Air Conditioning Unit at 15’
	55	Normal Conversation at 5’
	50	Typical Daytime Suburban Noise
	45	Refrigerator at 10’
	40	Bird Calls
	35	Library
	30	
Quiet	25	
	20	Motion Picture Studio
	15	
	10	Leaves Rustling
	5	
Threshold of Hearing	0	
Norco
General Plan Noise Element
11
EXHIBIT 3.1
AFFECTS OF NOISE ON COMMUNICATION
Norco
General Plan Noise Element
12
Table 3.3 shows the anticipated community response to noise levels as determined by the U.S. Department of Transportation in their “Guidelines for Considering Noise in Land Use Planning and Control.” In their studies the average neighborhood reaction was determined be slight to moderate for noise levels that are 60dB(A) and lower. The average reaction increases to significant once noise levels reach 65dB(A) and will be severe, or very severe once noise levels reach 70dB(A) and above. Several factors can determine the level of reaction. Probably the most significant factor is the time of day.
TABLE 3.3
EFFECTS OF NOISE ON COMMUNITY (RESIDENTIAL LAND USE)
NOISE LEVEL dB(A)	PERCENT HIGHLY ANNOYED	HEARING LOSS	COMMUNITY PERCEPTION OF IMPACTED NEIGHBORHOOD
75 & above	37	May begin to occur	Noise is most likelv to be the most important adverse issue of the neighborhood.
70	25	Not likely to occur	Noise will be one of the most important adverse issues facing the neighborhood.
65	15	Will not occur	Noise is one of the important issues facino the neighborhood.
60	9	Will not occur	The noise impact may be considered adverse to the neighborhood.
55 & below	4	Will not occur	Noise is not considered more important than various other environmental issues.
3.1.5	ANIMAL REACTION TO NOISE LEVELS
The only studies found that measured the impact of noise on animals were studies done on farm animals to determine if there was an impact to agricultural output. The studies on farm animals (Bond, 1970) indicated that noise can sometimes have an effect on the behavior of farm-raised animals, particularly loud, sudden noise. However, noise from jet aircraft and sonic booms did not result in evidentiary changes in milk production by dairy cattle.
While the body of literature on the impact of noise exposure to domesticated animals is not very conclusive, the general consensus is that animals may be stressed by noise with a resulting drop in production of eggs, milk, etc. The production loss that might be experienced by typical noise levels along some Norco roads, however, would only be a few percent.
Swine exposed to reproduced aircraft noise (usual intensities ranged from 100 to 120 dB, with some intensities as high as 135 dB) resulted in no evident changes in rate of growth, food intake, efficiency of feed utilization, or reproduction. In another study (Kryter, 1972) it was noted that sudden, unexpected bursts of
______impulsive or steady-state noises will cause physical responses in animals, but
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	13
that with continued exposure, animals will more or less completely adapt. The noise levels used in these studies were in the 100 dB range and greater.
Noise stress upon horses is more related to single events than to total noise exposure. Horses tend to become adequately adapted to moderate steady-state noise, but can experience a “fight or flight” reaction to loud single event noises like horns, backfires, alarms, etc. Noise exposure levels at most streets are not so high as to create obvious noise concerns, however with increases in traffic the potential for startle events increases also.
EXISTING SETTING
SIGNIFICANT NOISE GENERATORS IN THE COMMUNITY
To have an effective noise control program, the City needs to identify significant sources of noise in the community. Because most of the community is small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian in nature, most significant noise is a result of street and freeway traffic. Commercial and industrial land uses have the potential to create noise impacts that could be disruptive to the City’s lifestyle, but those land uses, especially industrial, are mostly in areas where any significant noise impacts would dissipate over distance, and thereby not be an impact to residential areas.
3.2.1a Commercial and Industrial Land Uses. There are two significant areas where industrial zoning adjoins existing residential development. The first of these is the commercial-industrial node centered around the intersection of Hamner Avenue and Commerce Street. Existing residential properties along Mountain Avenue back up to industrial land uses along Industrial Avenue. In most cases the residence is located a substantial distance from any of those existing uses, and the City is not aware of any uses on that street that produce significant levels of noise. There is no history of noise complaints from that area. All of the properties along Mountain Avenue are within the Gateway Specific Plan industrial area and will someday be industrial land uses, eliminating any potential future conflict.
The other major area where industrial zoning adjoins residential land uses is the Wyle Labs property east of Hillside Avenue. While there are activities on the Wyle Labs property that could potentially produce significant impacts to nearby residences, the topographical setting attenuates impacts to levels that are not significant. The facility is located in a natural valley that physically separates it by ridges from residences to the north and south; and the primary activities on site are located a substantial distance from residential areas to the west and east that are downslope and upslope respectively from the facility. Any noise impacts that could be created are attenuated over the long distance to residences. The City is not aware of any noise complaints from activities at Wyle Labs. In recent years the number and magnitude of tests at this facility have been greatly reduced and
Norco
General Plan Noise Element
14
at the writing of this document, the property has been sold, and the facility is winding down for permanent closure.
Most of the noise complaints that the City receives deal with noise from temporary activities like parties and bands in residential areas. The only animal-related noise for which the Sheriff’s Department receives calls is from dog barking. A noise survey was completed in 2001 to identify potential noise concerns and issues in the community, and to identify any additional significant noise generators that might exist. Exhibit 3.2 shows the locations where noise measurements were taken.
3.2.1b Street Traffic Noise Impacts. Two sets of noise measurements were taken to determine the level of noise that is created by street traffic. The survey was not limited to traffic noise only; but as indicated in Section 3.2.1a, most of the continual noise that is experienced in neighborhoods comes from traffic.
Long term measurements were taken at five different intersections on the east side of the City where a semi-grid road pattern, with long spans between stops, does not discourage through traffic the same as do later subdivision designs that are typical on the west side. Table 3.4 shows the results of the long- term noise measurements.
The long-term measurements suggest that close to City roadways, the noise standard for noise-sensitive land uses (65 dB[A]) is generally exceeded with noise levels of 65-69 dB CNEL. This will likely be the case on most streets excepting the most lightly traveled streets in the community. Most of the maximum noise levels were associated with either the morning or afternoon commuter hours. Because of the weighting that occurs on the CNEL scale for late night hours, the 24-hour CNEL and peak hour levels are very similar.
Noise levels adjacent to roadways are dependent on a number of factors including the volume of traffic, the number of trucks in the mix of traffic, and the speed of the vehicles (Exhibit 3.3). From a mathematical formula that relates traffic volume to noise impact it has been determined that a 26% increase in volume translates into a 1.0 dB(A) increase in noise level and a doubling of traffic volume increases the adjacent noise level by 3.0 dB(A). A change in vehicle speed has an even greater impact on noise levels as is shown in Exhibit 3.3.
A major arterial that carries 10,000 ADT at a speed limit of 50 mph would create a noise impact of 64 dB(A) CNEL at 100 feet from the centerline. By lowering the speed limit to 45 mph, the sound level impact is reduced to 62.5 CNEL at 100 feet, and a speed limit of 40 mph creates a noise impact of 61 CNEL. Exhibit 3.2 also illustrates the impact of truck mix within the overall traffic pattern. The bottom scale of Exhibit 3.3 assumes an average speed of 40 mph on a major or urban arterial. At that speed with a traffic volume of 10,000 and a truck mix of 10% of the total, the CNEL would be 66 CNEL. If the truck mix is 5%, the CNEL lowers to 63.5 and at a 2.5% truck mix the level is 61.5.
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	15
0	U500	3000	6000 Feet
L__i___i__i___I___i__i___i__I
Legend
PARKS
3.	Parmentor Park
5.	George Ingalls Equestrian Center
9.	Rivertrails Park (Corona Ave.)
10.	Rivertrails Park (Hillside Ave.)
11.	Clark Field
12.	Community Center 14 Neil Snipes Park
15.	Makin-Shearer Park
17.	Kips Corner Park
CHURCHES
7.	4191 Corona Avenue
13.	2000 Norco Drive
18.	1001 Parkndge Avenue
19.	1609 Hamner Avenue
SCHOOLS
1.	Norco Elementary School
2.	Norco High School
4.	Norco Intermediate School
6.	Sierra Vista Elementary School
8.	Riverview Elementary School
16.	Highland Elementary School
20.	Auburndale Intermediate School
EXHIBIT 3.2
NOISE MONITORING LOCATIONS
EXHIBIT 3.3
TYPICAL TRAFFIC NOISE LEVELS
CNEL @ 100 feet	CNEL @ 100 feet	CNEL @ 50 feet
TRAFFIC VOLUME AND SPEED AS PARAMETERS
TRAFFIC VOLUME AND TRUCK PERCENT AS PARAMETERS
Norco
General Plan Noise Element
17
TABLE 3.4
LONG-TERM NOISE MONITORING RESULTS (dBA)
PARAMETER	LOCATIONS				
	© First & Valley View	© First & Corona	© Second & Hillside	© California & Proctor	© Fifth & Sierra
24-hour CNEL	69	60	65	68	69
Peak 1-hour LEQ	3-4 p.m. 67	7-8 a.m. 59	7-8 a.m. 64	4-5 p.m. 71	7-8 a.m. 68
2nd high hour LEQ	5-6 a.m. 66	8-9 a.m. 58	5-6 p.m. 64	7-8 a.m. 69	6-7 a.m. 67
3rd high hour LEQ	4 - 5 p.m. 66	4-5 p.m. 57	3-4 p.m. 63	8-9 a.m. 69	8-9 a.m. 66
Quietest hour	1 - 2 a.m. 57	10-11 p.m. 46	3-4 a.m. 46	1 - 2 a.m. 45	1 - 2 a.m. 57
1 - second maximum	77	77	85	84	85
1 - second minimum	47	33	39	30	48
© Measurements taken 4/17/01 in conjunction with Corona/Valley View Extension EIR
© Measurements taken 11/26/01
Short-term noise measurements were taken over a two-day period in the middle of the week for 15-minute intervals during different times of the day between 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. The measurements were taken at sensitive land uses including parks, schools, and churches. The results of the surveys are shown below in Table 3.5. From the long-term surveys it was found that the weighted 24-hour CNEL was 3 dB(A) higher than the afternoon levels. Adding 3 dB(A) to the LEQ levels from Table 3.5 will give a fairly dependable estimate of what the 24-hour CNEL levels would be for that location.
In Table 3.5 the numbers below columns L10, L33, L50, and L90 represent the percentage of readings from that site that exceed the noise level in the column. For example, 10 percent of the measurements at Site “A” exceeded 62 dB(A), and 33 percent of the measurements exceeded 57 dB(A). This gives a broader picture of what level most of the noise is generally occurring at.
The results of the short-term measurements show that most of the sensitive receptors, including schools, churches, and parks, in the survey now experience noise levels in the low 60s dB CNEL (when the LEQ is converted to CNEL). Although Norco currently does not have an established threshold for noise, 65 dB(A) is considered a compatible level of outdoor noise for sensitive land use receptors in most communities. As traffic increases, these noise levels may approach thresholds that make sensitive land uses less desirable in certain locations.
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	18
TABLE 3.5
SHORT TERM NOISE MONITORING RESULTS (dB[A])
SITE LOCATIONS REFER TO EXHIBIT 3.3
SITE	LEQ	Lmax	Lmin	L10	L33	L50	L90
1	58.7	74	49	62	57	55	52
2	60.9	74	48	64	60	58	53
3	56.1	74	46	58	54	52	48
4	61.9	76	51	64	58	56	52
5	54.9	63	46	58	55	53	50
6	63.1	79	48	66	60	58	51
7	55.5	67	46	60	54	52	49
8	63.1	81	48	66	60	56	52
9	60.5	64	57	61	60	60	59
10	55	66	48	58	54	53	50
11	65.5	80	48	69	65	62	52
12	59.9	72	50	62	59	58	54
13	59.8	76	46	63	56	54	49
14	60.8	70	54	64	61	60	56
15	54.3	66	45	57	54	52	48
16	53.8	65	44	58	52	50	44
17	55.4	68	44	59	54	52	46
18	66.2	75	50	71	66	61	53
19	63.9	75	52	67	64	62	57
20	61.2	78	44	66	60	56	49
3.2.2 NOISE GENERATORS FROM OUTSIDE THE COMMUNITY
In the previous section noise impacts created in the community were discussed. These impacts can primarily be controlled, or at least mitigated to levels so that the impacts are limited. Section 3.4 describes the various methods that can be incorporated into community design to help mitigate noise impacts. In addition to those noise sources that come from the community, there are those outside of Norco that can also create noise impacts, but are outside of control by the City of Norco. The two primary outside noise sources that impact the community are the 1-15 Freeway which bisects the City and which has numerous small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian land uses adjacent to it; and overflight traffic noise from flights taking off from Ontario International Airport.
3.2.2a Freeway Traffic Noise. The primary existing noise source that affects the greatest number of residents in the City of Norco is the 1-15 Freeway. Having been constructed after the community was well established, there are a number of small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian lots immediately adjacent to the freeway. The number of vehicles using the stretch of the freeway through
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	19
Norco has been growing steadily. In 1991 there was an average daily traffic volume of 82,000 that rose to 99,000 in 1996. The latest CALTRANS annual report (2001) has the average daily traffic flow at 138,000 in the section between the Hidden Valley Parkway and Sixth Street interchanges. A typical noise contour map for a six-lane freeway with 139,000 average daily trips in Riverside County shows that at 50 feet from the centerline of the outermost lane, the noise level is 80 dB(A) LDN. Exhibit 3.4 shows the typical noise contours for a freeway of this size which is very similar to the 1-15 Freeway in Norco.
EXHIBIT 3.4
TYPICAL FREEWAY NOISE CONTOURS
--- FREEWAY CENTERLINE
r- OUTER EDGE OF SHOULDER. 55 FEET FROM CENTERLINE - FREEWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY. 71 FEET FROM CENTERLINE
ALL MEASUREMENTS FROM FREEWAY CENTERLINE
r-.	119 FEET r	267 FEET r	571 FEET r	1228 FEET
				
	<	<	<	<
				
	CD	CD	CD	CD
	TJ	■O	■0	T3
	O	o	IO	O
	00		CO	CO
HI
LU
in
<£>
CM
-►
<
CD
■O
in
in
Exhibit 3.4 represents typical sound impacts from freeways assuming everything is under average circumstances where there are no significant barriers to the transmission of sound waves including topography or sound walls. In the City of Norco, there are slopes on each side of the freeway that are approximately 15 feet high beginning north of the Third Street undercrossing. South of this point the adjacent neighborhoods are downslope from the freeway on both sides. This continues until Second Street where slopes begin again on both sides, though not as high as the slopes north of Third Street.
The slopes are one of the methods used to mitigate the impact of freeway noise. There are also some pepper trees and sparse shrubbery along portions of these slopes that helps attenuate noise levels. On the west side of the freeway, as has been indicated earlier, the property adjacent is zoned commercial and the impact from freeway noise is not considered disruptive to that land use. On the east side, however, the land use is small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian and the freeway noise has a greater impact. The greatest concern is that portion of the freeway on the east side between Second and Third Streets where the
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	20
adjoining properties are below freeway grade, and there is no sound wall to mitigate the impact.
3.2.2b. Airport Related Traffic Noise. Airplanes flying in and out of airports have two operating procedures by which they fly by. Visual flight rules (VFR) are used when weather conditions are good so that pilots can see the runway and other aircraft in the vicinity for three statute miles. Under instrument flight rules (IFR) pilots must rely on cockpit instruments guided by ground or satellite based navigational equipment, and on air traffic control services where they are available. Large jets most always fly under IFR. Within 1,000 vertical feet of an airport that has a tower, the flight patterns of planes are controlled by the tower. Once a plane goes above 1,000 feet, monitoring of the flight pattern is transferred to Air Traffic Control that is the local/semi-regional control out of Los Angeles. When planes reach flying altitude, control and monitoring is transferred to the Air Traffic Control Center in San Diego.
Airports can have two or three different departure procedures that vary according to weather and traffic conditions. Generally, the departure procedures for Ontario International Airport have aircraft take off to the west and then ascend to the southeast over the Paradise VOR (very high frequency omni-range signal for electronic navigation.).
The Paradise VOR is a beacon facility that is used by all of the airports in the Southern California region for approaching and departing aircraft and is located on what is known locally as Vortac Hill just east of Third Street in Norco. Exhibit 3.5 shows the relationship of Ontario International Airport and the take-off patterns with the City of Norco and the Paradise VOR.
There are numerous factors that go into the determination of flight take-off patterns, the most important being the location of the Paradise VOR. All of the flights that take off from Ontario International Airport after 7 a.m. follow the takeoff pattern shown in Exhibit 3.5. As indicated, this can change depending on weather conditions and area traffic and there are situations where the flights take off to the east, but this is not the norm. Cargo planes, because they are taking off during off-peak hours as compared to passenger planes, do not follow the standard take-off pattern, but take off to the east and then immediately turn south to the Paradise VOR. Listed below are some reasons and factors that make changing the take-off patterns very difficult.
Paradise VOR - the location of the VOR cannot be changed since so many flights in the Southern California region, including flights on approach and take-off from Los Angeles International, John Wayne, Burbank, and Long Beach Airports, and smaller fields, in addition to Ontario International Airport, use it for visual guidance. The United States Federal Aviation Administration has proposed the elimination of all VORs with the advent and improvement of Global Positioning System
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	21
EXHIBIT 3.5
ONTARIO INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT TAKE-OFF PATTERNS
* ONTARIO
t g wife rot d»
HrcSIOH »LVO
&E&VARDINO C9UI
LI"OMlH-
:jfiitROiLl RO.
RIVERSIDE COU!
aELIMQIW
SIXIHSI
PARADISE
VOR
©2001 Thomas Bros Maps
ORANGE
COUNTY
TYPICAL TAKE-OFF FLIGHT PATTERN

technologies, but this is being opposed by small aircraft organizations that rely more heavily on the VORs. Any final determination is not likely in the near future.
Physical barriers - there are physical barriers east of the Ontario International Airport that make direct take-off routes in that direction more dangerous because of having to elevate rapidly to clear the topography. The Jurupa Mountains, though not extremely high, create the first obstruction that needs to be cleared. After that, planes still have to climb sharply to clear the height of the San Bernardino and San Jacinto Mountains further east. This can be problematic with heavy loaded cargo planes that cannot climb as quickly.
Although it is not the norm, when planes do take off directly east, they immediately loop back over the Paradise VOR to gain elevation without flying directly into the path of approaching aircraft from the east. The loop down to the Paradise VOR allows pilots more room to reach their desired
Norco
General Plan Noise Element
22
flying levels so as to clear surrounding topography while maintaining 3,000- foot clearances from all other aircraft in the vicinity.
Traffic congestion - in addition to topographical barriers, pilots leaving Ontario International Airport also have to get to their desired flying levels in the face of all incoming aircraft approaching Los Angeles International, John Wayne, Burbank, and Long Beach Airports from the east. The loop around to the Paradise VOR takes planes from Ontario out of those direct approach patterns so that they can get to their flying levels and continue north, east, or southeast above the levels that local approaching aircraft are flying at. The turn down to the Paradise VOR eliminates the need for departing aircraft of having to loop within the congested east-west air corridor before gaining enough altitude to leave the basin.
Any change or disruption of patterns has to be weighed together with all factors that affect take-off patterns, and whether proposed changes would increase potential safety hazards to pilots and passengers. What may seem as a simple change in direction or pattern on ground can have a large impact on the dynamics of the entire basin where pilots are having to clear large mountain ranges north and east in relatively short flying spaces while having to contend with a congested airspace.
The Ontario International Airport Operations Office is currently working to establish a noise advisory committee that will consist of representatives from the FAA, county and city governments in the region around the airport, airline representatives, citizens, and from the airport operations itself to address noise impacts and how best to mitigate them. It is not known when the committee formation will be completed since it involves federal agencies. The Chief of Operations indicated that they have been working with UPS on ways to avoid or mitigate fly-over impacts around the Paradise VOR, and that UPS is doing everything they can to increase elevation before they get to the VOR. The problem is that often times the planes are heavy with cargo loads and they are not able to climb as quickly. The UPS representatives did state, however, and the Chief of Operations confirmed, that none of the flights leave with cargo loads that are too heavy for the plane. It is ultimately the pilot that has last say on whether a plane will fly or not and if a plane is overloaded, they will not fly. It is also the pilot who has last say on the path of departure from the airport even though it may differ from what was recommended by the tower.
Los Angeles World Airports which operates Ontario International Airport maintains and monitors 15 noise measuring stations around the airport to determine where the 65 dB(A) CNEL contour line is located. Locations of the stations are moved depending on where that contour line moves with each year. If conditions at the airport change, such as flight patterns, or the number of planes, or the times of the day when flights occur, that cause the 65 dB(A) contour line to move, the stations are relocated to the point where there are no
Norco
General Plan Noise Element
23
areas beyond the monitoring stations that experience 65dB(A) CNEL. Currently that contour line lies within an area roughly bounded by the San Bernardino Freeway (10) on the north, the Pomona Freeway (60) on the south, the Ontario Freeway (15) on the east and Euclid Avenue on the west.
These noise monitoring stations measure levels on the CNEL scale which means that it is a weighted 24-hour average level. They do not measure single event noise occurrences which may exceed 65 dB(A) outside of the established contour line. It is the single events that seem to be of most interest to the City of Norco since the impacts are not continual. And it is the time of day when they occur that is also the issue. The cargo flights generally leave the airport during off-peak hours when ambient noise levels are low, so the noise impact of the plane seems louder than it would during the daytime.
3.2.2c. Other Noise Generators Outside the Community. The Draft Riverside County Integrated Program has identified Raahauge’s Shotgun Range located off the end of Bluff Street as a potential noise generator but does not contain a noise contour map of the location. The site is not identified in this document since there is no known history of noise complaints to the City from that facility. The site is located within the river plain of the Santa Ana River below the bluffs where the nearest homes are located. There is also significant and dense natural vegetation around the facility so it is likely that much of the noise is attenuated through natural barriers, landscaping, and distance.
3.2.3	SENSITIVE RECEPTORS IN THE COMMUNITY
The State has deemed certain land uses to be noise sensitive requiring identification and consideration when determining possible noise impacts in the community. These include, but are not limited to hospitals, convalescent homes, schools, churches, and sensitive wildlife habitat. Exhibit 3.6 shows all of the sensitive receptors recommended by the State. The City does not have hospitals or convalescent homes, but the senior housing complexes have been included.
Some communities include single-family residential areas as sensitive noise receptors deserving of special consideration. In Norco the small plot agriculture/animal keeping/equestrian lifestyle is considered a sensitive receptor. This consideration is based more on the lifestyle environment than it is on the impact to animals as explained in Section 2.1, and agriculture alone is generally not considered to be sensitive to noise impacts.
3.3	LAND USE AND NOISE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
3.3.1	FEDERAL STANDARDS
The Environmental Protection Agency has established guidelines for other agencies when noise regulations are necessary, but they are not mandatory
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	24
requirements and are provided for informational purposes only. These are based on the relationship between noise levels and human responses. Basically, higher than 45 dB(A) (Ldn or Leq) there is interior interference and annoyance. There is exterior interference when noise levels exceed 55 dB(A) and hearing loss can occur at 70 dB(A) and greater. The Federal Highway Administration (FHA) has developed noise standards that are applied when highway projects are proposed, or where housing is proposed and FHA or Caltrans are responding agencies for environmental input and recommendation.
The FHA standards are not directly applicable for development in Norco since most of the residential zones adjacent to the freeway are already developed.
They do, however, indicate the standards that one agency of the federal government has determined are acceptable for residential development, and the circumstances when noise impacts should be a consideration.
The FHA design goal for highway development in residential areas is an Leq level of 67 dB(A) for exterior yard areas, and 52 dB(A) for interior levels. This is based on a general assumption that standard wood frame housing provides an automatic 10 dB(A) reduction from exterior to interior noise levels with the windows open, and a 20 dB(A) reduction with the windows closed almost all of the time (basically non-opening windows). The FHA has come up with general categories of land uses that are appropriate under various noise settings as shown in Table 3.6.
TABLE 3.6
FHA NOISE DESIGN LEVELS dB(A)
NOISE LEVEL	57 Leq 60(L10)	67 Leq 70(L10)	72 Leq 75(L10)	--	52 Leq 55(L10)
ACTIVITY CATEGORY	A (exterior)	B (exterior)	C (exterior)	D	E (interior)
When determining appropriate design levels either the Leq or the L10 scales are used, but not both. L10 means that not more than 10 % of occurences will exceed the stated noise level.	Where quiet serves an important public need to preserve a specific intended land use.	Public areas where the need to maintain quiet is not as critical as for those in Category A.	Developed lands, properties, and activities not already included in Categories A & B.	Undeveloped lands.	
	ACTIVITIES				
	Amphitheaters, Specific parks (or), Portions of parks, Open spaces, Historic districts.	Recreation areas, Playgrounds, Public parks, Private parks, Residences, Motels & hotels, Meeting rooms, Schools, Churches, Libraries, Hospitals.	No specific activities listed.	Noise abatement is not required unless development is imminent and the cost or difficulty of incorporating abatement measures later would be prohibitive.	Interiors of: Residences, Motels & hotels, Schools, Churches, Meeting rooms, Libraries, Hospitals, Auditoriums.
Norco
General Plan Noise Element
26
When the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) is considering funding for a project where noise could be an issue, the Department makes a determination on whether the project is “normally acceptable,” “normally unacceptable,” or “unacceptable” based on criteria as shown in Table 3.7.
TABLE 3.7
HUD HOUSING CRITERIA FOR EXTERIOR NOISE ACCEPTABILITY (Ldn)
DEGREE OF ACCEPTABILITY
55
EXTERIOR NOISE EXPOSURE (dB)
60	65	70	75	80
85
—► Acceptable
-> Normally Unacceptable
> Unacceptable
Standard construction will make indoor noise levels acceptable, and exterior levels will be reasonable for recreation and play; standard HUD approval.
Special building construction may be necessary to protect indoor environment, and barriers may be necessary to make outdoor environment acceptable; HUD projects need Regional Admin, approval.
The construction cost to make the indoor environment livable may be prohibitive, and the outdoor environment would remain unacceptable; HUD projects prohibited.
3.3.2	STATE STANDARDS
The California Administrative Code establishes the noise insulation standards that must be applied to all new multi-family structures including apartments, condominiums, attached dwellings, motels and hotels. The federal standards were designed to mitigate the noise impacts of federally funded projects that are typically noise producers. The state guidelines are designed to protect new multi-unit residential structures that are located within areas of 60 dB(A) CNEL and greater adjacent to roads, railroads, transit lines, airports and industrial areas. The buildings in these areas require acoustical studies to determine the appropriate attenuation measures to achieve interior noise levels of not greater than 45 dB(A) CNEL with doors and windows closed.
The impacts of airport noise are regulated through the California State Aeronautics Act. Eventually all airports in the state must operate so as not to create external noise levels greater than 65 dB(A) CNEL in existing or future residential areas. The 65 dB(A) CNEL level was chosen because, up to that
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	27
point, the average person living in a home of standard California-type construction, will not experience any loss of sleep or disruption of speech. Currently the area encompassed by noise impacts of 65 dB(A) CNEL and greater lies within a radius that extends roughly one to two miles around the perimeter of the airport. As has been explained, the City of Norco is well out of the 65 dB(A) CNEL contour and is therefore not included in airport programs to mitigate noise impacts. No other airport in the area creates noise impacts that noticeably affect the City of Norco.
Each municipality or jurisdiction is charged by the state with the responsibility of establishing and implementing its own noise element and noise ordinance. The state has established general guidelines based on known nuisance and safety factors associated with noise pollution (Table 3.8, Land Use Compatibility). In addition the state has provided jurisdictions with guidelines on how to further refine or correct these generalized standards to reflect the noise issues that are unique and/or significant for each particular community.
The corrections are done by adjusting the actual CNEL level to better reflect the existing condition or how it may be impacted by changing conditions (Table 3.9, Normalized CNEL Corrections). For example, areas with large temperature variations between winter and summer can have average CNEL levels adjusted downward in winter to reflect that windows are closed all the time as compared to summer. Areas that are removed from urban noise and truck traffic can have the levels adjusted upward to reflect the relative isolation that is the norm.
3.3.3	LOCAL STANDARDS
As indicated, the state delegates to local jurisdictions the responsibility of establishing General Plan Noise Elements and of enacting noise ordinances and other policies for enforcement. At the writing of this document, Norco did not have a noise ordinance. All noise complaints were handled on a case-by-case basis as nuisances or as potential threats to the public health and safety. Riverside County has noise threshold levels that are very similar to the state standards shown in Table 3.8 with some variations for local conditions considered important by the County. Open space areas that have been set aside to preserve an ambient serenity and/or for the preservation of habitat and species are included by the County as sensitive receptors.
Most communities have standards drawn from the State recommendations shown in Table 3.8 and many suburban communities have established 65 dB(A) as the maximum exterior noise level for residential areas. The City of Norco should implement noise policies that are compatible with the small plot agriculture/animal keeping/equestrian lifestyle. While there is no clear evidence that increased noise levels within reason will have an affect on domestic animals, the ambient lifestyle should be considered when the City enacts a noise ordinance.
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	28
TABLE 3.8
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
CALIFORNIA STATE GUIDELINES
LAND USE CATEGORIES
COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE ________dB(A) CNEL_______
60	65	70	75	80
RESIDENTIAL - LOW DENSITY, SINGLE FAMILY, DUPLEX, MOBILE HOMES
RESIDENTIAL - MULTIPLE FAMILY
TRANSIENT LODGING - MOTELS, HOTELS
SCHOOLS, LIBRARIES, CHURCHES, HOSPITALS, NURSING HOMES
AUDITORIUMS, CONCERT HALLS, AMPHITHEATERS
SPORTS ARENAS, OUTDOOR SPECTATOR SPORTS
PLAYGROUNDS, NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS
GOLF COURSES, RIDING STABLES, WATER RECREATION, CEMETARIES
OFFICE BUILDINGS, BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL, PROFESSIONAL OFFICES
INDUSTRIAL, MANUFACTURING, UTILITIES, AGRICULTURE
NORMALLY
UNACCEPTABLE
NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE
Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon assumption that buildings are of normal conventional construction, without special noise insulation.
CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE
New construction should only proceed after a detailed analysis of noise reduction requirements is made and needed insulation included in the design. Conventional construction may suffice with closed windows and a fresh air sup-ply system.
New construction should be discouraged. If construction proceeds, a detailed analysis of noise reduction requirements must be completed with needed insulation included in the design.
CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE
New development should not occur. Construction costs to make the indoor environment acceptable would be prohibitive and the outdoor environment would not be useable.
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	29
TABLE 3.9
NORMALIZED CNEL CORRECTIONS (dBA) CALIFORNIA STATE GUIDELINES
TYPE OF CORRECTION	DESCRIPTION OF CHANGE	MEASURED CHANGE dB(A) CNEL
SEASONAL CORRECTION	Summer (or year-round operation)	0
	Winter only (or windows always closed)	-5
CORRECTION FOR OUTDOOR RESIDUAL NOISE LEVEL	Quiet suburban or rural community (remote from large cities and from industrial activity and trucking).	+10
	Quiet suburban or rural community (not located near industrial activity).	+5
	Urban residential community (not immediately adjacent to heavily travelled roads and industrial areas.	0
	Noisy urban residential community (near relatively busy roads or industrial areas).	-5
	Very noisy urban residential community.	-10
CORRECTION FOR PREVIOUS EXPOSURE AND COMMUNITY ATTITUDES	No prior experience with the intruding noise.	+5
	Community has had some previous exposure to noise. This correction may also be applied in a situation, where the community has not been exposed, that bona fide efforts are being made to control the noise.	0
	Community has had considerable previous exposure to the intruding noise and the noise maker’s relations with the community are good.	-5
	Community aware that operation causing noise is very necessary and it will not continue indefinitely. This correction can be applied for an operation of limited duration and under emergency circumstances.	-10
PURE TONE OR IMPULSE	No pure tone or impulsive in character.	0
	Pure tone or impulsive character present.	-5
Source: State Guide	ines for the Preparation of Noise Elements of the General Plan.	
Corrections made by adding the “Measured Change” to existing CNEL to obtain the normalized CNEL.		
3.4 NOISE ATTENUATION
3.4.1 NATURAL ATTENUATION
Noise naturally dissipates over distance depending on the terrain, vegetation, and the amount of barriers such as buildings and walls to block noise waves. Soil types, temperature gradients, wind direction and speed are also factors that help attenuate noise over distance. In an area that is primarily flat with no barriers and with relatively low background noise levels, a single point source
Norco
30
General Plan Noise Element
noise level will dissipate approximately 6.0 dB for each doubling of distance from the point source.
For a line source of noise, such as a heavily traveled road, the noise level drops about 3.0 dB when the distance is doubled between source and receptor. This reduction increases to 4.5 dB when all environmental factors such as soil, vegetation, and wind are considered. In their “Noise Assessment Guidelines” HUD uses a 4.5 dB drop with a doubling of distance when assessing impacts from roadways. Distance is the easiest and most cost-effective measure to mitigate the incompatibility of significant noise generators and sensitive receptors. In an urban setting, while this can be applied to certain specific land uses in limited situations, distance is generally not a feasible mitigation overall.
3.4.2	BUILDING AND SITE PLANNING ATTENUATION TECHNIQUES
There are two basic methods for mitigating the impact of noise. The first is to control and minimize it as much as possible at its point source through the application of building techniques, and site and landscaping design features. When the application of attenuating factors at the site have only a minimal impact at reducing noise levels, or are prohibited by federal or state mandate for certain uses, acoustical site planning, architectural design and construction need to be provided off-site so that future uses are not immediately incompatible with existing conditions. Where development already exists, the construction of noise barriers in the form of berms and walls can be applied.
3.4.2a. Acoustical Land Planning. Existing and anticipated noise environments must be considered when configuring land uses in the Land Use Element of the General Plan so that incompatible uses are kept separated. The Land Use Plan has been designed, and should be maintained, so as to separate and protect potentially incompatible land uses as follows:
#	Placement of noise compatible land uses between significant noise generators and noise sensitive land uses
#	Zoning restrictions on the location and operation of potential noise generators
#	Compliance with any applicable airport land use compatibility plans (none apply in Norco)
#	Restrictions on the operation hours of significant noise generators
3.4.2b. Acoustical Site Planning. Whether a project involves the construction of a new potential significant noise generator, or the construction of a noise sensitive land use in an area impacted by noise, there are site planning measures that can help reduce the impacts of excessive noise levels.
#	Use of buildings, landscaping, and berms as noise barriers
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	31
#	Orientation of buildings and common open areas away from noise sources
#	Use of parking, landscaping, and increased setbacks as measures to increase distance between noise generators and noise sensitive land uses
3.4.2c. Acoustical Architectural Design. The design and layout of individual buildings can incorporate measures to achieve greater noise attenuation.
#	Building height can be used to help provide attenuation to the site and to the interior of the building.
#	Rooms with more sensitive uses such as meeting halls in commercial buildings and bedrooms in residential buildings can be located within the building so that the rest of the building helps provide attenuation from nearby significant noise generators.
#	The placement of doors, windows, balconies, outdoor stairways, etc. can be done in a manner such that they are not exposed to significant noise generators.
#	Architectural design features such as awnings, wing walls, wall surface articulation, and window size can be incorporated to help shield common areas and building openings from significant noise generators.
3.4.2d. Acoustical Construction Techniques. The following techniques are applied to various parts and phases of building construction to help reduce interior noise levels.
#	Dense building materials for walls, floors, ceilings, and doors
#	Acoustical treatments to windows consisting of any combination of double glazing, double panes, airtight seals, and non-opening windows
#	Maximum air space in attics and walls
#	Design of ventilation systems that open away from noise exposed wall and ceiling surfaces
3.4.3	TRAFFIC SPEED CONTROL
As stated in Section 3.4.1, there is a decrease of 4.5 dB(A)as you double the distance away from a line source of noise like a street. Traffic noise is the result of a number of factors, the biggest of which are the number of vehicles and the speed at which the vehicles are traveling. Techniques to reduce traffic speed have to be weighed with sometimes opposing public health and safety needs with regards to the movement of traffic and effective access by emergency vehicles.
Norco
32
General Plan Noise Element
3.5 PROJECTED NOISE LEVELS
Noise-sensitive land uses are considered impacted if the exterior noise level exceeds 65 dB(A) CNEL. Exhibit 3.7 shows the areas of the City that are considered impacted under current noise levels, and Exhibit 3.8 shows what the anticipated impact area will be under buildout conditions in 2020. The graphics showing impact areas represent worst case scenarios where there is direct line of sight from the noise source to the receptor. Because of this, the impact areas are overstated since there are barriers along portions of the freeway consisting of grade differentials, berms, and sound walls that attenuate some of the noise impacts.
All of the impacted areas in the City are associated with traffic, the primary impact area being the corridor that parallels the 1-15 Freeway. Table 3.10 shows that with the exception of the freeway, all roads currently create CNEL levels of 65 dB(A) or greater fairly close to the road right-of-way within most standard building setback areas.
It is projected that most City roadways will experience noise levels exceeding 65 dB(A) CNEL at 50 feet from centerline, and that in some locations the 65 impact area may extend into what is considered sensitive land use areas such as the immediate front yards for some residences. All of the increases of 5 dB(A) or greater shown in Table 3.10 will occur along residential streets east of Hamner Avenue. In the impact area expected from the traffic along the 1-15 Freeway, all outdoor areas will exceed 65 dB(A) regardless of the barrier effects that residences normally provide.
Norco
33
General Plan Noise Element
LEGEND
TRAFFIC NOISE IMPACTED AREAS EXISTING CONDITIONS (CNEL > 65 dB(A)
1.450	2900	5)800 Feel
J i i 1 i i i I
EXHIBIT 3.7 NOISE IMPACTED AREAS (existing conditions)
TABLE 3.10
EXISTING AND FUTURE TRAFFIC NOISE (dBA CNEL at 50 feet from centerline)
ROADWAY	SEGMENT(S)	EXISTING	BUILDOUT	CHANGE
North Drive	E of California	65	72	+7
Sixth Street	Valley View - Corona	-	75	-
	Corona - Temescal	70	75	+5
	Hillside - Pedley	-	75	-
Fifth Street	E of Western	66	63	-3
	E of Hamner	65	69	+4
	Sierra - Valley View	-	67	-
	Corona - Temescal	60	64	+4
	Hillside - California	-	63	-
Fourth Street	Sierra - Valley View	-	66	-
	Valley View - Corona	58	63	+5
Second Street	W of Mountain	68	70	+2
	Hamner -1-15	69	73	+4
	Valley View - Corona	66	-	-
	Corona - Temescal	-	68	-
First Street	E of Parkridge	63	70	+7
	Corona - Temescal	-	68	-
Hidden Valley Pkwy.	Valley View - Corona	68	73	+5
Norco Drive	Fifth - Hamner	62	65	+3
Bluff Street	River - Vine	59	62	+3
River Road	NW of Bluff	66	68	+2
	Corydon - First	68	71	+3
Parkridge Street	First - Second	62	65	+3
Corydon Avenue	Fifth - Vine	65	67	+2
	NE of River Road	64	64	0
Hamner Avenue	N of Sixth	66	68	+2
	Fifth - Sixth	69	74	+5
	Fourth - Fifth	70	75	+5
	Third - Fourth	-	75	-
	Second - Third	-	75	-
	First - Second	-	74	-
	S of First	72	70	-2
California Avenue	N of Seventh	67	73	+6
	S of Sixth	59	-	-
Valley View Avenue	Sixth - Fifth	60	-	-
	S of Second	56	63*	+7
Norco
35
General Plan Noise Element
z

TRAFFIC NOISE IMPACTED AREAS 2020 PROJECTIONS (CNEL > 65 dB(A)
3.8
NOISE IMPACTS® AREAS
([Pr©|e©4©«3 202© ©©m88$B'9>BTis»
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
4.1	NOISE ORDINANCE
The City may want to consider implementing noise policies that will preserve the small plot agriculture-/animal-keeping/equestrian lifestyle.
4.2	NEW PROJECT DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
Projects that are located in noise-impacted areas should be designed to incorporate the techniques described in Section 3.4 to reduce interior and/or exterior noise levels to acceptable limits. Potential significant noise generators should be required to provide noise analyses in conjunction with project applications to ascertain what noise attenuation measures are appropriate for the anticipated noise impacts.
4.3	STATE AND FEDERAL FUNDING FOR COMMUNITY NOISE ATTENUATION
State and federal grants for public health and safety may provide opportunities to improve existing conditions where noise intrusion has resulted primarily from growth in the region; and this primarily from increased traffic along the freeway and major arterials. The City should explore all opportunities to apply for grants that might improve existing noise-impacted conditions in the City.
4.4	FREEWAY NOISE WALL
The City should work with Caltrans to identify the Norco stretch of the Interstate 15 Freeway for future funding to construct freeway noise walls adjacent to small plot agriculture/animal-keeping/equestrian land uses.
4.5	TRAFFIC/ACCESS/SPEED CONTROLS
The City should be open and seek feasible methods to reduce traffic speed especially in quieter neighborhoods. Any methods to reduce speed need to be consistent with the goals and policies of the other elements of the General Plan including Public Safety, so as not to create unsafe conditions. Where feasible, the City should seek to control vehicle access where traffic could present an unacceptable noise intrusion.
4.6	SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
The City should control single event noise impacts through the issuance of special event permits for outdoor events. Operation hours and location of event staging facilities should be controlled so as to minimize impacts to nearby sensitive receptors.
Norco
yy General Plan Noise Element	37
4.7	ONTARIO AIRPORT NOISE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The City should take an active participatory role once an airport noise advisory committee is formed. The City should also monitor regional airport meetings to insure that City interests are protected with any changes to take-off and landing patterns and policies. The City should also work with the airport to minimize and eliminate as many early morning or late night take-offs by cargo planes that ascend directly to the Paradise VOR in Norco.
Norco
General Plan Noise Element	38









































﻿GENERAL PLAN
OPEN-SPACE ELEMENT
UPDATE ADOPTION DATE: June 1989
Greenspace for Norco
A Master Plan for Parks, Recreation and Open Space
Project Team	Verna Jigour
Shinpei Koyama
Gary Vasquez
Assisted by
Faith Perry Lisa Schenck
Principals John T. Lyle A.S.L.A.
Jeffrey K. Olson A.S.L.A. Francis Dean F.A.S.L.A.
Arthur Jokela
C6O6
STUDIO

Graduate Studies in Landscape Architecture California State Polytechnic University, Pomona June 1989
i.
Acknowledgements
during the preparation of the Greenspace plan, the 606 Studio team members met regularly with Parks and Recreation Department Director, Ray Odell, his assistants, iecky Mendoza and Debby Williams and the members of he Parks and Recreation Commission: Paul Hadnagy, Sharon Ladnier, Mitchell Bernstein, Jo Ann Dickson, and Doris Haney, who provided valuable feedback and nsights. Student representatives to the commission, Tiffany Goodsell and Rick Becerra offered insights as well is soliciting student input. Denise Lawr ence, Chair, Environmental Studies Department at Cal Poly, Pomona, provided invaluable guidance for the social research. Jim Sums, Community Workshop Consultant, based in San ;r an cisco, coordinated the community workshops, generously sharing his expertise, wit, materials and mergy. City of Norco staff members who assisted included Zathy Ives, Gene W. "Bill" Young, James E. Daniels,
\Tancy Owens, James Ashcraft, Nancy Hemphill, Elizabeth Xanr Brent Richards, Ken O'Neill, Captain R. C. "Bob" Joy nd City Manager, Ron Cano. Members of the <orco community who contributed ideas and observations included Lisa O Shaughnessy, Laurie ’utman, Carolyn Burnett, Cathy Ryan, Tyler and Linda vlitchel, Lewann Hepfler, Barbara and Dayle Starbuck and Ynn McClure, in addtion to the other community nembers who participated in the workshops. Dr. William L Roley and Roger and Ellen Aguinaga., of Aguinaga 7ertilizer, Inc. were instrumental in the development of composting options. Special thanks go t o friends who issisted at critical times: Emiko Koyamn, Marcia \4cDonough, Lynne Dwyer Hade and Laura Rhodes. George Stavros, Professor of English and Foreign languages at Cal Poly, Pomona, provided valuable editorial assistance.
Introduction
Norco has a substantial foundation of superb open space with which to create a greenspace system of uniquely high quality and appeal. The historic importance of Norco's rural character, which is emphasized by the role of horses in the community, can be enhanced and further developed through the town's greenspace planning and implementation program. The greenspace system will enable the community to be more of what it wants to be, by capitalizing on the inherent riches of its landscape.
A Definition of Greenspace
The term "greenspace" refers to a synergistic system in which all of the contributing features are connected in such a way as to perform more effectively than they do as isolated elements. Greenspace features include parks, natural areas and trails. They also include visual open space that may or may not be accessible; wildlife hab5!^t as well as soccer fields and other recreational faciliti informal community gathering areas as well as structured meeting spaces. Greenspace supports and regenerates the human community, the community of plants and animals in its area and the ecological health of the town. A greenspace system is the major medium of a community's ecosystem, including flows of water and nutrients and wildlife habitat. Greenspace provides the landscape matrix through which the community's outdoor needs are woven. Successful greenspace must be amenable to the changing needs of the community and therefore must have flexibility built into its planning framework. Greenspace can perform a vital role in drawing the citizens of Norco together.
Contents
L_____A Greenspace Plan______________________________________2
Plan Summary Purpose of Project General Methods
IL The Region	______ 6
Regional Character Regional Natural Areas The Hydrology Model
III.	Norco Geography________________________________________12
History
The Community and its Equestrian Character
Rural Character and Recent Development Youth
Adults and General Demographics
Institutions
Commercial Character
Local Physiography The Hills
The Santa Ana River Lake Norconian
External Resources Internal Influences
IV.	Issues and Goals_______________________________________23
V.	Greenspace Inventory___________________________________24
Regional Connections The Hills
The Central Green The Santa Ana River Greenspace Inventory Exisling Parks Planned Parks Schools
Park Inventory Conclusions
VI.	Greenspace Demands and Trends__________________________42
Community Profile
User Need Survey Focused Interviews
Community Workshops and Personal Contacts
Outdoor Recreation - Trends in California
VII.	Ecological Analysis____________________________________52
Water and Nutrient Flow
Greenspace Suitabiltiy Model Hill Suitability Analysis
VIII. Design Themes___________________________60
Design Themes		
The Country Town The Spirit of Place The Equestian Community		66
IX.	Theme Elements Trail System Decision Stages	
X.	The Objective of a Greenspace Flan Stages of Decision Stage 1 - immediate Decisions Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 - Ideal Greenspace Planning and Design Recommendations	78
XT.'	The Central Green The Hills The Mountain Park Rest Stops Wildlife Santuaries Linear Parks and Greenspace Corridors Sixth Street Ingalls Plaza Trail Overpass Amphitheater Greenspace as an Ecological Support System	92
XII,	Regional Corridors Animal and Waste Options Water and Nutrient Flow Stormwater Treatment and Retention Ponds Greenspace Standards	98
XIII,	Standards Appendices	102
A.	Achieving Viable Greenspace for Wildlife and Humans in the Urbanizing Environment
B.	Urban Creeks and Floodway Channels - A Hidden Resource
C.	Sources of Funding for Parks and Open Space D Questionnaire Tallies
E. Data Maps
1.	Greenspace Inventory
2.	Land Use
3.	Slope
4.	Vegetative Associations
5.	Site Analysis
A Greenspace Plan
Section I
Plan Summary
This plan presents a framework which organizes the elements of Norco's existing and future greenspace into a systematic whole. The intention is to provide the city with a flexible planning tool which can be modified to respond to changing conditions. The system is built upon a sequence of planning and design decisions to be made over the course of the Greenspace
implementation process. Key decisions to be made by the City of Norco staff and community members are defined for each stage of the process. The plan view image shown here is a graphic representation of the future greenspace network that will result if the community choosfes to implement all of the recommendations made by the 606 Studio.
The basic issues addressed by this plan are:
•	Serving the recreational and open space needs of the community.
•	Maintaining and enhancing NTorco’s distinctive community character.
•	Assuring the viability of community life support networks, human and all others.
•	Providing systematic linkages among trail and wildlife corridors.
•	Establishing Norco's role within the regional context,
with respect to its landscape and demographic considerations.	1
The basic goals of the project were to:
•	Serve the recreational needs of the community.
•	Provide an organized structure for future park planning efforts, including the location of potential park lands, the possible functions they might sustain, and the order in'which all recommended actions should be implemented.
•	Inspire community involvement in the planning and implementation process.
•	Promote local environmental awareness.
•	Achieve a system which will contribute to local economic stimulation through the landscape enhancement of Norco's distinctive community character and the image it aspires to project to the external world.
•	Provide a tool for grant funding requests.
•	Clarify the legal and economic mechanisms for achieving the desired system.
Issues and goals are presented in an expanded form in Section IV.
Three underlying themes constitute the vital forces of the Norco community and do much to shape its character. These are portrayed as the "Rural Town", the "Spirit of Place" and the "Equestrian Community".
These themes are characterized by the following attributes:
Rural Town
•	The experience of openness and freedom found in the local hills and the Santa Ana River area and the enjoyment of the convenience and social amenities of a small town.
Greenspace for Norco 2
Legend
’Y '-4'L
, rp-;’?	■ ' , 7 ■'	'
■	e;?>.v’	J.’-h
■	V-V’?1	.W
A GREENSPACE PLAN

taxk.. RtmrAThrt ulT‘AarM;^:r
GfcAtH Ml'KIU'lfS I?. lAMlsr'.l'l- U« IMIIITI HI
fl IMW* :K*T	JilW	«K*r NORTH
A Greenspace Plan 3
Greenspace for Norco
CAURNtNIA STATU POLYTECHNIC UNIVERSITY rOMONA
•	A symbolic appreciation of such freedom and openness is expressed in the image the town presents to itself and the world outside.
Spirit of Place
•	The awareness of and relationship with one's surroundings.
•	A deeply felt connection to the land and its natural character.
•	A sense of rootedness.
•	A celebration of the local landscape and a striving to draw on its distinctiveness as a unifying element throughout the town.
Equestrian Community
•	The opportunity to ride through the urban, environment and move from there into local and regional landscapes such as the hills and the river.
•	The ability to travel to, from and through these
spaces freely. :	■
•	Opportunities to socialize outdoors with others of like mind.
The plan is fexible in responding to continuing community input. The issues and goals form a fundamental framework for the future. The weaving together of the three themes contributes life and color, transforming the whole into a living Greenspace Plan for Norco.
■ -	j
PROCESS FLOW DIAGRAM
Greenspace for Norco 4
Purpose of Project
General Methods
As the City of Norco approaches its 25th anniversary on December 28, 1989, it can do so with a newly envisioned future for greenspace as a cohesive, unifying pattern. This Greenspace Plan offers an organized approach for the creation of that future.
In the Fall of 1988, the city commissioned the 606 Studio to develop a general master plan for its parks, recreation and open space. The plan was needed to fill a gap in the city's existing General Plan. This plan will also facilitate applications by the Norco Parks and Recreation Department for various grant funds.
In the last several years, Norco's economic base has been expanding, enriching the city's coffers. But in the recent past, little revenue has been available for civic improvements. As a result, most of Norco's parks have been built by special-interest groups having volunteers and funds to put into the effort. Although the existing parks offer many recreational amenities, they fail to fit together into a cohesive and comprehensive system. Some elements are missing altogether. For example, while many facilities are provided for sports activities, pleasant little picnic spots are hard to find. Aesthetics appear to have taken a back seat to utilitarian functions n most of the parks - and.in many parts of town.
Related to the town's recent and ongoing economic growth is the surge of growth in the surrounding areas. For 25 years, the community has sought to retain an uncommon rural identity, while carbon-copy Southern California shopping centers and communities were being stamped out all around it. With the newly completed interstate freeway bisecting the town and rampant development closing in on all sides, the challenge for Norco is to secure a supportive tax base while maintaining and further developing its distinctive community image.
The process of developing this plan followed an ecosystematic approach. Physical and biological processes and features of the land were mapped and compiled into design models. Human parameters were determined through demographic studies, user needs
questionnaires, focused,interviews, community workshops and casual conversations between 606 Studio team members and various people of the community.
/I Greenspuce Plan 5
Regional Character
The City of Norco lies in the western Riverside County in Southern California, 50 miles east of Los Angeles. Its region can be defined as the upper watershed of the Santa Ana River which includes a portion of southwestern San Bernardino County. The region is framed by the San Gabriel, San Bernardino and San Jacinto Mountains, rising more than 10,000 feet in elevation to the north, northeast and east of the city, respectively. These form a dramatic backdrop.
particularly in winter, when winds whisk the air clear of fog and smog to reveal their white-capped peaks against a brilliant blue sky. Perched on a bluff above the Santa Ana and at a transportation node, Norco is an integral part and could become a focal point of its region.
The Santa Ana Mountains to the south and the Chino Hills to the west complete the framework and restrict the climatic influence of the Pacific Ocean upon the region. It is between these two obstructions that the Santa Ana Canyon passes as it enters Orange County. Potential floodwaters are held above the canyon by the Prado Dam, whose enormous capacity includes a riparian basin and perennial wetlands. In Orange County, the Santa Ana River channel finally meets the sea, about 120 miles from its headwaters near ML San Gorgonio, Southern California's highest peak.
On crystalline winter days, the landscape throbs with vibrant contrasts, the vertical mountains jutting abruptly from their steep canyon bottoms, California Fan Palms against the snow covered ridges. Along the flood plain of the Santa Ana, the forms of those peaks are echoed in the much smaller, rather curious conical hills that jut up from the valley floor, singly and in groups. Norco is nestled among a group of these hills.
At close range, the rugged appearance of the hills, with their granite boulders jutting out at all angles, may rightfully draw the traveler's attention away from the taller mountains. The relatively low-growing, shrubby habit of the indigenous plants of these hills conspires to reveal the topographic beauty of the land itself.
As in most of Southern California, the climate of the region is dry, Mediterranean in character, receiving an average of about 13 inches of rain per year in the lowlands, with virtually no rainfall in the summer. Although the region's temperatures are generally mild, its interior placement makes it more subject to extremes than the coastal cities.
Greenspace for Norco 6
)
The Region
The topographical barriers effectively cut off the marine influence 85% of the time, when the weather is dominated by the continental air mass. Consequently, many of the lowland areas are subject to winter frosts, and summer days may range 10 or more degrees higher here than on the coastal plain.
Another effect of this placement is to entrap smog in the basin. But in winter, the Santa Ana winds often swoosh the muck out to sea, to reveal the grandeur of the landscape. The smog situation is not helped by the daily flood of autos on the Riverside, Pomona and San Bernardino Freeways. Vast numbers of people in the region commute to jobs in Los Angeles and Orange Counties.
I
I
I
1
I
I
1
J
I
]
a
a
s
1
i
Riverside County has reputedly become the fastest growing county in the nation. A part of the so-called "inland empire," it has attracted droves of home buyers from the coastal communities, particularly Orange County, where housing costs have soared. The region boasts affordable housing which might otherwise be unavailable in the coastal cities to many of these families, often first-time buyers. Many of these buyers have grown up in coastal Southern California and have their roots there. More importantly, the bulk of the employment opportunities lie in the coastal economies, which continue to grow themselves. Hence, the daily exodus.
Not all of the region's land is currently being carved into subdivisions, however. Much of the western Chino Basin aquifer, directly north and northeast of and including Norco, is covered with ranches, particularly dairy. But, in time, this landscape will unquestionably change.
Section II
Regional Natural Areas
A fair amount of the uplands encircling the region are under state or federal management that keeps them in a more or less ecologically natural state. The San Bernardino National Forest spans the San Gabriel, San Bernardino and San Jacinto Mountains. Included in these are the Cucamonga, San Gorgonio and San Jacinto Wilderness areas, respectively. The Trabuco District of the Cleveland National Forest encompasses most of the higher peaks of the Santa Ana Mountains. Within this district lies the San Mateo Canyon Wilderness Area. Chino Hills State Park conserves a sizable portion of the Chino hills.
Riverside County is currently preparing a master plan of trails which will begin to establish many vital connections among these managed natural areas. A proposed trail running the length of the Santa Ana River from the San Bernardino mountains to the Pacific Ocean was designated National Trail #100 in 1976, but' has never been completed.
The remaining undeveloped uplands in the region
npass the 's poking Rills, these nils, Ml.
Mathews; j for
ands have been abuse, they
which are not held in the public trust majority of the curious, boulder-enc out of the flood plains. In additior include the Jurupa Mountains, P Rubidoux and the hills surrou however, much of the latter development. Though man> severely degraded by human us. continue to serve as reservoirs of indigenous plants and animals; these may be considered as ecotypically transitional between their homologues in the adjacent coastal or desert environments. As such, their potential genetic significance to the regional ecosystem may be of greater importance than generally recognized.
The Region 7

•teilvcnvood Lake-
Angeles National Forest
■ ' a
z " J/	j-
,............-— -
San Bernardino National Forest
Regional Parks
Trails
REGIONAL PARKS & TRAILS
			n j
		1
0	3	6
] ZH
12 NORTH
Greenspace for Norco
s
The Santa Ana River corridor falls just short of connecting the first four of these areas. Temescal Wash, running between the Lake Mathews area and the Santa Ana Mountains, drains its floodwaters into the Prado Basin, along with the Santa Ana and other waterways. The wash carries significant natural areas to the southern boundary of Corona, where it is scraped bare of vegetation and harnessed in a glaring concrete channel until it is once again set free into the basin.
It is noteworthy that Norco's northern border, along the Santa Ana River, lies on the only lowland stretch of the river that has not been channelized in any way. As it flows southwest from Mt. Rubidoux, it meanders through its flood plain, flanked by willows and cottonwoods and rich with wildlife. Along this stretch, the most obvious sign of human meddling with the river environment is the Giant Reed, Arundo donax, whose invasive habit has allowed it to take over the understory of most of the riparian woodlands here.
This disruptive invader reputedly impinges on the habitat of the Federally Endangered Least Bell's Vireo. The vireo along with the Yellow-billed Cuckoo, a Proposed Federal Endangered species and numerous other fauna and flora, make homes or take refuge along this corridor west of Norco. Here, the assemblage enters Prado Basin, where the rich wood- and wetlands almost connect with the Santa Ana Canyon and Chino Hills State Park.
REGIONAL NATURAL AREAS
The Region 9
Regional Hydrology
The Santa Ana River, with its enormous watershed is a geographic, historic and social link among the Counties of San Bernardino, Riverside and Orange. This river has played a starring role in shaping the regional environment. This fact may not be immediately apparent to the casual observer who may encounter the Santa Ana as a "river of sand" in late September. The river enabled the settlement of the region and was not always waterless in September.
Irrigation extractions had profound impacts on the Santa Ana River itself and the riparian woodlands native to its
banks. With its tributaries re-routed into irrigation channels and dams, the forests of cottonwood and willow perished. The river was transformed from the continuously flowing waterway and assumed the seasonal, off-and-on character, with cessation of summer flows, that we see there today. Smaller tributaries became seasonal or disappeared altogether except in periods of flooding.
Orchards became the most prevalent agriculture in the area, converting river terraces from Redlands to Anaheim. Other agriculture in the area included vegetable and berry farming along with dairy, turkey and chicken ranching. An enormous aquifer, named for the
10
Chino Basin, lies under much of the southwestern
■orner of San Bernardino County, extending to Norco nd the Prado Basin. Knowledge of the aquifer
precipitated the sinking of numerous wells and, with managed recharge, has allowed the storage and extraction of groundwater supplies for much of the area.
The intensive agricultural development in the area has resulted in massive erosion, which has facilitated the invasion of native plant communities by aggressive weeds, many of which were introduced by the settlers. The Giant Reed, Arundo donax, was introduced through its use as a windbreak and for erosion control. Now it has severely compromised the quality of the riparian
woodlands and the wildlife they can support. These patterns of erosion and vegetation change have intensified the pattern of drought-flood which characterizes the Santa Ana River.
Urban storm runoff brings a flush of water into the river and, along with it, a host of pollutants from urban areas. Additionally, sewage treatment plants have been built along the river that discharge their effluent into it. They have been known to produce accidental spills of untreated wastes, particularly during peak flow periods. Other human abuses of the river include illegal fills, dumping and off-road vehicle use.
Ev a po( ran spi rattan
Eva pul ran spiral ion
11

History
Until 1896, the lands or the Norco area lay undeveloped, a remnant of early land grants and ranching practices. In that year the Norco valley was purchased by the San Jacinto Water Company. Initial interest in the area was for the cultivation of citrus, but the soils and
temperatures were found to be unfavorable. So in 1926, the land was purchased by Rex B. Clark who intended to divide the 5,409 acres into 5 acre poultry ranches.
Clark is recognized as the founding father of Norco and is responsible for the early form of the community, laying out the streets and constructing the first buildings there. Some of these have survived the subsequent development since the twenties, and some have been lost. One of these still standing is being used today by the townspeople as a Community Center and is one of the most visible buildings in town. This was originally Norco’s first school house. Clark also constructed a General Store which has since been torn down. The second floor of this landmark had been home to the "Norco Grill" which is claimed to have been so popular it drew regular patrons from Los Angeles. Another local landmark that is still standing is the Country Junction restaurant. This was originally known as The Red Barn and was a notorious saloon claimed to have been known from Riverside to Orange County for its "...cold beer, country guitars and barroom, brawls." ("Norco Facts”, no date of publication.)
But the most famous of all of Norco's landmarks, even though it still exists today, has been lost to the community in a different way. Th e Norconian Club is a grand old resort that was built in 1927 by Rex Clark. It has since become home to a Naval and California Rehabilitation facility and has been declared off limits to the community. The Club is built on the shore of Lake Norconian and, when originally constructed, was a multi-million dollar luxury resort with ninety-seven
rooms, a golf course, ball room and a Casino club house on the lake. It attracted the rich and famous from all over the world, and the immense pool on the grounds was used by U.S. Olympic swimming teams for training.
From the very beginings of its development, Norco attracted residents who wanted room to keep horses and animals. Over the course of years, this settlement pattern was enhanced and encouraged by the community, creating the equestrian tone we find there today.
Greenspace for Norco 12
Norco Geography
The Community
and Its Equestrian Character
The motto, "City Living in a Rural Atmosphere" arches over the profile of a horse on the City of Norco's official symbol. This motto symbolizes a central long-term goal of Norco's community leaders. The voters of Norco have, for 25 years, maintained the majority of their city's land as animal-keeping properties of one-half or more acres. Past City Council members who allowed certain higher density, non-animal-keeping residential developments found themselves summarily dismissed by the voting public.
During the 606 Studio's involvement with the city, one of the prominent issues before the City Council was the weekend rodeos a resident was hosting in his several-acre backyard. Concerns included the impacts on the neighborhood of noise and parking. With neighborly
I	spirit and eager to work out a compromise, all involved
parties agreed to allow the rodeo to continue, with
|	appropriate mitigation measures.
Testimonies which led to the agreement included impassioned citizen pleas referring to activities such as the rodeo as part of "why we’re here - for the open
j	space, the freedoms and family recreation." Those
freedoms include, for many, the freedom to do largely what one wishes to on one’s own property, without the
.	ordinances, codes, covenants and restrictions common
to the scorned homogeneous "planned" communities of
|	Orange County. This is a town of ardent individualists
who believe in their particular concept of freedom. The expected freedoms include the right to have a loud party
j	(or rodeo) without inviting the law,
I
1
1
1
1
1
Section III
Rural Character and Recent Development
For some, this freedom means the prerogative to maintain (or fail to maintain) one's yard as one sees fit, within reasonable confines of health and safety restrictions. Individuality of landscape
treatment is the rule, superseded only by the regularly spaced canopies of the Tamarisk and Eucalyptus, where they have matured. Unique mailboxes often make a street-side statement about their owners. Liberty is revered here. A six-foot version of the Statue of Liberty lights a driveway along Third Street. A much smaller jockey figure complements her on the opposite side. On the other side of town, a yard on Corydon is graced with linked topiary teddies lining the driveway. On a
Norco Geography 13
miniature hillock stand topiary horses, and the front door is guarded by perhaps the best of all: A five-foot topiary Godzilla who has been seen, on occasion, wearing oversized bright yellow sunglasses.
For some, this freedom allows the collection of rusting junk cars, obligatory in some rural American landscapes. Many others decorate their yards with the antique accoutrements of equestrian-based travel. There are wheels, carts, wagons, plows and reapers in various arrangements - some designed, some serendipitous. These are particularly characteristic features of the east side of town, otherwise referred to as "old" Norco.
Throughout the city, animals often occupy street-front property. Signs reading "Pigs 4 Sale" are juxtaposed with pygmy goats, geese, llamas and emus, and, of course, the horses, which represent the most prominent commonality of the diverse yardscapes. Ingall's Park is a magnet for equestrian events. Breeders still operate several ranches around town. Many other horses are kept for recreational purposes. The city has provided equestrian trail rights of way over most of the city as a commitment to the animal-keeping lifestyle.
While the equestrian influence continues to be strong in the community, some residents fear this character could change if enough of their neighbors give up their horses and pygmy goats.
It is common to hear Norconians refer generally to the east and west sides of town as "old" and "new" Norco respectively. The delineation has always been marked by Hamner Avenue and now is accentuated by Interstate 15, the recently completed freeway bisecting the town. "Old Norco" as one might guess, refers to the part of town that was settled earliest. Not surprisingly, "new Norco" tends to be inhabited by more recent immigrants, many of whom have fled Orange County and may continue to work there.
Landscape "gentrification" in some of the new residential areas is sometimes perceived as the threat of the dreaded Orange County development pattern. The infant Crape Myrtles and Gazanias, common on the west side, do mark a vivid contrast with some of the more mature "homestead" landscapes on the east side. But then, many of those with the fancy front yards believe that their efforts may inspire similar efforts on the part of their neighbors across town.
In some parts of the city, neighbors are more concerned that the large lot sizes may encourage the use of backyards for diesel truck and trailer parking. They fear being overtaken by truckers, as has reportedly occurred in other communities along the interstate truck routes of the inland empire. Because of this fear, the city enacted an ordinance was enacted to limit the number of trucks parked on individual lots. But many of the truckers are equestrians who claim they need their trucks to support their costly equestrian lifestyle. Such issues are never simple.
Not only are the streets of Norco lined with horse trails, but they are not lined with concrete, with the exception of some areas along the main thoroughfare through town. Steadfast in its commitment to maintaining a rural atmosphere, the city has eschewed the standard suburban sidewalk treatment in favor of decomposed granite (and dirt) horse trails. Unfortunately, this tends to put joggers, cyclists, skateboards, wheelchairs, and mothers with strollers out in the street side by side with
the cars.
Greenspace for Norco 14
Another rural amenity (or deficit, depending on one's viewpoint) is the absence of uniform street lighting. The lack enables the ready viewing of star-studded night skies, smog conditions permitting. If all the cities in the region were lit so modestly, the Milky Way might become a familiar companion. Unfortunately, there is a commonly held (perhaps accurate) perception of danger in the darkness. Some residents fear that the darkness encourages their youngsters to get into trouble to evade the law under darkness of night.
Youth
Currently, about 36 percent of the population is under 21 years of age, a percentage projected to drop slightly in the next five years. Half of that population are teenagers. A fair number
of children and teens participate in animal husbandry, although this interest is reportedly declining. Many others are actively involved in sports. (Norco is an active community, in general.) For young people who are not involved in either of these activities, there exists a recreational gap not uncommon in many American cities. Teenagers often seek activities that cannot be officially condoned for reasons of liability insurance or other public policies, an example is skateboard parks.
One young man who grew up in Norco complained that there is nowhere young people can go without having to spend money. He offered that, as a non-drinker of alcohol, he has felt pressure to buy drinks if he wanted to play pool. (He spends much of his leisure time now riding a mountain bike around the region.) An anti-loitering ordinance was recently enacted, aimed primarily at discouraging youngsters from "hanging out" in the parking lots of convenience stores and other private properties used as gathering points. And like parents across America, many parents in Norco are concerned about the potential for drug abuse and related crimes among their youngsters, particularly if there are insufficient other diversions to keep them occupied.
Adults and General Demographics
About five percent of Norco's citizenry are age 65 or older. Many of them reside in a small retirement community near the post office and the local branch of the Riverside County Library. A rich and
diverse seniors' program is offered by the Parks and Recreation Department-to keep them occupied. The Seniors Center is lively with activity every weekday. Younger adults can participate in a variety of adult sports and fitness programs. Almost six percent of. thel980 households in Norco were single-parent families. An unknown percentage of those parents have long commutes to their jobs. Some have verbalized the need for a "latch-key" children's program in town. Other parents have bemoaned the dearth of neighborhood play areas for the youngest children.
With respect to other demographics, the population was almost 90 percent "white" at the time of the 1980 census, with slightly more males than females. Figures for 1988 show the median household income as $36,245, the average as $38,029. Major employers include the State of California Rehabilitation Center (CRC), with 894 employees and 1200 volunteers; the U.S. Naval Weapons Fleet Analysis Center, with 800 employees; and Norco Farmers (eggs), with 245 employees.
Riverside Community College is beginning construction •, of a new branch in Norco and is projected to employ 200 faculty in 1990 and 400 in the year 2000.
Institutions
As large as it is, the Naval Fleet Analysis Center does not make an immediate visual impact, inasmuch as most of it is submerged into the hills of its landscape. From a distance, CRC looks unlike a
prison, its most prominentl buildings being those it has inherited from the old Lake Norconian Resort. But if one drives down 5th Street, past the electric fence and
N o rc o Geography 15

’-7
barbed wire, and manned watch towers observing everything that happens below, one becomes acutely aware of its penal character. The residents of this facility constitute a hidden but sizeable portion of the city's population. Through cooperative arrangements, prisoners sometimes join work crews to assist the city with maintenance chores.
Commercial Character
The city has been actively seeking commercial development to support its tax base. An auto mall is nearing completion. A new central business core is currently under study. A regional
shopping center is hoped for. The challenge facing Norco is to develop an economic base without compromising its unique character. Indeed, economic development, if properly planned, would help to manifest some of the character currently absent along Hamner Avenue, in particular.
If the traveler’s only encounter with the city is the drive down the treeless glare of Hamner Avenue's existing strip commercial developments, he carries away with a decidedly drab impression. The absence of a sense of a "center of town" is likewise apparent. As one observer who had seen only Hamner Avenue and City Hall remarked, borrowing the Gertrude Stein phrase,
"There's no there there." A little more "there" exists along equestrian-oriented 6th Street,, but even there it could be greatly accentuated. Much of the spirit of 6th Street emanates from the colorful local "characters" frequenting the street. The 606 Stud io found considerable "there" in Norco, but found it in the people and the features of the land, rather than the existing built environment.
Local Physiography
Norco is blessed with three particularly valuable landscape features: its hills, its position on the Santa Ana River, and Lake Norconian. However, the existing community fabric has fallen short of integrating these features into its weave. Of the relationship between the city and its landscape, one is reminded of the expression "so near, yet so far
The Hills
The most visually dominant of these features are the eastern hills of Norco. On a clear day, these distinct volcanic knobs are noticeable from many miles away, emerging from the flood plain. "Up-close and personal"
these boulder-studded hills have as much character as the townspeople. Much of the town rests between the Beacon Hill complex and the larger hills on Norco's eastern border with La Sierra, a district of the City of Riverside. Some maps identify the eastern collection of hills as La Sierra. Approximately 2,000 acres of them lie within Norco's boundary. These shrub and grassland-covered hills occupy a large portion of the viewshed of the city. They are, for the most part, under private ownership, but recreational use has been the common rule here for decades.
As prominent as these landforms are, they bear the vivid scars of years of human abuse. The closer one approaches to Norco's eastern hills, the more shocking becomes the evidence of the ravaging of this land by offroad vehicles (ORVs). In some areas, their relentless tramplings have left whole hillsides with more bare dirt than vegetation. There is also evidence, in some areas, of overgrazing by sheep. The resultant erosion - visible gullies cutting deeply into the earth - is visible for miles. The physical effect is to send more sediments into the
Gretnspace for Norco 16
3
3
3
9
9
a
a
LANDSCAPE FEATURES________________________________________
Green space for Norco	PARRS Jk RCCRCAHON department
TOLYTECHNIC UNIVERSITY POMONA	□	OEaOUaTE STUDIES IN LANDSCAPEAROIriTCTURE
				
				
11 liHKV ItKKT	■mW	6000'
NORTH
a
9
Norco Geography 17
a *
city's drainageways, To add insult to injury, many of the rusting carcasses of the vehicles responsible for the damage lie decomposing in the canyons, their oil and battery acid wreaking havoc on the tenuous riparian environments there.
Despite such desecrations, the hills retain a wealth of biological and recreational resources. Considerable evidence (graffiti on the rocks above Ingall's Park) suggests that Norco's young people have found their way to the ridge tops to enjoy the 360-degree regional views, which on a clear winter day can be absolutely stunning . La Sierra High School graffiti is evident on the ridge line rocks within Riverside's boundaries. A primitive wooden cross crowned one of the crests until it was snapped'by one of last winter's windstorms. Humans have clearly marked their territory up here.
Equestrians and hikers frequent these hills, often following the tracks of the off-road vehicles. But these tracks were definitely not designed with horses in mind, for many of them approach verticality ir their ascent of the grade. An ascent so steep may be thrilling in an ORV, but is unnecessarily stressful to humans and their beasts of burden. Equestrians have been observed dismounting to get their animals and themselves safely up the grades.. Both horses and humans accelerate the rate of erosion. The gullies become an obstacle course testing horse and human sure-footedness. Still, many users seem to think of these hills an d trails as part of Ingall's Park-
Abundant wildlife species also inhabit these hills, but the balance of their natural ecosysterns has been disrupted by human intrusion. The highest concentrations of wildlife are found in the springs, seeps and natural drainageways in the bottoms of the canyons. These natural wetlands are clothed i n Mulefat (Baccharis viminea). Laurel Sumac (Malosma laurina) and Elderberry (Sambucus mexicana). The wettest spots support thickets of Willows (Salix species). Among their winter-bare branches can be seen various feathered creatures ranging from hummingbirds to raptors. In the
shadows of the brush below can be heard the rustling of diminutive creatures seeking refuge and moisture in the verdant oases that remain.
Spring brings a sweet Pandemonium of song to the hills. As a clamor arises from the wetlands, another less confusing symphony is played out over the brush and grasslands. These drier, more open lands attract birds with a different hahit/.usually ground-hugging species that fly as lower and shorter distances than perching birds. Many have distinctive calls that pierce the silence seductively.
Many a human traveler in these hillsides has been bemused and delighted by the popping up of cottontails seemingly everywhere, as one progresses over the land. Jackrabbits also give a start as they bound suddenly out of the bushes and dart across one's path. If the traveler is lucky, she may happen upon a den of coyotes, who fulfill a vital role in the food web of these shrublands.
Although the vegetation has been degraded through human ignorance, much of the indigenous shrub associations remain. California sagebrush abounds in parts of these hills. The scientific name for this plant, Artemisia, recalls Artemis, the Greek goddess of the moon and wild animals. The plant is considered by many cultures a potent healing herb and the volatile scent of its crushed leaves brings a sigh of approval from most who experience it. Artemesia is a representative of the coastal influence upon these hills.
Greenspace for Norco 18
1
The Desert Encelia, or Incensio, is also predominant here, representing the influence of the continental air mass upon this transition zone. Its felt-like silvery-white leaves contrast boldly with a blue sky and the greens, browns and golds of its neighbors. Chamisal, an especially fire-prone vegetative association composed primarily of Chamise, frequents some of the most windswept slopes. Baby Blue Eyes, pinkish-white Wild Onion, and purple Brodiaea punctuate the hillsides with seasonal color.
While the breezes batter the ridge tops, the canyons provide some shelter. There is, Additionally, a bowl of a valley nestles gently among the peaks, where Elderberry and Laurel Sumac indicate a less harsh environment. The valley is suggestive of a park-like setting, and many Norconians know of it as a resting spot on their horseback rides. In fact, it lies on a potential route to a regional trail connection with the Lake Mathews area.
Aside from casual recreation, grazing has been the primary land use over much of this land. Some granite has been quarried. A Southern California Edison utility easement runs in a north-south stripe across the hills. A subterranean state radio facility is situated on the peak most visible from all of Norco. But the facility itself is invisible unless one is near the top of the hill. Wyle Laboratories, a cryogenics research facility, occupies the largest canyon in the hills. Inasmuch as most of Wyle's property remains as visual greenspace, this land use is highly compatible with the conservation of landscape features. Of major concern to many Norconians is what will become of the rest of the hillside property.
Most of this property is zoned ‘'Hillside", a designation allowing agricultural/residential development at varying densities, depending on slope, but requiring certain guidelines be followed with respect to grading and drainage. Currently, city staff members say that the allowed density is too low to make development of the hills cost-effective. It would probably average two acres per lot. Some estimate that this would allow 400 homes
to be built. Realistically, all one has to do to comprehend the likely fate of these lands is to look at the hills of Los Angeles and Orange Counties. The building trends have moved inland.
The Santa Ana River
The second most obvious landscape feature of Norco is the Santa Ana River. In its semi-wild state as it courses along the northern boundary of the city, it represents an adventureland, teeming with wildlife. The energy of this
river is manifested in breathtaking drops from the eroded bluffs of Norco's steep banks. The swiftness of the river below can be equally impressive as its hypnotic movement seems to pull one downward.
Norco is truly privileged to have five miles of the most natural segment of the river running along its border. -Unfortunately, much of it is inaccessible except by residents with river-front property. Rivertrails Park allows accessibility for equestrians on the east side of Hamner Avenue. But a large sign prohibits, among other offensive behaviors, ordinary hiking unless hikers arrange for a permit from the Parks and Recreation Department.
Residents on the west side of town have pointed out that even if they live just above the river, they are unable to ride their horses along the banks, primarily because the steep slopes make riding too dangerous. For other persons, there are simply no access points. Equestrians and others on the west side are prohibitively far from Rivertrails and Ingall's Park with its surrounding hills. Some say that property owners on the west side are relinquishing their horses for want of an inviting place to ride.
Norco Geography 19
Efforts to complete the Santa Ana River Trail may facilitate the construction of a slope-stabilized trail along .he bluffs in Norco. A consultant has been hired through an interagency agreement, of which Norco is a part, to plan the completion of the trail. Community workshops will be a part of the planning process. Norconians will have an opportunity to participate in the process and will be invited to express their views on trail location at that time.
Major impediments to travel along the river include its crossings by Interstate 15, Hamner Avenue and River Road, where construction debris, low bridges and other obstructions prevent free passage. The river itself can at times be difficult to cross. Attractions on the far side include Prado Basin County Park, Rivertrails Park rental horse facility, and portions of Santa Ana River Regional Park. The need for safe crossings is apparent
For a town with so much river-front property, visual access along with trail access to the river is surprisingly restricted . Several opportunities exist to site recreational and related activities such as restaurants in such a way that they fully capitalize on the views of the river and its woodlands.
Lake Norconian
To say tha t Lake Norconian is the least obvious of Norco's landscape features is an understatement. Many people have grown up in Norco without realizing the lake exists. But once seen, it cannot be forgotten. The rich beauty
and tranquility of this landscape seem almost visual non sequiturs, given that a prison lies on one side and a military facility on the other. The undiscovered status of the lake has been made possible beca use of two conditions: a visual seclusion afforded by the surrounding topography, which includes Beacon Hill,
and the high-security land uses at the Naval Weapons Fleet Analysis Center and CRC, between which two facilities the lake is ensconced. If the Navy's security-consciousness did not prohibit cameras in the area, the image of the lake might be a more familiar symbol in the minds of its Norconian neighbors.
Those who are not Navy employees or retirees may get a view of the lake only by driving past the CRC visitors' facility on Western Avenue and preceding up the hill to a parking lot used by visitors and employees of CRC. From this vantage point, one is surprised to encounter a lushly landscaped paradise surrounding a naturalistic water body. Enormous lawns surrounding the lake are neatly manicured by conscientious workers driving large tractor mowers. At the water's edge, the vegetation becomes less tamed as as cattails and rushes form a band of marshy wetland. (This band is kept in control through herbicide applications where it approaches the Navy structures.) Within the lake lies an island, so densely vegetated it appears impenetrable.
From a nearer peninsula, a grand polygon of a building juts dramatically over the water, its glass walls oriented to a 320-degree view of its lush surroundings. This building once housed the casino of Rex Clark's Lake Norconian Resort. Its peaked red-tile roof, white stucco and black wrought iron effect a striking reflection in the blue-green waters below and contribute to the appearance of Mediterranean elegance that was a thematic treatment throughout the resort. Other impressive buildings were part of the resort complex. Some of these house administrative functions for CRC, while the rest are used by the Navy. But the old casino building because of its setting is probably the most eyecatching feature. This building is occasionally opened to wedding parties and other special events, for Naval employees, their relatives and close associates.
Around the shore, a fisherman or two may be seen, hoping to pull in some of the good-sized bass that are supported by the lake ecosystem. Virtually self-
Creenspace for Norco 20
sustaining, the lake apparently needs no stocking. In the past, some anglers have fished from small boats, but that practice may fall to Naval policy changes. The fishing is open to employees of the Fleet Analysis Center, their families and Navy retirees who happen to know about the lake.
A road encircling the lake provides a place for jogging and strolling by Navy employees, the vast majority of whom are civil servants. During the shorter days of the year, these joggers may arouse a flurry as they approach an area inhabited by migratory Canadian Geese, who use the lake as a winter resting ground. Often their flying "V" formation is obscured by thick fogs which settle around the lake and river nearby. Then, their presence is loudly proclaimed by their distinctive honking, eliciting awe from their human admirers below.
The island, off-limits to humans, serves as a wildlife sanctuary. The California Department of Fish and Game is aware of the lake's offerings to wildlife and takes an interest in all activities relevant to the maintenance of that habitat. In the past, when discussions of the lake's prospects as a public recreational facility have arisen, the department has been quick to defend the sanctity of the wildlife habitat. This is not to say that the agency would prevent another use, but rather that it will require assurance that any future recreational uses will be compatible with the conservation of the habitat conditions.
Other attractions around the lake include a small pond and water garden, next to which is situated a tree-shaded picnic area with barbecues. In addition to Navy employees and retirees, some portions of the lakeside properly are occasionally opened up to organized groups like the Boy Scouts, at the case-by-case discretion of the Navy. Otherwise, there is very little interaction between the people of Norco and this spectacular gem of a landscape secret. Many townspeople are interested in the possibility of obtaining local control of the lake, or at least the use of it for public recreation. The exclusivity of this Naval "country dub" is offensive to those
observers, who note that their tax dollars maintain the setting. As one of its outstanding landscape features, Lake Norconian and its surroundings merit greater attention from the community.
Existing Resources
The three major landscape features, the hills, the river and the lake, constitute the most important recreational and aesthetic resources of the City of Norco. A fourth and very important resource is the city's equestrian trail network. An additional resource exists in the drainage channels that traverse the city. These combined elements provide a basis through which a system of parks, recreation and open space can begin to take shape. External Influences
External forces which now have, or will have an influence on the greenspace system include burgeoning development in the areas surrounding Norco, along with the effect that development may have on the local economy and traffic flows through the city. The opening of the Norco campus of Riverside Community College will provide positive opportunities for shared recreational and cultural facilities through an interagency agreement between the city and college. Additionally, the development of a Riverside County regional trail system provides opportunities for trail linkages to diverse locations throughout the region.
Norco Geography 21
Issues and Goals
Section IV
After reviewing the background information presented in the previous sections, the 606 team arrived at a synthesis of the basic issues involved in the development of a program appropriate for Norco. These were:
The recreational and open space needs of the community. Determining the community's wishes and needs was essential to the development of a program.
Norco's distinctive community character. This character would provide a perspective through which to interpret community needs.
Community life support networks, human and all others. The human community is involved in interdependencies with the community of domestic plants animals, as well as the community of untamed plants and animals. These interdependencies are all, in turn, interactive with the physical properties of the environment, such as soil and water quality. All will be affected by greenspace planning and design decisions.
1
1
Systematic linkages among trail and wildlife corridors. Inasmuch as the effectiveness of any trail can be increased by connecting it to other trails, the potency of all trails can be strengthened by their organization into a well-defined system. Inasmuch as wildlife corridors are essential to the maintenance of wildlife diversity, a system of corridor linkages must allow for the movement of indigenous species.
The regional context, with respect to its landscape and demographic considerations. Local trail and wildlife corridors will only achieve maximum effectiveness with the establishment of regional corridors and natural areas to which they are connected. Other regional concerns include the visual landscape and the aquifer. Demographic concerns include regional growth and transportation patterns.
1 The basic goals of the 606 Studio were to:
3
•	Serve the recreational needs of the community.
5
•	Provide an organized structure for future park planning elforts, including the location of potential park lands, the possible functions they might sustain, and the order in which all recommended actions should be implemented.
•	Inspire community involvement in the planning and implementation process.
1
•	Promote local environmental awareness.
4	• Achieve a system which would contribute to local economic stimulation through the landscape enhancement of
Norco's distinctive community character and the image it aspires to project to the external world.
a
•	Provide a tool for grant funding requests.
•	Clarify the legal and economic mechanisms for achieving the desired system.
Issues and G u a Is
3
Regional Connections
Norco's greenspace system, while possessing its own unity and identity is also an integral part of the larger regional landscape pattern. Several opportunities exist to make connections between Norco's greenspace and those of the surrounding areas. Norco's eastern hills bear a familial resemblance to the Pedley Hills and the Jurupa Mountains which currently remain in a largely undeveloped state. If the powers that be in Riverside and San Bernardino Counties take the initiative to secure these prominent landmarks as permanent greenspace, it would not be difficult to make corridor connections between them. If a connection was then made between the Pedley Hills and the nearby Santa Ana River, the link would be made with Norco and Mt. Rubidoux, which both lie alongside the least tamed portion of the river. The river carries the corridor westward into the Prado Basin, and with a little effort, the connection could then be made to Chino Hills State Park.
REGIONAL CONNECTIONS
Moving southward from Norco, the hills surrounding Lake Mathews are almost within "spitting distance" of those bordering Norco and La Sierra. The Arlington Valley, which runs between them, has had its central drainageway channelized. The Riverside (91) Freeway finalized the split between the two groups of hills.
Where the U.S.G.S. maps refer to Norco's Hills as "La Sierra", they refer to Lake Mathews’ hills as "El Sobrante de San Jacinto", or the "remainder of the San Jacinto Range”, emphasizing their position at the western tip of that range.
The Lake Mathews Specific Plan has been approved by the county for the development of the area. Public open space and trails are included in the plan.With a primary county trail running down Temescal Wash and making connections to the Santa Ana Mountains, more corridor
Greenspace for Norco 24
possibilities arise. For many people, a trail running through Norco's hills and El Sobrante would be the preferred way to reach the Temescal Wash county trail, as opposed to one running through urbanized Corona. If a Riverside Freeway underpass had been designed to facilitate a non-vehicular connection between its two sides, a trail connection to the Lake Mathews area would be simple.
Wherever human trail connections are planned (and some places where they are not), every effort must also be made to provide for wildlife corridors. The health of native ecosystems is based, in part, on connectivity of habitat areas which allows for the movement of individuals and genetic populations. Whereas regional trail connections are a recreational amenity for humans, these connections are a vital necessity for the survival of many species of plants and animals. As repositories for the relict representatives of the native landscape, our parks and open spaces must be connected into systems on a regional basis, if we expect to enjoy these landscapes and all their inhabitants through the next century and beyond. Trails and wildlife corridors can go hand-in-hand into the twenty-first century.
With some determination on the part of the regional communities, and sensitive planning and design, these connections can begin to be forged.
The Hills
Many features of the eastern hills make-them valuable assets to a greenspace system. Their wildlife habitat potential is important enough in itself, but the recreational opportunities offered Norco by these lulls are exceptional.
Greenspace Inventory
Section V
Greenspace Inventory 25
Many equestrians and hikers have already observed that fact and have come to consider these lands as part of Ingalls Park. These rocky hills are definitely an important part of the park's image.
Of primary consideration in the greenspace plan must be the focal areas for wildlife. These focal areas are the linear wetlands associated with the canyon bottoms. Many of these are fed by springs or seeps and offer moisture through the dry seasons to the winged and four-legged ones of the surrounding areas. They also function as travel corridors for many species. Some of the creatures which occupy the shrubby vegetation are dependent on that vegetation for their survival. Additionally, some species may only inhabit the interior of a patch of shrubland. If the patches become too small and "edge conditions" predominate, certain species may be lost altogether. The greenspace system must provide viable habitat for the indigenous flora and fauna.
From a recreational standpoint, these canyon wetlands offer abundant opportunities for wildlife observation. They also contribute interest and variety to the sensory landscape, creating pleasant diversions for travelers as they makes their way up to the ridges. A sequence of different spatial relationships may be experienced as one travels from canyon bottom to ridgetop. Recreational trails must be allowed to traverse the greenspace.
Permitting Norconians and passersby to view the entire region, the ridges of these hills are of incalculable value as public greenspace. Endosing them to form the yards of just a few families would squander that value. These views are best left accessible to all the people of Norco and the region. The hills are a large p-art of the view from Norco itself. Prohibiting or restricting ridgetop development would conserve a great deal of the visual wealth of these hills as part of Norco's scenery.
The hills can constitute the backdrop for a regional trail linkage from the Santa Ana River to 'Lake Mathews and beyond. Along this route, the pleasan c and wind-
sheltered natural bowl directly east of the radio facility might become a comfortable rest area for a regional trek. It might even be possible to offer limited back-country style camping here. Regardless, accommodations for regional back-country travelers might be provided privately in Norco, somewhere between the hills and the river. The thought of equestrian "bed and breakfast" inns comes to mind.
If all these assets are to be preserved for the people of Norco, any residential or agricultural development which occurs in these hills must be completed with the utmost sensitivity toward the natural ecosystem. Grading and drainage must be accomplished with minimal disturbance of the native vegetation. Managed transition zones will be necessary between wild and domestic landscapes. Guidelines for landscape plantings must require visual harmony with the indigenous landscape, as well as restricting the use of invasive ornamental plants which might "get loose" in the wildlands, overtaking the natives. Application of these precautions will yield a more attractive environment for those who will come to live here.
The Santa Ana River
With five miles of rare natural riparian environment running through the town, the fact that only about two miles at one end it are easily accessible by the "out-doorsy" Norconians is rather frustrating. Full recreational
enjoyment of the river’s offerings can be made possible by furnishing opportunities to travel to, along, and across the river.
All available riverfront properties should be considered as potential park sites. Greenspace located along the river will serve as Norconians' gateways to the river. These will also be the gateways into the city for regional
Greenspace for Norco
26
trail travelers. With the river and its riparian woodlands providing the scenery, these settings offer a lush landscape without excessive maintenance requirements. Because of the river's potential drawing power for recreation-seekers, parks here can offer socializing opportunities for Norco's citizens.
Resolution of the Santa Ana River/Crest-to-Coast Trail will open up vast possibilities for non-motorized travel. The trail will be the most satisfying if it is allowed to run directly adjacent to the river. In certain locations, this will require some engineering along the steep bluffs of the rivers south side. Additionally, the trail must not impinge on the privacy of the residents of the bluffs areas, while allowing them access to it. Other locations will require development of over- or underpasses in order to circumvent auto traffic. In the future, as well as recreational trail use, some may actually enjoy a bicycle commute along the river trail to Riverside or Orange County employment. The trail will also be a major element of the regional trail system mentioned in the Regional Connections section of this chapter.
At least as many elevated river crossings as are available to auto traffic must be made available and useable to non-motorized travelers. The Hamner Avenue and River Road auto crossings would be likely candidates for the addition of pedes trian/equestrian crossings. The Hamner Avenue crossing will facilitate access to the upgraded Rivertrails Park equestrian rental facility.
River Road offers entry to Prado Basin County Park. Another crossing might be a "low-tech" seasonal one near the northeastern boundary of the city. The design of these crossings must be sensitive to the requirements of equine sensitivities and allow harmonious integration of other modes of travel.
Grueri space Inventory TJ
All trails and amenities incorporated into the riverine anvironment, must be sensitive to the needs of the wildlife with whom humans share the river. Certain areas must be kept off-limits to humans to allow the wild creatures their privacy. The river can provide outstanding educational opportunities for the students and the public at large. Environmental education sponsored by the city or Riverside Community College can help to lessen the inclination of illegal dumpers and other violators of the environment.
Stories of homeless transients and others frequenting the riverbed have caused concern among city officials and recreational users of the area. An increase in the recreational use of the river will have the effect of increasing surveillance of the area. Emergency telephones might even be installed at strategic locations.
Much can be done to enhance the potential of the Santa Ana River as a greenspace focal area.
The Central Green
In the center of Norco exist several patches of open land which are not presently recognized as being interrelated but which, in fact, can be joined together to form a unit. These lands are referred to here collectively as
the Central Green. The central green is comprised of Lake Norconian and the complex of hills surrounding it, extending to Beacon Hill. In addition to these outstanding landscape features, this greenspace holds the sites of the Riverside Community College campus and the proposed Civic Center business park. With its location near the center of town, this area holds great promise for emerging as the nucleus of a community greenspace system.
Beacon Hill
Beacon Hill serves as Norco's central landmark. This prominent knob is visible from most parts of the city, as well as from all the major freeways in the area, as far away as Ontario. Therefore, its visage is of primary importance to the representation of Norco's distinctive visual image, from all vantage points. Although the hill is privately owned, the existing land uses have conserved the upper portion of the hill as visual, open space. The summit of the hill is currently occupied by a relay station for cellular telephones, which impacts the visual presence of the hill far less than other land uses might. City staff members informed the 606 Studio that the owner of the upper portion of Beacon Hill's land has expressed an interest in dedicating the land to the city. Such a dedication would ensure Beacon Hill's persistence as a beacon of Norco's self-esteem.
Lake Norconian
As was previously suggested in the Local Physiography section, Lake Norconian is the jewel of the local landscape features and like a gemstone, depends on its setting to show it off. The existing greenspace matrix in which it is set forms a backdrop supportive of the lake's tranquil character. The focal points of the lake landscape are the wildlife island, the casino clubhouse and the richly canopied pond and water garden, with its associated picnic facilities at the northeast corner of the lake. This verdant oasis holds great potential as a visual and recreational amenity for Norco, if public access can ever be secured.
Riverside Community College
If Lake Norconian has had a limited notoriety within the town and region, that obscurity is soon to be lost forever, with the opening of the Riverside Community College campus. The proposed site plan for the campus includes generous amounts of greenspace reaching up toward rolling hillocks at the northwest end of the
Greenspace for Norco
28
i
i
campus. From vantage points along these hill tops, students and other campus greenspace users will obtain visual access to the lake and will likely become frustrated with their inability to get closer to its cooling atmosphere, especially in the blistering heat of an Indian Summer afternoon.
s
J
3
J
1
3
3
3
J
J
3
3
1
1
1
3
3
1
a
a
3
a
i
3
Another hill at the east campus entrance from Third Street is topped by the ruins of a former residence. The serendipitous leavings include a portion of an old stone pilaster, a decapitated tree trunk, steps leading to the sky and a concrete pad from which much of Norco can be viewed. Although this arrangement was probably not an intentional statement, it provides an artistically interesting symbol upon whose meaning passersby may speculate. Even if this monument falls in the path of progress, its stark image can serve well as a sculptural element of the campus greenspace in the interim.
The campus greenspace offers great potential as a link in the community greenspace network. Such a relationship would be mutually beneficial to both the college and the community. Trail linkages could offer alternative bicycle routes to the college as well as routes from it to nearby college-oriented retail facilities. Greenspace linkage can also provide the college with direct approaches to local natural areas which may serve some of the college's needs for biological and geological field experiences. Civic Center /Business Park
Lying between the RCC site and Beacon Hill is the site for the proposed City of Norco Civic Center and business park, another obvious candidate for linkage into a community greenspace network. In additon to the city offices, the proposed complex is intended to provide the new home for the local branch of the Riverside County Library. As a corollary to the maintenance of Norco's desired rural image, greenspace must be incorporated into the atmosphere of the Civic Center complex which will become a focal point of the community identity.
The site's setting provides an appropriate backdrop from which to begin.
The property extends from Hamner Avenue, between Fourth and Fifth Streets, back to the property line of the Naval Weapons Fleet Analysis Center. That portion of the Naval property includes a series of three knolls which conceal Lake Norconian from view. These knolls appear to be echos of Beacon Hill and culminate just across Fifth Street from it, behind the northwest end of the business park site, where the two largest form a double-peaked mound with a central small saddle. This combination of landform and greenspace offers a rich resource from which to draw in establishing the character of the Civic Center business park.
■ i
In addition to the visual greenspace provided by its scenery, the Civic Center business complex, as well as other businesses along Hamner Avenue, would benefit from the inclusion of an urban greenspace park or plaza to complete the complex's identity as the heart of the town.
CENTRAL GREEN
G re e n sp a c e Inventory 29
Existing Parks
Park Type	Neighborhood Park	Community Park	Special Use
Use J	Provides for daily recreation needs for residents in the immediate area. Provides a variety of low to moderate intensity recreation opportunities. Parks facilities/amenities might include picnic areas, tot lots, hand court areas, limited recreation multi-purpose building, informal play space (not league), and limited service area.	Areas of diverse environmental quality. Greater variety of recreational opportunities for larger recreation service area. Provides either or both passive and active recreation, such as; sports complexes, swimming pools, tennis courts, community serving recreation buildings and conservation of natural areas.	Areas for specialized or single purpose recreation activities, like nature centers, display gardens, equestrian arenas, outdoor amphitheater, commercial centers (urban plaza) and golf courses.
Site Character	Suited for intense development. Easily accessible to neighborhood population center. Within safe walking and bicycling distance. May be developed as a school-park facility.	May include natural features like, waterbodies and local hills. Areas suited for intense development. Easily accessible to nieghborhood served.	Within communities
Size	1 to 7 acres	8 to 20 acres	Varies
Service Area	1/2 mile radius	1 miles radius	No standard
Proposed Parks
Park Type	Pocket Park	Linear Park	Conservancy
' Use	Areas of medium to high density housing or commercial usage. May include childrens play equipment, city entry feature, small plaza or vest pocket parks.	Area developed for one or more modes of recreational travel, such as walking, hiking, bicycling, horseback riding. May include high to moderate intensity use areas.	Protection and management of the natural/cultural environment with recreation use as a secondary objective.
Site Character	Within commercial areas and in close proximity to apartment complexes, townhouse development or housing for the elderly.	Built in or near natural corridors, such as drainage channels, utility right-of-way, bluff lines, vegetation patterns, and roads. Linking components of the recreation system or community facilities, such as schools, libraries, commercial areas and other park areas.	Varies, depending or the resource being protected.
Size	1 acre or less	Sufficient width to protect the resource and provide maximum use.	Sufficient to protect the resource
Service Area	Less than 1/4 mile radius	No standard	No standard
Greenspace for Norco
30
Regional Park
Parks
Area of natural or ornamental quality for outdoor recreation, such as picnicking, boating, fishing, swimming, camping, and trail uses; may include play areas.
Contiguous to or encompassing natural resources
The following definitions address the spatial, functional and design considerations for parks. These classifications are based on people-oriented factors, including the public's interest in certain types of recreational facilities and programs and their intent to service a particular .area- Definitions should serve primarily as a guide to park planning, not as the final determinant of the most appropriate function of a park.
200 plus acres
Several communities, 1 hour driving time.
Regional Park Reserve
Area of natural quality for nature oriented outdoor recreation, such as viewing and studying nature, wildlife habitat, conservation, swimming, picnicking, hiking, camping, and trail uses. May include active play space. Generally 80% is reserved for conservation and 20% for recreation development.
Diverse or unique natural resources, such as lakes, streams, marshes, flora, fauna, topography.
1000 plus acres
Several Communities, 1 hour driving time.
Greertspace In vc n to
Parks
The following list of existing parks provides the basis for recommendations for future park improvement. In determining the condition of each park the following components were considered: site amenities (structures, picnic tables and shelters and barbecues, etc.), visual appearance, park maintenance (restrooms, fences, etc.) and ground maintenace (lawn and tree/shrub pruning).
Each component was ranked on a scale of 1 to 5,1 being least desirable, 5 most desirable. The combined total reflects the condition of each park: 0 to 5, poor; 6 to 10, fair; 11 to 15, good; 16 to 20, excelent. For the park inventory totals, refer to figures ? to ?.
Existing Park
Clark's Field
Location: Corner of Detroit Street and Hamner Avenue. Type: Specialty.
Size: 2.0 acres.
Condition: Fair (10).
Description: Used primarily for adult baseball.
General Comments: Improvements should include upgrading bleachers, spectator seating and scorebox. Additional amenities might include a drinking fountain and permanent restrooms. Softening the site boundaries using a combination of trees, shrubs and ground cover, and landform buffering is encouraged, specifically alohg Hamner Avenue.
Community Center Park
Location: 3900 Acacia Avenue.
Type: Community center park.
Size: 15.0 acres.
Condition: Fair (8).
Description: The Community Center Building, Riley's Gym, the Senior Citizen Center and Boy Scouts House provide most of the indoor space for private and public
programs and recreational activities in the city. Outdoor recreational facilities include an adult softball field, a swimming pool, a tennis/basketball court, play equipment and four horseshoe pits.
General Comments: Pedestrian circulation throughout the site should be improved to provide ease of access from indoor to outdoor and between indoor facilities. Opportunities to soften the site boundaries using landform or vegetation buffering rather than additional chain link fencing should be considered. Maintaining the aesthetic quality of the park should be of high priority; accordingly, special attention should be given to maintenance, especially tree pruning and trimming. Ingalls Equestrian Center
Location: Corner of 6th Street and Crestview Avenue. Type: Specialty.
Size: 44,0 acres (7 acres remaining undeveloped). Condition: Good (11).
Description: Ingalls Park is considered the premier equestrian facility in Norco. Horse shows, rodeos and
Crcenspace for Norcu 32
t«. C- B "□ s' El 2 4 •= = £ -(ft fc. “ S’ 1	o £ "5 ft r- 3 W 2	c. * S O O' 3' -3 n 5 «_ E c Ck	| Total	3 p ■< 3 f» 2 p 5*	J Ted Brooks	j River Trails	“5 W ■i 3 <n £	| Neil Snipes	5 ■5" 7! o 3 o	| Ingalls	'	[ Community Center |	| Clark Field	Parks	J? £ &E- 3 zs 5? H W ll B r—	
	.b o>	Z rji			“t	L*J t4			C-J O *	t«J	Auto-Parking (on-siie)		
	O> SO	o				U-J e-j			-4		Auto-Parking (on-siie,Proposed)		
	*s	-J o	a				w ■ft			ft	Auto-Parking (off-site)		
						■-< n				X ft	Benches		
									<< ft		Bicycle Parking		
	*	<-*				-	-I		fJ	-	Drinking Fountain		
			<c			<» Vl			*< ft	ft • w.	Restroom		
									■< ft VI		Handicap Access		
		J IP *■		S q p	T=l ft 3" w 5"		ft 5		<3- ■E S’ •ft u		Security Light		
	-	-									Telephone		
		ft			■e?"	ft	M n	n	o		Trash Recepticle		
| Total	Si ft 3 a £ ft X* 3’	| Ted Brooks	| River Trails	1 Parmenter	2 rt. tz> □_ ■5’ rc	tj' o 3 O	3" M ft Ift	o 3 3 3 r= 3 *< n re □ 5	1 Clark Field	Parks	'V ft ft 1"	2 fj	O ?S	O o 5	r—i = £	ft 2 e.	tZI * s	
ft								ft		Badminton		
								L4		Basketball		
-								-		Gymnasium		
-								-		Multipurpose Room		
-								-		Program Space		
								-		Recreation Building		
~4	w			-	-			M		Restroom		
Ul	r-J-			-	-		-			Snack Bar		
Ul								Ul		Volleyball		
-							-			4-H Show Bam		
Planned			Existing										Parks		
5? 5i a m w ■a S? w	q ft	n u M Q ft M ~ er ■< n tn .e c n 5. J9 a	-a © Ha	3 u ■< rt s p S’	“4 c- ta 3 o S"	| River Trails	"q w 3 rt 3 O ->	| Neil Snipes	) Kips Korner	,	a w b	{Community Center	{Clark Field		B> DI ; s- s- o I s ft JC ; a O 111. s ■38	
	t	1	1	I -t	1. £	f £	i e.	I.	1	1	1 1. •5	1	Type		
o		I	t* oo M w	Ln		-Q	■b. L"	tn O	r	*. A O	u> 3	w o	Acres		
Facility status unknown			-	-									Baseball-Adult		
			m	W									Baseball-Little League		
			-										Basketball		
				*< ft		*e ft		*<					Equestrian Trail		
			u	U1									Football		
			-							-			Riding & Show Arena		
			*■								A.		Horse shoe Pit		
			M								t-4		Shuffle board		
			tin	sr									Soccer		
			u				2				-	-	Softball-Adult		
			-	-									Softball- Informal practice		
			M	w									Softball-Youth		
			-							-			Stage/Exhibit Bldg.		
											-		Swimming Recreation		
			(J								T*		Tennis		
										• « w			Warm-up Arena		
		Barbecue	Picnic-Family	B, =i O L. o 6 '5 u £	Picnic Shelter	Play ground Equip. Tot Lot
PICNIC & PLAYGROUND Packs & Recreation Facility Inventory	!					
Parks	i					
CJark FieJd						
Community Center		3	9		3	yes
Itigalis		1	1			yes
Kips Korner						yes
Neil Snipes		*	*	*	*	yes
Parnienter		3			3	yes
River Trails						
Ted Brooks		3				
Wayne Makin		1		2		yes
Total		1 1	10	2	6	
future barbecue, picnicking (iclliiicfi
	SCHOOLS 1 Parks 4 Recreation T Facility Invcnlary fj Schoo Is	u u <	co X? U cd m	a P •a cd u 44 M cd m	o a -g 3 a cd -D 44 ed	ra J5 O Q U-.	rt jo eS 3 O* rt CZ	<u o a a co	"cd JO d O	o o a. w> c E 6 ? r/i	C3 a CL £ e> o SO b E E rn	b C p-<	44 o cd Lw f-	o a •d nJ JO di o >	□ o ■a u o cd JO 5? o >
fco B '13 Ui K	Norco High	40.0	2	3	6	1	4	t	I		1	6	I	3	7
	Norco Jr. High	27.3	1		4	I			1 !			4	1		4
	Norco Elem.	10.0	3		3				2						
	River View Elem.	H.l	2		4				1 i						
	Sierra Vista Elem.	10.6	2		6				It-—						
	Highland Elem.	10.0	1		1				2 i						
	Total	106.2	1 1	3	24	2	4	1	S i 1		1	to	2	3	6
"U Hi b «	Riverside Community College	I	2.5 acre park will pre tables & barbecue fat include softball, soccc swimming pool, tenni						)viti i lit <S <5	c play C5. Jo fooib hand		cq nt all ball	nip. use ficl co	pic fa rts urt.	nic cilit and	cs
other equestrian-related activities attract participants from Riverside County and as far away as Orange, San Bernardino and Los Angeles counties. Expansion plans are in progress so that Ingalls will be able to accommodate larger horse shows. Expansion will include an additional 300 new stalls, raising the the combined total to 376. Facilities now include a show arena, two warm-up arenas, two 4-H barns and the Nellie Weaver Hall. ‘TKe 4-H barns provide space for showing and training animals, while Nellie Weaver Hall accommodates exhibits, dances, wedding receptions and banquets. Ingalls has also become the site for the annual Valley Days Fair. Another special feature of Ingalls that it provides trail access into the surrounding Norco hills.
General Comments: Nestled in the foothills of the Norco hills, Ingalls has become a symbol representing the city's animal-keeping character. The hills provide an attractive backdrop enhancing the city's rural character. Future design consideration should address the pedestrian, equestrian and vehicular circulation in and around the park. Relocating existing facilities may provide greater ease of access. The undeveloped seven acres located north of Ingalls creates a good opportunity to link the two parks; such linkage could enhance the visual aesthetic and function of each park. It would also be possible to take advantage of 6th Street by creating a focal point as people enter the park.
Kips Korner Park
Location: Corner of Kips Korner and Parkridge Avenue. Type: Neighborhood.
Size: 1.8 acres.
Condition: Good (13).
Description: Recreational facilities here include children’s play equipment (tot lot) and a tennis court. There is limited opportunity for low-intensity or informal play in the other areas.
General Comments: Kips Korner is a good example of the atmosphere or flavor a neighborhood park might have. "Soft green" elements, as in the grass-lined
Greenspaco for Norco 34
Existing Park
raciinics
$606
STUDIO
PARKS & SCHOOLS
§5^$ Greenspace for Norco
PA«k5 * M:cHHAnr&i department
CALIFORNIA STATE POLYTECHNIC UNIVERSITY POMONA
GRADUATE STUDIES IN LANDSCAPE AH<TIrTECT\)hE

0 IOOO* toWT	4000’	600tT NORTH
Gr<«rtsp«ce Inventory 35
t			 - ■
	I
drainage channel, elevate the park's visual qualities, offer informal play space for children and act to unify the park. Improvements might include integration of natural elements (boulders and vegetation) within the grass-lined channel. Additional tree plantings on the south and east boundaries would provide a screen from adjacent residences.
Neil Snipes Park
Location: Corner of 5th Street and Hamner Avenue. Type: Neighborhood park.
Size: 15.0 acres.
Condition: Fair (7).
Description: The developed portion of the site includes play equipment and limited picnicking and informal play space. Due to lack of public interest and other reasons, the BMX (bicycle motor-cross) track is closed to the public. Although the new design is not complete, there is some speculation that Snipes Park, may become a community park featuring meandering paths for pedestrian use, a par course, a central play area for children, sand volleyball court, and, possibily, an outdoor amphitheater. Planting islands along the paths and a simulated "dry" creek add to the visual interest.
As a community center park, it would accommodate group and family picnicking.
General Comments: Neil Snipes Park is currently under ■edesign. There is thereby a good opportunity to implement one element of the greenspace plan. Because of the size and location of Snipes Park the development of a specialty park would well serve the community. Such a park would focus mainly on court-type activities such as racquetball, basketball, tennis and volleyball. Whether or not Snipes Park becomes either a community center or specialty park, proper measure should be taken to lessen the visual and noise impact along Hamner Avenue. Restrooms Eire in poor condition.
Parmenter Park
Location: Reservoir Avenue.
Type: Specialty.
Size: 4.5 acres.
Condition: Fair (9).
Description: Parmenter Park is used primarily for adult baseball. Other site amenities include children’s play equipment, picnic shelters and barbecue facilities. General Comments: Future park improvements should deemphasize the use of chain-link fencing. Access into the park should be more inviting for pedestrians, reducing automobile use. Within the park, circulation should accommodate pedestrians as they move from one area to another.
River Trails Park
Location: Off Hamner Avenue, along the Santa Ana River.
Type: Regional.
Size: 277.0 acres.
Condition: Poor (4).
Greenspace for Norco 36

Description: Approximately 273 of the 277 acres of River Trails Park remain undeveloped; an equestrian trail system meanders through the riparian environment.
The developed four acres are leased to a private concessionaire who operates and maintains a public horse-riding stable. The primary use of River Trails Park is limited to horseback riding; however, walking and hiking are allowed if a permit is obtained through the Parks and Recreation Department.
General Comments ; The Santa Ana River is the main feature of River Trails Park and should be considered the focal element of any future park improvements. As an entry statement into Norco, the river should support the city’s desire to enhance and maintain its rural character. The river should be treated as an integral part of the city rather than a barrier. The redesign and upgrade of this park may help to achieve a pleasant "park" atmosphere. A multi-user trail crossing the Santa Ana River would provide easier access.
River Trails Park is a major gateway into Norco and will play a greater role as National Trail 100 becomes a reality. Norco and River Trails Park may then become a major equestrian trail hub for the southern California region. The city will have the opportunity to invite visitors to experience the uniqueness of Norco for equestrian uses.
Ted Brooks Park
Location: Vine Avenue.
Type: Specialty.
Size: 1.4 acres.
Condition: Fair (8).
Description: Ted Brooks Park provides a warm-up arena that ties directly into an equestrian trail. Limited informal free play space is also available.
General Comments: Ted Brooks Park caters mainly to the equestrian community; however, the design (size and surface material) of the warm-up arena tends to limit its usefulness. Accommodating the need for warm-up arenas in the community, a redesign of this
facility should address the proper size. Because of the size of warm-up arenas and possibility of locating new warm-up arenas throughout the community, Ted Brooks Park may serve the community better as a neighborhood park.
Wayne Makin Park
Location: Corner of Corydon and 5th Street.
Type: Specialty.
Size: 21.5 acres.
Condition: Fair (7).
Description: Wayne Makin is the primary sports park accommodating high-intensive activities for Norco and some of Corona. The park is used for little league, girls' softball, football, soccer and other youth sports.
Facilities include two little league fields, a senior league field, three football fields, five soccer fields and one mini-minor field.
General Comments: Viewing the Wayne Makin Sports Park from a distance, one observes that the telephone pole/light standards stand in sharp contrast to the surrounding area. Redesign of the lighting system, including decreasing the number of poles, will help provide more visual order. The chain link fencing is an overwhelming presence at this sports park; not only does the amount of fencing detract from the visual quality of the sports park, but it also contributes to confusion users circulate from one field to another. Providing play equipment for children is a good idea; however, such equipment should be located and clustered in an area away from the danger of flying baseballs. Additional planting should be considered at the east side of the sports park, softening the view towards CRC yet allowing adequate visual survey for area security. Facilities requiring special attention include the dugouts, backstops field and spectator bleachers.
Greenspace
t	1

Planned Parks
Two parks are planned for the City of Norco. One site is seven acres of Ingalls Park's 44 acres. Sixth Street separates the site from the existing facility. According to Ray Odell, Director of Parks and Recreation, this site is being considered as a community center park; however, the Greenspace Plan suggests that this area may better serve the community as a specialty park that would focus on connecting the two parks, with the possibility of linking the two parks through an urban plaza.
The second of the two planned parks would be located on the west side of Norco, near Kips Korner Park. This 1.7-acre park dedication site, lots 50 and 51 of tract 22497, straddles a drainageway and will function as a neighborhood park/retention basin.
Schools
Six schools, embracing approximately 70.2 acres, make up the public school system. These are Norco High, Norco Junior High, Norco Elementary, River View,
Sierra Vista Elementary, and Highland Elementary. The recreational opportunities for public outdoor facility use includes baseball, softball, tennis racquetball and basketball. Norco High School offers indoor facilities for basketball and volleyball. Although most school facilities are supposed to be accessible to the public for recreation, locked gates and fences discourage their use.
Greenspace for Norco 38
3
5F” COURTS & FIELD SPORTS Service Area______________________________________________________________________________
Green space for Norco
---JT	v *■	J'AKhLr 4 MXHL K.TIDH Igl-AHCMLN.
CALITORN1A STATE POLYTECHNIC UI'HVERSrTV POMONA	U	GRADUATE STUDIES IN LANIISCAPE AACUrfElTlJNE
o kw 2n(Mr	«mr	Amr N(ncti|
Grc en spa c e Inventory 39
I
I
Park Inventory Conclusions
The attraction capability of a facility is dramatically affected by the quality or uniqueness of design and development." (Recreation, Park and Open Space Standards and Guidelines, 1983)
The current park system could be utilized more effectively were additional time and funding devoted to appropriate park planning, design and maintenance. Existing park facilities and amenities do not at present adequately support park functions or elevate aesthetic qualities. Creating comfortable and beautiful park environments would encourage use and also elevate the community appreciation of its parks.
Specialty parks, including Ingalls, Clark's Field, Wayne Makin and Parmenter, servce a single-purpose recreational activity such as field sports and equestrian activities. These activities provide the majority of Norco's recreation. Areas of low-intensity or passive recreational use are limited and cannot accommodate the demand. This situation suggests the need for a more balanced park system.
The existing trail system provides great opportunities for linking parks to the community at large and to regional ■>ark resources. However, the trail system discourages uses other than equestrian, including bicycling, strolling and jogging. Currently, the trail system is secondary to the automobile in terms of location and landscape treatment. This is surprising in an eqviestrian-oriented community.
Providing access to the various facilities is another important component to maximizing the use of a park. The same can be said for school facilities, especially outdoor facilities; fences and locked ga tes there and at Ingalls and Parmenter Parks do not invite their use.
Chain link fencing at Wayne Makin, Parmenter and Community Center is now a characteristic solution when defining park boundaries and the separating facilities within parks. Not only contribute to visual blight, but create circulation and access problems for persons entering and moving about the park.
Existing and future parks can better support the recreational demands of the community if special attention is given to their visual quality (landscaping, site amenities), circulation (equestrian, pedestrian and bicycle access within and near parks) and site planning (focusing on the compatibility between various activities).
The amount of labor needed to develop and maintain parks is an ever-present problem. Volunteers can be a valuable resource, assisting in development, maintenance and operation of park facilities and programs. If volunteer efforts are focused on park construction or maintenance, special attention must be given to quality control, to maintaining the aesthetic and function of park amenities.
Greenspace for Norco 40
Greenspace Inventor
3F“ HIGH/LOW INTENSITY USE & EQUESTRIAN
=3E!;S Greenspace for Norco	PARKS A RECREATION WJ’AKTMK.fT
CAl.CTORNIA STATE POLYTECHNIC UNIVERSITY POMONA	tl	GkAGUATC SWOIEJ IN LANO-CAI’j AHCHITCCnJHE
NEED MORE-
OUTDOOR RECREATION
%
5 1 ‘71----—.—......... ... iT.. ,_J Natural Area (undeveloped)
4B.5|---_■■■ ■. .. —------- '	1 Neighborhood Natural Area
4 ’ ■* 1	i — ——	, Z3 Picnic/Diibccue/Fimily
3 2-9f~	....... \..J Picnie/Barbccuc/Group
32.71 .. . ■	.	1 Equestrian Facility
H-fl'............ 1. ~	r~j Amphilhcaicr
21.51—L . .	1 Warm up Arena
39-31 /.	| Handicap
3S-S|	' .	”1 Swim-Recreation
18-Ql.	I Rifle
17.7f„. ..	I Racquciball
17.41"".'	• I Shale board
The Community Profile User Needs Surveys
In determining the city, of Norco’s current and future needs for parks and recreation, the 606 Studio, ir. conjunction with the Norco Parks and Recreation Department, conducted a user needs survey, in order to gain a better understanding of these community r.eeds.
Approximately 6000 surveys were mailed-out, 627 were returned, with a tabulated total response rate of 19.4%. The surveys were color coded to enable the design team to recognize any significant recreational differences within the community. (See Page 45) For the tabulated totals of the user needs survey, see appendix D.
L....... 1 Tennis
1 Archery »3-3[.Z....: Z Volleyball I	Swim-Competition
1< Basketball
9.91' "J Soccer 9-4T.Z1 Baseball 9.4L. n ."j| Softball-Adult
Sofiball-Youih
ShuN'lcbuard
Badminton 6-4L,7.J Football
1 Croquet 3-30 Others
Enhancing the city's rural image is a major concern for the community. Also a major concern was preserving nature, this was reflected in the high response rate in regards to natural undeveloped areas (51.7%) and neighborhood natural areas (48.5%).
PARKS USED MOST FREQUENTLY
%
39.411..	1 lug....
1	9.fil	■ 'I Community center
8.6CZZ3 Wayne Makin
6.9l ' Li Snipes 5.40 Parmcnter S.3O River Trail 3.2D Kips Konicr
2	J Cl Ted Brooks l.tfj] Trails
1 - 3 D Clark Field 1.00. Regional Parks
NERD MORE,.,
PROGRAMSZACTIVITIES
%___________________
39.11	I Teen Programs
	
37.or” -	] Equestrian
34.6|	—	1 Yeulh Procrams
34.0 |	Zl City Street Fairs
31.91	—■ -	Dancss-Tccn
3i.?r	1 Natural History
24,21	~™	1 Handicapped
23.if ’	. i Rcc Center Drop In
21.91”	”	I Danccs-AduU
19.91	j Senior Activities
14.81	~	;	] City Parades
2.1 [J Others
0.5| Corona Parks
Grcenspace for Norco 42
F
	
Greenspace Demands and Trends
About 41.8% of the respondents felt the need for more family picnicking areas and 32.9% desired more group picnicking areas. The respondents also expressed a high interest in equestrian related activities, (32.7%) and the need for an outdoor amphitheater (27.7%).
The trail system is regarded a major asset of the community. However, the current trail system accommodates and encourages primarily equestrian circulation and discourages other modes of circulation, such as pedestrians and bicyclist. Of those responding to the survey, 42.4% desired bicycle trails and 39.2% felt the need for more equestrian and walking/hiking trails.
This suggests the need to enhance the existing equestrian trail while integrating bicycle and pedestrian oriented trails into the current system.
Section VI
The survey indicates that existing indoor spaces for recreation programs and activities are insufficient due to an increased interest ih arts and crafts, fitness rooms, racquetball, weight training and aerobics.
As shown in the survey results, the most frequently used park is Ingalls, followed by the Community Center, Wayne Makin and River Trails. However, it should be noted that Ingalls park is used primarily on the weekends whereas the other parks provide daily recreational space.
A high proportion of the respondents (49.2%) have lived in Norco for more than 10 years.
USE OF FACIUTY/ACTIVITY				Never	„ Outside % i4.2|2Z'Z		Norco
Daily/Weekly % , Pi cnic/B arbecuefi. 7 LZJ		Monthly	Couple limes a year					
		n.8|	} 37.2CZ	•		~d	>4.71	..I...)			.J
Softball	».8t 	I	2-lC	12-8 cm	36-2 j	— 		J	6-2Cd	
Baseball	9.at	1	1,90	7.if -i	38,4|	'	J	1.9D	
Football	r.oD	0.8]		42.3 P"				3	1.60	
Soccer	4.sn	1.30	3-SO	<«•»!				J	2-7O	
Tennis	s.sQ	2<T3	wCd	36.0t 1			2.2D	
Volleyball		o.»B	9.4l	1	38.4f—	'	'• '".d.'d	3.20	
Basket hull	■ n .... J	4.3Q	8.91—71	33.3 L	J	2.9Q	
Swimming	13.4F ~ i	4,3n	16.41		 .1	23.41	d	5.?r i	
Youth Classes	8 3 Cd	naO	5.on	29.51“	T~d	1.0Q	
Adult Classes	3.sn	2.60	7-Q	26.8k		1	2.CJ	
Animal Husbandry	i2.or	i	4.in	8 - 8 l	.... '.J	30.6!	1	2.60	
Jogfiing/Hikln	tlT.lL	_]	4.1U	B.sr n	25.»|	"""<	—1	4.60	
Craft	«.6r~ i	3.5n	5.9l	1	31-H				<5Q	
Fitness	";..i	3.2D	3.«n	28 4]		 ' Green	space D e m	ands a	« d
Of those responding to the survey, 8.4% said they were ’ight users, using the park facilities once a year, 12.4% refined themselves as moderate users, using the parks monthly, and 35% identified themselves as heavy users, using the parks several times a year. Approximately 13% never use the parks.
The most commonly reported reasons that people do not use the Norco parks or only use them lightly are that programs and facilities are not available.
With regard to park maintenance, 50% of the respondents felt that the parks are adequately maintained, whereas only 42% felt equestrian facilities are adequately maintained. Twenty three percent of the respondents do not know if the parks are adequately maintained, while 38% do not know if equestrian facilities are adequately maintained. This suggests either a lack of park interest or lack of desired programs and facilities.
Focused Interviews
In an effort to gain a better understanding of the public’s philosophy toward recreation and the city, the 606 Studio conducted focused interviews- Fifty-one focused interviews were administered, providing insight into public's attitudes toward recreation and the city at large. Results below list the single significant answer most common by given; otherwise, the th ree highest responses are given.
The element enjoyed most:
•	rural atmosphere The elements disliked most:
•	growing commercial development
•	traffic
•	unkempt appearance Norco appeals to:
•	horse lovers
•	animal lovers ""
•	family people Why people move to Norco:
•	rural atmosphere
•	cost of real estate
•	equestrian emphasis The favorite places in Norco:
•	a specific park
•	river
•	residence
The most important features or landmarks in Norco:
•	Norco hills
•	Santa Ana River
•	Ingalls Park
The image of the Norco hills:
•	open space
•	beauty
•	recreation
The image of the Santa Ana River:
•	recreation
•	open space
•	beauty or pollution
WOULD YOU LIKE TO LIVE IN PROXIMITY TO...
YES
NO
% _________
18ZI ■ I
1 .60
6-llT
H-8|.
n.3i
NEUTRAL
%_________
23.41
in.sr"H
17.4EZZZ]
23.31-------------1
Creensfucc for Norco 44
NEED MORE..
%
4 1,6
50. fiL
Survey Zone 1
L73 Naturul Area (undeveloped)
Neighborhood Natural Area
4 t .6LrL. \A3LZl Picnic/Barbccuc/Family
3 3,7 T . . -3 Picnic/Barbecuc/Group
27.qr*~T?TTai Equestrian Facility 27.Or./..LL.J Amphitheater
46.1	CLL7. ,.LL 3.L1 Bicycle Trail 38*2 UZLZ.....L71 Equestrian Trail 39.3 E^L.iui. ... .'".3 Walking/Hiking Trail 25.8CT..Z1 Indoor Racquelball 21.3ELLLL3 Fitness Room
20.2	E7TL~ .J Warm-up Arena
19.1 LL.? ...1 Swim-Recreation
1Q 1 [77771 Outdoor Racquelball 19.lT	1 Rifle
PARKS USED MOST... FREQUENTLY
% „
3 1.5 tL_77-7—4 Ingalls 12.3L_"J Wayne Makin 1 n. 1 L." j River Trails
9.0173 Community Center
5.60 Ted Brooks
Survey Zone 2
NEEDMORE...
Survey Zone 3
49.5EL
30.on
I Natural Area (undeveloped) ....... L...1 Neighborhood Natural Area
Picnic/Barbeouc/Family
Picnic/B arbeeue/Group 7J Equestrian Facility
Amphitheater Bicycle Trail
7J Equestrian Trail
Walking/Hiking Trail Jogging Trail
23.8L___J Arts/Crafts 22.6CZT3 Fitness Room 21 4T 7. I Indoor Racquelball 20.1 PL 773 Handicap 19.5ILL 73 Aerobics
PARKS USED MOST... FREQUENTLY
44.
Ingal Is
21.0	Community Center
9.20 Snipes 6.&Q Wayne Makin 4.6Q Parmcnicr
Survey Zone 4
NEED MORE...
%
54.4 rrTFy
7-73 Natural Area (undeveloped)
49.5fc„'	Neighborhood Natural Area
38.6	177-7' JZJ Plcnlc/Barbeeue/Fami I y
32.7Picnic/Barbccue/Group 33.7EL. ■■ .T J Equestrian Facility 21.8 f ... 7.._3 Amphitheater 45.5 L ~ "77773771 Bicycle Trail 35-6f~~7.,.	J Equestrian Trail
37.6EZ
25.7	EE
NEEDMORE...
4Q. lFr_ l. _LU Natural Area (undeveloped)
43.0L7LL'. '	Neighborhood Natural Area
35. lLT L.i Picnic/Barbccue/Family
PARKS USED MOST... FREQUENTLY
Ingalls
3 Walking/Hiking Trail 24.7FT LLZ1 Community Center
□ Jogging Trail
25.7	L—-, L3 Indoor Racquelball
24.7	E-L-7Z2 Arts/Crafts
22.8L___LLJ Handicap Access
21.8	R i f 1 c
20.8	r LI S wim-Recreati on. 20.8 E. : ■ I Warm-up Arena
17 flF-LLZl Kips Korner
8.9L-J Wayne Makin 7.9m River Trait
29.217.■■■■.] Picnic/Barbecuc/Group 32.41	" "‘*1 E ques t rian Fa ci 1 i ty
23.4L..' L-. 'J Amphitheater 41. 2EZLLL. 7...—.13 Bicycle Trail 4 1.2LL—L L..fJ Equestrian Trail 27-2CLL7T7] Walking/Hiking Trail
29.8EL__LLL] Jogging Trail
27.2l_^j«^J Handicap Access 23,7	J Fitness Room
20.2fc_.~LJ Arls/C rafts
20,2C~_L? 1 Warm-up Arena
19.3Swim-Recreation
PARKS USED MOST... FREQUENTLY
40.3CL
Ingalls
19.3L7.7-L Community Center 15.9173,7$ PaTmenter 10.5F f'j Wayne Makin
3.50 Snipes
Greenspace Demands and Trends 45
When people want to be outdoors, they usually go to:
•	Norco trails
•	other locations
•	backyard
Twenty years from now, the "ideal" N orco would look like:
•	it does right now
Twenty years from now, people are afraid Norco will look like:
•	more commercial development
•	more residential development
•	mass development Outdoor features missing in Norco:
•	various park types
•	further trail connections
•	more parks and community identity
Open space within the city people would like to save:
•	Norco hills
The majority of people are interested in starting community composting program, and they also enjoy wildlife near their homes. About half included "nuisance" species (coyotes and deer) in their definition of wildlife.
I I Very Compatible I I Mildly Compatible 0 Mildly Incompatible I Very Incompatible
REASON FOR NOT USING PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITES
Programs/facililics arc not available in Norco There arc net enough faciliticji in Norco
12.30777' 12.3L77
Programs/facilitics are not available at convenient limes Prefer to tlo recreation with/dear fricnds/rclativcs
io.sL__ 777.71 Norco facilities arc inadequately maintained 6.1I""'' I	Norco facilities arc net conveniently located
2.7	Prefer to use facilities near work
1 2.3j. 1 Olhcrs
Archery
Baseball/Softball P '“ciball
Trail
Amphitheater
Archery
|_|	| Baseball/Softball
jan [ Basketball JBQQ I Bike Trail DHDD |Rques(rian Facility
Equestrian Facility HBH~ll~|[~| |Equestrian Trail Equestrian Trail □■□□□□ |Footba11 Football	H □□[!!□ nO	| Handicap Trail
!□□□□
Handicap Trail |J I
Jogging
Jogging |Naiu ral Areas
Natural Areas Off-road Vehicl Picnic Areas
Play Ground
Racquethall Slidoling Range
Soccer
1EE00O0E00 I Off-road Vehicl ■■■El	!	1 Picnic Areas
|Play Ground
□	(Racquetbail
Swimming
E0QQ0000n00EZ]EJQ |Shooting Range
■□■■■■■naaiHlDC [s^
iswim^s
I Tennis
Community Workshops and Personal Contacts
Members of the community rasied concerns in the community workshops, written statements, and casual conversations with 606 Studio members as we pursued our information gathering. Concerns were in the general categories:
•	Natural area trail connections
•	Wildlife habitat
•	Neighborhood parks for families with children
•	Facilities for teenagers and young adults
•	Better distribution of equestrian facilities
•	Pedestrian surfacing
•	Norco's community image as represented to its citizens and visitors The following represents a consolidation and interpretation of some of the citizen input.
Trails and Connections
The people of Norco are on the move. Whether on horseback, bicycle or foot, they actively experience their environment and appreciate the natural features of their surroundings. The
physical setting is part of the reason they have come to live there. But they want and need to be able to reach their landscape's features. The landscape can be made more accessible by provision of:
Tennis
Volleyball
Walking/hiklng
mr~ir~ir/nf"ir^ir~ir~ii [mi hwoq ] voiieybaii ■■□□□□□□□□□□■□□□Gann
RECREATION ACTIVITIES COMPATIBILITY MATRIX
Creenspace for Norco 46
1
I
I
i

•	Trails
•	Access points
•	Rights-of-way through private lands
•	Bridges and underpasses where the river or auto traffic presents obstructions
•	A map of the city's trail system
Equestrians are quick to point out the difference between horseback riding and other modes of transportation.
With other modes,, humans are in complete control (to the best of one’s ability) of the movement. For equestrians, control is shared with the horse. Sensitive to disturbances in their surroundings, horses may react to a honking horn or the gunning of an engine by rearing up or stumbling over trail fencing. These may precipitate an unintentional dismounting which may seriously injure the rider. If simply for their disturbances to horses, aside from their damage to the land, ORVs ought to be banned from given areas, in the view of some equestrians. Consideration of equine sensitivities must be included in the design of equestrian trails and crossings.
Wildlife Habitat
Many residents of Norco have commented on the delight they experience as the cottontails hop up in front of them like popping popcorn along the trails in the hills. Exposure to singing
birds and scurrying lizards soothes the soul. Some have expressed deep concern for the fate of their feathered, furred, and scaled wildland neighbors. One citizen related that he really misses the burrowing owls that used to be abundant in the Norco area and wishes they could somehow be brought back. It appears that much of the affection and appreciation that Norconians feel for their domestic animals is extended to the natural animals of the world and their local area, in particular. Wildlife habitat is an essential component of the natural landscape character that has brought many residents to the City of Norco.
Children's Recreational Needs
With the proportion of young residents of the city - age four years or less - at about 8% (and rising), the need for additional facilities to accommodate them is clear. If a comparison is made between the
existing city facilities and programs pertinent to this age group, and those provided for seniors, who constitute about 5% (and rising) of the population, the seniors appear to be much better provided for. (Neither of these groups is well served by the public school system.)
When the number of five- to eleven-year-olds is added to the number of tots, the proportion of children swells to 18% of Norco's population.
□ Very I 1 Mildly IT"! Mildly ■ Very
Compatible
Compatible
Incompatible
Incompatible
____________________ O
Amphitheater________I I
Archery ____________n
BasebaU/Softball	1 t
Basketball__________CZ1
Bike trail__________ED
Equestrian Facility	Cl
Equestrian Trail	[~~1
Football____________| I
Handicap Trail	~~1
Joge'"S Trail_______I I
Natural Areas	□
Off-road Vehicles
Parks__________ I j
Picnic Areas	□
Playground__________I I
Pocket Parks _______□
Racquelball	[""□
Shooting Range______[	1
Soccer______________[ 1
Swimming	f ]
Tennis
Volley ball____ I I
Walk/hike Trail	I I
□	EJ L2J ss n □ □
□	□ □ ■ 53 [3 □
□	I	□
□	□□ ■ E322 □
□	(□□■□□□
f J I I i_I H L-3 i . 1
□	□□tanna
■■■ ■
□□□□□□□
□	□ □ n E3 E3 □
□□□□□□□
□
□	FT! E3 ga □ n □
□	□□ ■ Ei □ □ □□□n□□n □□□□□□□
RECREATION - LAND USE COMPATIBILITY MATRIX
Gretnspace Demands and Trends 47
Parents of very young children have expressed the need or parks close to home where they can take their children without needing to drive. In addition to providing play settings for the children, these parks can also serve an important social function as meeting places for parents who, otherwise, may suffer a lack of adult companionship. Parents of children old enough to be out on their own prefer that their children not have to travel great distances from home for socialization, exercise and adventure. Small neighborhood parks can strengthen ties among Norconians and answer needs for
family recreation.
Teenagers' Recreational Needs
Another 18% of Norco's population is comprised of persons between the ages of 12 and 21. Some Norco parents have expressed concerns about the potential for drug and alcohol abuse among their
teenagers. Although evidence of the problem in Norco seems less conspicuous than in neighboring Corona, they fear the challenge is confronting their community, just as in communities across the nation. Certainly, the more opportunities for healthful diversions a community can make available to its young people, the less likely they are to put their time into unhealthful activities. With their fluctuating hormone levels, ;eenagers need opportunities for emotional as well as physical release. The element of "perceived danger"("thrills") can accommodate some of this release when it is provided for in their environment. With proper design, some recreational settings can safely deliver to teenagers "thrills" which a flow for emotional release.
Caught empathetically in the social 11 mbo between childhood and adulthood, teens also need their own gathering places. This need has been manifested in Norco by congregations of young pec pie in the parking lots of convenience stores. With the city's recent passage of an anti-loitering law, who can guess what locations will take the place of these private pa rking lots? The
gatherings may have seemed a nuisance to store owners and customers, but at least these parking lots are well lit and allow easy surveillance by law enforcement. Teenagers of Norco need a space dedicated to them, in which they can socialize with their peers or just "hang out."
Equestrians' Recreational Needs
Equestrians say they would also benefit from a social space designed with their needs in mind. This is one of the functions a warm-up arena can serve.
The warm-up arena at Ingalls Park is
seldom open for casual drop-ins; the appropriate structure and location are offered here, but the function is underfulfilled. On the west side of town, some citizens have suggested, among other problems, that the arena provided at Ted Brooks Park is not near enough to the natural areas that equestrians would prefer to ride in. In this case, the structure and functions are flawed and the location apparently inadequate. A better
Greenspace for Norco 48
location, they say, would be adjacent a trail head where trails from a number of directions might cross. This requirement is fulfilled in the arena at Ingalls Park. If left open more often, it would serve many of the needs of those on the east side of town, (The west side needs more work.) To be successful, community equestrian facilities must satisfy the requirements of proper structure (construction), function (socializing space and exercise for horses) and location (near crossroads of popular trails).
A growing trend in equine recreation in Norco is the use of carts and carriages. Possibly due to the dearth of trails wide enough to accommodate them, they have not established a strong visual presence in the community. (The 606 Studio team was unaware of the issue until carriage enthusiasts raised it at the final community workshop.) Some private landholders have permitted carriage drivers to ride on their lands under certain conditions, but there is no officially sanctioned area for them to ride. The width of trail required for these vehicles precludes their installation in many areas. But an effort must be made to work with the group of carriage drivers toward providing recreational facilities that serve their special needs.
Pedestrian Surfacing
Although most Norconians enjoy the atmosphere effected by the absence of standard suburban concrete sidewalks, many parents, in particular, have complained that they are concerned that
their children must go into the street to ride their wheeled toys. The same problem confronts mothers with strollers and persons in wheelchairs. During the rainy season, the equestrian trails can become so wet and muddy that even the horses are out in the street. The aftermath of winter leaves potholes in the trail that can be difficult for the most able-bodied person to maneuver, not to mention people with physical limitations, and some of the elderly. Pedestrian surfacing must be provided wherever possible as an alternative to the equestrian trails, but that surfacing must be aesthetically compatible with the unique character the city is striving to maintain.
Gr«*Hspfice Demands and Trends 49

Norco's Community Image
Many citizens have complained about the image Norco presents to its residents and the world at large. Occasionally these complaints refer to the unkempt appearances of some residents' yards. But
that issue can lead down the path toward codes, covenants and restrictions, opposition to which has been one of the hallmarks of the community "personality." What citizens have agreed most heartily upon is the need to improve the public image of the city, notably in its primary commercial districts on Hamner Avenue and Sixth Street and at entrance points into the city. Residents have recollected how much nicer Hamner Avenue was "before they took down all the trees."
Remarks of disapproval about the removal of mature trees in other parts of the city were frequently made to the 606 Studio members. It was pointed out that a painting hung in the City Council chambers depicts a windrow of huge eucalyptus that recently fell to the path of development. The passing of these historic landmarks was recalled with heartfelt sadness. Such losses are avoidable; For rather thar. the catastrophic changes that usually accompany development, a transitional or successional approach, can integrate new cultural development harmoniously. The greenspace network can be the key to achieving this harmony.
Among suggestions Norco residents have offered for improving the character of Hamner Avenue are trees and associated landscaping, distinctive lighting treatments, benches and the upgrade of facades of many of the commercial buildings. For Sixth Street, some have suggested the incorporation of a rest stop park where riders might hitch their mounts to enjoy a social sarsaparilla in the shade. One astute citizen observed that because Sixth Street serves as an entryway to Ingalls Park, elements that echo the landscape surrounding Ingalls Park ought to be incorporated into the Sixth Street landscape. The inclusion of carefully placed boulders, native plants and other complementary street
amenities would create a grand entry statement to the equestrian facility, reenforcing the image of a unique community. Inasmuch as Norco's dramatic physical surroundings offer great potential as community image-makers, much more can be done to take advantage of these features. Norconians are asking for a face-lift for their city that will reinforce the character of its people and landscape.
Greenspace for Norco 50
Outdoor Recreation Trends in California
fn an effort to determine Californians, opinions, attitudes and values regarding outdoor recreational matters, the California Parks and Recreation Department commissioned a statewide study, the findings of which may be helpful in planning future parklands in Norco. Full greater details may be found in Public Opinions and Attitudes on Outdoor Recreation in California, 1987. Select major findings of this study may be summarized as follows:
•	Approximately two-thirds of respondents consider public park and recreation areas important to their life-styles.
•	Highly developed parks and recreation areas are visited most often; however, nature-oriented parks or reserves are the preferred type of outdoor recreation areas.
•	In terms of general attitude, Californians strongly agree (76%) that protection of the natural environment is important for outdoor recreation and that of natural areas must be preserved for use by future generations (75%)
•	Californians believe that eight outdoor recreation activities should have top priority for the expenditure of public funds: walking, bicycling, camping in developed sites with tent or vehicle, birdwatching/general nature study/visiting natural areas, picnicking in developed sites, beach activities, outdoor cultural events and visiting museums/zoos/historic sites.
•	California tends to support funding for park and recreation areas through "sin" taxes and increased fees for special facilities while opposing increases in general forms of taxation.
•	Increased entrance user fees found its strongest support (68%) when the money was used only at the park where it was collected.
•	Approximately. thrge-Jourths of respondents believed spending should be increased for the protection and management of natural and cultural resources. Increasing the protection of scenery and the natural environment was strongly supported by three-fourths of the respondents.
•	Californians tend to support the concept of using unpaid private citizens as park volunteers (85%). Of those individuals who had not volunteered, almost 64% indicated they would consider volunteering.
Creenspace Demands and Trends 51
Legend
mmmm
Water flow
Nutrient flow
Water & nutrient flow
Human contributions
	fraclptuitan		
			
I Imported water 1 tppruiimaldy IP% or basin water			
			
	Chino groundwater basin		
WATER AND NUTRIENT FLOWS
Greenspace for Norco 52
Ecological Analysis
Results of the ecological analyses are presented in this section as a series of models. A model in this context is an abstract representation of reality, including only the elements essential for understanding interrelationships. Two types of models are shown here: a flow model for decisions related to water and nutrients and suitability models for locational decisions. These models form the analytical foundations for the greenspace plans and designs presented in later sections.
Greenspace plays a key role in urban ecological processes. Greenspaces filter water and air, recycle waste, support natural vegetation and wildlife and not least of all, offer psychological support for humankind. Thus they form a basic ecological support system. Without these open spaces, urbanization obstructs natural processes that support life.
The planning and management of greenspace offer many opportunities to fit human needs to natural systems. In order to understand how this fit may be accomplished, the existing situation must be analyzed.
Water and Nutrient Flows
The Water and Nutrients Model diagram represents of some of the material and energy flows of the urbanizing environment. The flows illustrated are particularly relevant to greenspace planning and management. Strategic greenspace planning can make major contributions to stabilizing ecological functions. For example, reductions in the erosion and sedimentation of Norco's drainageways by conserving slope-holding native vegetation in critical watershed areas can be accomplished. Proper design can reduce the erosion potential on recreational trails. Well-designed biological water treatment ponds can help remove non-point source pollution from storm water while also providing attractive landscape features and making treated water
Section VII
available for other uses and making treated water available for other uses. Greenspace can also provide a medium for recycling the nutrients in aiiimal'manure by composting this material and spreading it over the surface of the land.
Greenspace management, including nutrient and water recycling, can produce dramatic monetary savings.
While it is often difficult to estimate the exact costs involved in the flows of water and nutrients, each step in the transfer of material or energy carries an associated cost. It makes economic sense to get the maximum return possible for each expenditure of energy (money).
When referring to the model, take notice of what is being imported into and exported out of the city. The energy and resultant costs involved in the transportation of commodities and wastes alone is an enormous component of the system, Fbt the sake of simplicity, these are not depicted in the model.
In recent years, nonpoint-source pollutionhas become a major concern of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Nonpoint-source pollution - contaminants that enter our nation's waterways when water washes across the surface of the land - is a nationwide problem. It is responsible for an estimated 99 percent of sediment, 88 percent of nitrates, and 84 percent of phosphates entering Americas lakes and streams, [and aquifers] Decomposition of organic wastes put into the water by human activities uses up oxygen vital to life. Non-point sources are responsible for 73 percent of this biological oxygen demand (BOD) in our waterways.
Ecological Analysis 53
The cost of this dirty water is significant. A 1984 study by The Conservation Foundation estimated the yearly costs imposed by sedimentation and associated contaminants resulting from erosion alone as being anywhere from $3.2 to $13 billion. And these estimates do not include many very significant impacts on biological systems for which an economic value is difficult to assign.
Nor do they account for the effects of non-point source pollutants - such as nitrates and many pesticides that dissolve in water.
(Hansen et al, 1988)
Aside from monetary costs, but contributing to them, are the costs to the health of all the living beings, including humans, dependent on the water for their survival. In recent years, greater numbers of people, particularly in California, have become concerned about the quality of the water they drink and cook with.
In 1987, the U.S. Congress passed the Water Quality Act, which amended the Federal Clean Water Act. Among other mandated actions. Congress directed the states to develop programs to begin to reduce nonpoint-source pollution. In developing its program, each state had to prepare an assessment report which, to the degree possible, identified and quantified the extent of the problem in that state. Each state also prepared a management plan which outlined steps to be taken in seeking a solution to the problem. California's nonpoint source pollution assessment and management plan was approved by the federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in January, 1989.
_	I}"
Compliance with California's management plan will be required of all local jurisdictions wi thin the state. The jurisdictions will probably begin to feel this new state regulatory role by early 1990. Cities will be required to monitor the quality of their stormwater discharge and report to their county governments. Roger Turner, Environmental Specialist at the Santa Ana Region office of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board,
emhasizes that it is important for communities like Norco to recognize that they may be a part of the problem. The quality of their own environment is at stake.
In Norco’s case, along with other cities sharing the Chino Basin groundwater supplies, attention to solving non-point source pollution problems directly affects the water coming out of, residents' taps. The Chino Basin aquifer stretches from San Bernardino to the Prado Dam and includes , among others, the cities of Chino and Norco. The basin acts as a vast reservoir, storing snow melt and other run-off from the San Bernardino Mountains and portions of the San Gabriels, along with run-off and waste water from urban and agricultural areas of the basin. An additional 19% of its volume is imported from watersheds to the north and fed by artificial recharge into the basin. Much of the land above the basin continues to be used for ranching, partic-darly dairy ranching.
Greenspace for Norco
54
With so much livestock living directly above the aquifer m Norco and surrounding areas, the potential for contamination of groundwater is great. Dissolved solids, including high concentrations of nitrates, are leached from manure lying on the ground and proceed through infiltration into the aquifer. In addition to the contamination of human drinking water, increased nitrate concentrations in areas such as the Prado Basin produce diarrhea and increased rates of abortion in many wildlife species. The Regional Water Quality Control Board requires that all large dairy ranch operations in the basin use some type of control to prevent (minimize) such contamination. One of the recommended strategies is the use of water catchment basins to prevent contaminated water from leaving the property. Biological systems can be used to treat water so that it can be recycled for irrigation. Composting of manure facilitates its efficient breakdown, in addition to greatly reducing the amount of manure that gets into our water, and it also offers a saleable product. Fifteen composting facilities in the basin attest to that fact.
An analogous situation exists on a smaller scale in Norco which allows an even higher density of animals than is allowed by die county. Although various
methods are currently used to dispose of animal wastes, manure often lies on the ground for long periods.
During a rainstorm, the "first flush" of run-off is especially laden with contaminants from this and other pollutants lying atop the ground. Norco’s first flush is carried, along with that of other communities in the watershed, into the Prado Basin, increasing the impact of non-point source pollution by concentrating it an area which is not only home to abundant wildlife, but also feeds the local groundwater supply. Orange County is the major downstream recipient of this pollution, much of which is recharged to their aquifer.
The Greenspace Plan offers mitigation or solutions for these problems of environmental quality by using open lands as a medium for filtering and treating water.
Ecological Analysis 55
Greenspace for Norco
56
Greenspace Suitability Model
Hills Suitability Analysis
Suitability models illustrate "the degrees of ability of land to support a given use or set of uses as they are distributed over a given area in accordance with its distribution of physical attributes" (Lyle, 1985).
The greenspace suitability model represented here takes into consideration a range of locational variables including slope, vegetation, adjacent land uses and open space (public, private and institutional). Maps describing these variables are combined to determine the best future greenspace locations among lands not now built upon.
The greenspace suitability model includes optimal locations throughout the City of Norco that, based on the data, can accommodate recreational uses. The model includes locations for three types or levels of recreational use; natural open space, free play and intensive use. A brief description of these three levels of recreation follows.
Natural Open Space
These areas can best be characterized as having natural or ornamental quality and best suited for low intensity recreational purposes such as nature study, wildlife habitat, camping, limited picnicking and trail uses.
Areas with a 20 percent slope or greater.
Free Play Use
These spaces will best accommodate moderate intensity recreation activities. They might include family and group picnicking, and informal play space (not league). Areas with a 10 to 20 percent slope.
Intensive Use
These areas are best suited for high intensity recreational uses such as organized baseball, softball and basketball. The intensive use area can generally accommodate a greater variety of recreation. Areas with a 0 to 10 percent slope.
Inasmuch as most of the property in the hills on Norco's eastern boundary is zoned for hillside residential development, determination of potential for greenspace must commence with the determination of land
suitability for such development. An orderly process is offered here, based on one developed in a 1988 study for the City of Los Angeles by a 606 Studio team. For a more detailed discussion of the process, refer to that study, Site Design for Hillside Development.
A site inventory is conducted which forms the foundation for a suitability model. Site information is represented graphically on inventory maps. Attributes shown on the maps are weighted according to their relevance to the proposed development or conservation. These maps are successively overlaid upon one another and polygons are drawn to reflect the overlap or coincidence of particular conditions in specific areas. The tally of these overlaps results in a suitability model for development and conservation.
Ranking of attributes identifies site conditions as: exclusionary (with respect to development), primary and secondary. Exclusionary conditions include earthquake faults and endangered species. Power lines may exclude residential development within their rights of way. A linear utility easement runs the length of the hills but an accurate map of its location was unavailable for this analysis. It will restrict development within its narrow band. Other than that, no exclusionary conditions were found in the site inventory. However, any hillside development within Norco should proceed only with trail dedication. Proposed trail easements would essentially exclude development.
Ec olo gi cal Analysis 57
Visual Analysis
Soil Analysis
Greenspace for Norco
58
Primary conditions are attributes of extreme
environmental importance. For this study, primary conditions included: the major (or primary) ridges; canyon wetlands and other moist areas with concentrated biological diversity; drainage areas; significant focal points; slopes over 40%; and unsuitable soil types. (In this case, rocklands are the only soil type considered unsuitable for development.)
Secondary conditions are environmental factors deemed important, but not critical to the site analysis process. Such conditions in this study included secondary ridges (those not on the skyline), Norco's viewshed, slopes of 20 to 40%, rock outcroppings and soils considered marginal for development.
Areas are considered unsuitable for development when one of the following situations exist:
•	One exclusionary condition
•	Two primary conditions
•	One primary and two secondary conditions
•	Four secondary conditions
Development can occur with appropriate mitigation measures when the following situations occur:
•	One primary condition, or
•	Three or less secondary conditions
The suitability map shown here was derived from that process of elimination. Areas deemed unsuitable for development may be considered suitable for inclusion in the greenspace system.
Legend
I Not Suitable
Suitable only with.. Mitigation □ Suitable
2000'	4000' NORTH
DEVELOPMENT SUITABILITY
Ecalegical' Analysis 59
Based on. information presented in the previous sections, the 606 Studio has defined three design themes that together summarize the unique character of Norco. These themes are the "Rural Town", the "Spirit of Place" and the "Equestrian Community", Each theme represents the community concerns for greenspace and the importance of enhancing Norco's present character. The design themes are composed of visual elements to establish consistency of concept and their image in development of the greenspace system. In the design standards for the greenspace system the design themes and element will act as guides.
The Rural Town
A rural town can best be characterised as a small community in a country setting that appreciates the physical as well as the symbolic experience of its natural features. Residents share the enjoyment of rural openness and freedom as well as small town amenities. The city's administrators must continue to define the community’s character and support this image as development occurs.
Greenspace for Norco 60
Design Themes
Section VIII
Spirit of Place
The Spirit of Place refers to the awareness of and relationship with the surrounding natural landscape that defines and supports a community's character. Three main features that define Norco's landscape are the hills, the Santa Ana River and Lake Norconian. Residents share the celebration of the natural landscape by focusing attention on these features. Elements of the natural landscape can be echoed throughout the built environment. Together, they embody the spirit of place.
Equestrian Community
The equestrian community theme acknowledges and enhances the existing equestrian trail system, primarily through the improvement and expansion of trails and related facilities. This expands opportunities for residents to travel freely on foot or horseback through local and regional landscapes, such as the hills and the river. It also offers spontaneous outdoors serializing along the trails. The equestrian theme can also be reflected in design features.
Design Tfe e me s 61
Design Elements
liach theme is characterized by certain specific elements that will enhance the visual quality and meaning of the greenspace system. Many of the following elements already exist in Norco in some form. The intent is to give these existing elements form and link them together in a systematic way, thus enhancing the utility and aesthetic value of the town and its landscape character.
The Rural Town
Commercial Areas
The main commercial strips of the town are located along Hamner Avenue and Sixth Street. Each reflects a different quality. Sixth Street provides the opportunity to develop a sense of continuity and tradition, while Hamner Avenue encourages a more contemporary character. Although each area will continue to have a somewhat different character, maintaining unity throughout is important. This can be accomplished by repeated forms, use of materials, street furniture, signage and quality plantings.
Community Network
Utilization of Norco's historic sites may encourage greater social interaction with the intention of fostering the community’s appreciation.
Connections
Visual connections should establish continuity within the park system and the town as a whole. Park design guidelines will help establish this visual consistency.
Sixth Street and Hamner Avenue act as linear connecting elements in the commercial areas. These and other connections will eventually tie into a central green that would provide a focal core for the town. As the central green develops, it will provide a heart for Norco as well as a circulation hub, accommodating automobiles as well as equestrian, pedestrian and bicycle circulation and maybe even a few horse carriages. These routes will become part of the citywide trail system. Regional connections will allow equestrian, pedestrian and bicycling circulation across and along the Santa Ana River.
Natural Features
Natural features such as Beacon Hill, the Norco hills, and the Santa Ana River are essential to the rural town character and can be enhanced if view corridors and trail connections are utilized more effectively.
Site Amenities
Amenities such as benches, signage and sculpture, should reflect the rural character and concern of the community.
History
The community's appreciation for historic sites can be reflected in places such as the Community Center, the former Lake Norconian Resort, and other historic landmarks.
Greenspace for Norco
62
he Spirit of Place
Landforms
The existing landforms of the local hills and river provide much of Norco’s natural character.
Highlighting these landforms reinforces the relationship with place and increases the community's appreciation of its natural settings.
Visual Connections
Maintain the local and regional views to the major landscape and historic features.
Vegetation and Wildlife
Enhancing wildlife habitat and encouraging native plantings throughout the town can support the sense of place while promoting an ecologially sound environment.
Site Amenities
Site amenities and furnishings should reflect the forms and materials (such as granite boulders) of these natural features. Such amenities could be repeated throughout the park system and within the town's commercial areas to establish continuity among design features.
Commercial Areas
ae commercial areas provide a great opportunity to reinforce the town's character through appropriate form and imagery and through a high visual exposure to the landscape.
The Equestrian Community
Visual Connections
Identifying and implementing areas for visual enhancement with the use of plantings or equestrain-related facilities can reinforce the city's rural character.
A visual equestrian identity may occur along the 1-15 freeway and Hamner Avenue. Particular areas for visual quality enhancement include the 1-15 freeway to the 6th Street Exit, the 3rd Street and Hamner
intersection, the 6th Street and Ingalls Park entry, and Hamner Avenue and River Trails Park entry. Enhancement by.planting should include the use of native species. ,
The Trail System
The trail system is a principal component knitting together the city and its design features. The system has potential to embody the town's rural character and become a unique symbol of Norco. It should be safe and adequately maintained for use. Equestrian trails are proposed to link together the central green park, the Sixth Street area, Ingalls Park, warm-up arenas, the river, the hills and other greenspace corridors. Regional connections should include linkages to the Temescal Wash, Lake Mathews, National Trail 100, Prado Regional Park and trail access to River Trails Park.
Natural Features
The settings that best enhance the equestrian
community theme are the natural areas, such as Beacon Hill, the Santa Ana River and the Norco Hills. Regional features such as Prado Regional Park and the Lake Mathews are also of value.
Site Facilities
Warm-up arenas, equestrian-related services, show arenas, composting facilities and rest stops throughout the community and its park system will help accommodate the demand.
Site Amenities
Hitching posts located at various points along trails should provide shelter from the sun, together with watering-troughs at major facilities.
Programs
Promoting equestrian-oriented programs at Riverside Community College and existing public schools, as well as through the parks department, will reinforce the equestrian community character.
Design Themes 63
The Trail System:
An Interconnecting Matrix
The trail system will provide circulation for pedestrian, equestrian and bicycle use. This will accommodate the community's need for various modes of transportation and reduce conflicts between them. The system includes five types of trails: a central corridor; primary, secondary, tertiary trails; drainage ways and natural trails.
The trail system heirarchy organizes the community's circulation needs into a coherent pattern of movement which will minimize conflicts between pedestrians and equestrians. This system defines each trail according to its traffic volume, function and level of enhancement as being primary, secondary or tertiary. The trail system also utilizes existing drainage ways as to integrating elements. A brief explanation of the trail types follows. Central Corridor
The primary role of central corridor circulation is to reinforce Norco's desire to retain its character in a increasingly urban region. Creating a more pedestrian-oriented environment will invite the community as well as vistors to share the Norco experience. Through appropriate planning and design within the central corridor context, Norco’s commercial circulation system will support the town's unique character. Sixth Street and Hamner Avenue are the primary' corridors for developing this rural town atmosphere.
Primary Trails
The primary trail system includes the major circulation routes which carry the bulk of traffic volume. This system will integrate pedestrian, equestrian and bicycle circulation within the town and minimize conflict through trail location and planting.. The primary trails will connect major features throughout community, including Riverside Community College, the Civic Center/Business Park, Norco Hills, the Santa Ana River, and the other community facilities (schools and parks).
It is important that surfacing and planting of these trails be carefully designed and well maintained.
Secondary Trails
Secondary trails connect to the primary and centra: corridor and to other features. They will be somewhat less intensively landscaped and maintained, as they carry moderate volumes of pedestrian and equestrian circulation.	: '
Tertiary Trails
Since the tertiary trails carry only a small volume of traffic, surfacing and planting will be minimal, with greater landscape enhancement occurring during the later stages of greenspace planning.
Drainageways as Greenspace Corridors
Drainage channels provide an already existing network of interconnections. By allowing access, these potential greenspace corridors can easily be incorporated into the trail system. Some locations may require restoration to elevate aesthetic and ecological qualities of the greenspace system. Integration of the drainage channels will involve some surfacing and planting treatment as well as addtional trail safety measures. This also provides the possibility to incorporate retention ponds to help decrease urban runoff and enhance wildlife habitat within the corridor.
Natural Trails
Natural trails are located away from the surface streets, generally on the edge of the town. These trails are important in enhancing rural atmosphere because they give opportunities to experience open spaces. They can provide linkage to the regional trail system as well as local landscape features such as the Norco hills, the Santa Ana River and possibly Lake Norconian. These trails will accommodate hikers and equestrians, and in some situations, bicycles. Rest stops for pedestrians and equestrians will also be provided at intervals along the trail natural trails.
Greenspace for Norco
64
Legend
Central Corridor Sg| Primary Trail
S” TRAIL SYSTEM
Green space for Norco
CALIFORNIA STATE POLYTECHNIC UNIVERSITY POMONA	O
0S
PARKS * RECSEATtOh uCPARTMENT
GRADUATE STUDIES IN LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE	D 10W 2DOT	40W	«MCT NORTH
Design Themes 65
Developing Norco's greenspace system will require a sequence of decisions to be made over a period of years or, perhaps, decades. For each stage of the
implementation process, a set of key decisions is presented here in relation to the time when they must be made and including, in most cases, the 606 Studio's recommended course of action. In order to lend clarity to the overall sequence, decisions are defined in a matrix format. The subjects addressed include landscape features, existing parks, proposed parks, and trail system. The four greenspace stages are presented in plan form on the following pages.
Stage One: Immediate Decisions
Within this and the following three sections, a brief discussion is presented for only the key decisions required in the greenspace implementation process. Several critical decisions are impending on the following concerns.
The Central Green
Inasmuch as the proposed Civic Center/business park is currently in the planning stages, critical decisions must be made immediately. First, an arrangement must be worked out through which
greenspace may be secured within the Civic Center complex. The acquisition of such a central space is highly recommended by the 606 Studio. (Please refer to the Section X, Planning and Design Recommendations, for greater detail.)
In addition to the creation of a central greenspace, an arrangement should be pursued to secure the visual greenspace provided by the knolls. These gently rounded forms serve as a grand backdrop for the complex, visible from the Interstate 15 freeway, and accentuate Norco's image as a rural town.
The trail system joining the central park area, Beacon Hill, Riverside Community College, the Santa Ana River and any future parks can be linked into the existing system in several places. The segments of this trail system can be acquired by purchase or developer dedication.
A joint-use agreement has been arranged between the college and the City of Norco, although details have not been resolved. Discussions should include the possibility of a joint-use equestrian/animal-husbandry facility on
Greenspace for Norco
66
I
Decision Stages
the campus. Another point of discussion should be the college’s interest in the local natural areas as resources for educational programs. The rolling campus hills might be an appropriate location for a joint-use Frizbee Golf course, that was requested by one teenage resident. Possibilities should be explored for integrating campus outdoor space and circulation areas with the larger matrix of Norco's greenspace.
Norco Hills
The city should prepare and distribute a mail survey to determine the community’s willingness to pay for acquiring permanent greenspace in the hills. (Refer to Section X.) If interest seems
sufficient, a municipal bond proposition may be put to the voters for the purchase of all or a portion of the hill areas.
Areas in the hills that are unsuitable for residential development must be identified as greenspace to be secured through developer dedication. (Refer to the preliminary suitability analysis in Section VII and the acquisition strategy in Section X.) Trail easements should be a part of any developer agreement. Erosion control measures should be established on slopes along trails in critical areas. Private landholders in the hills, like Wyle Laboratories should be encouraged to protect and enhance wildlife habitat on their properties. Information packets on programs developed by the National Institute for Urban Wildlife should be distributed.
Section IX
Santa Ana River
The existing restrictions on the use of Rivertrails Park by anyone other than equestrians, and the sign announcing them, should be reconsidered. The policy and sign are offensive and probably do
little to deter the problems they were aimed at. The best deterrent to antisocial behavior in the riverbed is community surveillance. Rather than limiting the number of people who can use the riverbed, invite more in. A"Riverbed Watch" policy (similar to "Neighborhood Watch") with improved access for community members would discourage crime in this area.
The establishment of additional access points to the river on the west side of town should be considered as soon as possible. Concurrently with the establishing of a trail along the bluffs, safety features, such as fencing and slope stabilization, will be needed in critical areas.
Trail System
Of immediate concern is the completion of linkages among elements of the existing trail system and Norco's significant landscape features. Bicycle lanes should be considered on Sixth Street
and other streets with primary trails.
Pedestrian/equestrian crossings must be established across major traffic routes and the Santa Ana River, where possible. Completion of the Norco segment of the Santa Ana River Trail should begin as soon as possible after trail planning consultants have presented their plan. The establishment of properly designed trails in the hills is still another priority. Please refer to the matrix for other details.
Decision Stages 67
Existing Parks
Appearance and function of the existing parks can be improved considerably by establishing and following design guidelines. Such guidelines should be applicable to the upgrading of existing
parks as well as to design of new parks. Specific recommendations are included in Section V under Existing Parks and Park Inventory Conclusions. The addition of court recreational amenities should be considered for Snipes Park.
Proposed Parks
The proposed parks highlighted on the Stage One Greenspace plan view and detailed on the matrix include neighborhood (NP), specialty (SP), and horsemens parks (HP). A L7 acre park
NP-3, is scheduled to be designed and built by the developer of the surrounding proposed tract. With a residential development and annexation proposed in "the bluffs" area, NP-4 is suggested as a high priority, considering the area's separation from the central body of the town. An ideal location would be property with river access and the size should be at least two to five acres. Considering the interest in carriage driving in this area, a larger area might be highly desirable in order to serve that group.
A high priority specialty park for land acquisition is SP-2, at the location popularly known as Pedley Field. As much of this land as possible should be acquired, especially the area of low hillocks near the main drainage. The drainage itself may be a part of a developer dedication. SP-4 should be obtained through a development aqreement as a less-than-fee acquisition, unless the community decides to purchase all of the area's developable lands. Inasmuch as the city owns the land, design work for the seven acres at SP-3 can commence. Please refer to Section X, Ingalls Plaza, for greater detail.
I
In order to provide riverside equestrian access and social spaces for the currently underserved west side of town, land for the horsemens park, HP-1 should be acquired as soon as possible. In that some of this property is state-owned, it may be possible to work out some kind of arrangement for part of the acquisition. Severe erosion is evident in the drainage gully that runs from Shadow Canyon toward the river here. Slope stabilization, revegetation and restoration of natural character should be carried out as soon as possible in this gully whose banks may someday hold shaded picnic tables. Installation of amenities for equestrians and other trail users should commence in the HP-3 area of Rivertrails Park.
Development of commercial areas may be accompanied by dedication of pocket parks in those areas. A particularly desirable area for a park of this type would be along Sixth Street, at P-1 or another location. A park of this type would serve the customers of the local businesses and their employees. It would provide shaded hitching facilities, water and benches for enjoying a cool sarsaparilla on a hot afternoon.
Greenspace for Norco 68
Legend
Park. System
3R STAGE 1 - IMMEDIATE DECISIONS
Greenspace for Norco
PARKS * RECREATION bepARTMENT
CAUPORNIA STATE TOLWECHNIC UNIVERSITY POMONA
GRADUATE STUDIES IN LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURB

0 icmr aw	««r	flow north
Decision 5 f« g
Stage Two
The Central Green
If possible, the knolls property should be acquired or made available for public use by the Navy. This offers an ideal site for a large amphitheater which could serve community needs and might generate
revenue. Amphitheater construction would commence as soon as land became available.
A cooperative agreement should be sought between the city and the Navy to establish a public recreation area or the western side of Lake Norconian with trail access. Lake fishing and fly lying can be a part of this program. Trail linkage should be completed between Riverside Community College and a proposed trail along the north drainage channel. Joint equestrian facilities for town and college use should be considered.
The Hills
Primary ridges, biologically diverse moist areas and other land s considered unsuitable for development should be dedicated as greenspace. Buffering lands should be acquired around the Mountain
Park (SP-4). Wildlife corridors should be established through new residential developments by developer dedication.
Santa Ana River
Establish more multiple-use access points to the river. Consideration should be given to attracting appropriate development on sonve of the bluff-top lands within the commercial zone along
Hamner Avenue. A high-quality restaurant or "River Inn" could provide additional surveillance of the river area, as well as providing a service for park users.
Trail System
Trails with safety barriers along the drainage channels become important linkages. Storm water retention and treatment ponds, with associated wildlife habitat, should be added at strategic
locations along the'channels. Pedestrian surfacing will be needed on specified trails. Regional trail connections link the eastern hills to the river and Lake Mathews area. (Refer to Section X.) A policy decision must be reached regarding mountain bike access to trails through the hills. This is of particular consideration for regional trail links. Limited mountain bike access should be allowed, emphasizing specific rules of trail etiquette. Refer to the matrix for other recommendations.
Existing Parks
Redesign of several existing parks should be undertaken with the help of design professionals. A new community center located at an expanded and redesigned Parmenter Park should be considered to
serve the concentration of young people in that area. Teen and pre-teen facilities would be highlighted there. The city should consider selling the Clarks Field property and relocating its functions to a more appropriate location. SP-1 is an alternative site for ball fields. NP-1 would serve the neighborhood recreational needs.
Proposed Parks
A neighborhood park, NP-1, is suggested for consideration to fill the needs of that area. Located along a potential greenway corridor, this location has great potential as a neighborhood natural area.
Construction of a warm-up arena at HP-1, within Rivertrails Park may be considered at this time. The provision of hitching facilities and water is desirable at the Mountain Park (SP-4). It may be possible to work out

Greenspace for Norco 70
Trail System
aliotial Trail 100
Legend Park System
•	Community Park	
o	Neighborhood Park	
	Specialty Park	Of
	Horsemen s Park	eo
	Regional Park	
	(Entry Point)	
bJ	Rest stop	
Primary Trail
Secundary Trail wZ Pedestrian Surfacing Secondary Trail w/o Pedestrian Surfacing Greenway Corridor
Natural Trail
3® STAGE 2
Greenspace for Norco
CAlJpOfiMl* STATE POLYTECHNIC UNIVERSITY POMONA	W
parks * recreation department
GRADUATE STUDIES IN LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
17N
0 HHKT 3000*	TOW	fiOMT NORTH
Decision Stages 71
an arrangement with Wyle Laboratories to tap into the aquifer under its property. The water could then be pumped to the Mountain Park, by solar, wind or manual pumping mechanisms.
Develop SP-2. (Pedley Field) This park can serve a variety of functions: for sunset viewing of silhouetted Beacon Hill from the hill tops (as it is now used); as a natural setting for an adventure-style playground -thrilling but safe slides can be built right into the hillsides, here; the uplands as a natural area for low intensity family recreation and wildlife observation; the flatter lands below may be used for unstructured field play areas, picnic grounds and environmental play yards for tots. (The latter are environments in which children are allowed to discover natural processes through play with water, sand, plants and other natural elements.) Consideration should be given to acquiring land for SP-1, adjacent to Norco High School. A sports complex is recommended here. Such a use might complement facilities at the high school and a joint-use agreement may be worthy of consideration.
Stage Three
The Central Green	v
Public access to Lake iSTorconian may eventually be expanded to include the remainder of its setting and the casino club house may be made available for community social events. A direct trail
link would be desirable between the Civic Center and the lake. Educational and interpretive exhibits might be developed by RCC along central green trails.
The Hills
Nodes of wildlife habitat can be created through restoration and enhancement of the indigenous vegetation. A hills trail patrol should be established with paid city personnel or volunteers.
The River
A formal trail patrol may be needed to police the river.
Trail System
The system should be expanded to include as many greenway corridors as possible. Linear park easements are should be acquired alongside them. Portions of the concrete channels can be
redesigned to allow a more natural character. A trail patrol might be instituted. Wildlife habitat along the channels can be enhanced through revegetation with native plants. Revegetation might improve corridor habitats in the hills, as well.
A pedestrian/equestrian overpass is constructed to avoid Hamner Avenue traffic. Pocket parks are developed in commercial areas. Refer to the matrix for other recommendations.
Existing Parks
Consideration should be given to relocating the Ted Brooks warm-up arena to H-l. This park might then be redesigned to better function as a neighborhood park. Redesign recommendations may be considered for the Community Recreation Center. Additional amenities may be considered for Wayne Makin Park. Priority should be given to plantings for shade and buffering effects. Picnic facilities would be a second consideration. Proposed Parks
Proposed parks would be developed including the sports complex at SP-1, the pocket park along Sixth Street, P-1 and horsemens parks, HP-1 and 3. Linear park easements may be acquired for greenway corridors.
Greenspace for Norco
72
CAUFQANIA STATE POLYTECHNIC UNWEMITY POMONA	a
CHADUATS STUDIES IN LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
fflOtr NORTH
Decision Stages 73
Stage Four: Ideal Greenspace
The Central Green
	In the ideal greenspace system, the city	
	would acquire the Naval property	
	including Lake Norconian and the	
	surrounding buildings. The setting and	
	buildings offer an attractive location for a	
revenue-generating conference center. Landscape enhancements would be added along the trail between the lake and Civic Center.
The Hills
Ideally, secondary ridges and large roadless areas will be conserved in the hills. Restoration and management of native ecosystems will support their persistence. Areas of the hills are
designated as urban wildlife sanctuaries.
Santa Ana River
Restoration of native vegetation would be accomplished on a regional basis.
Proposed Parks
The mountain park, SP-4 would be fully developed as a back-country facility. Refer to Section XIII for details. Neighborhood parks of two or more acres would developed at NP=2'and 5. A horsemens ft H^zrocket parks along
Hamner Avenue would bVrafiy developed. Linear parks would work symbiotically with/ the fully restored greenway corridors.
Additionally, recommendatioAs for enhancing wildlife habitat and water quality are included along with animal waste alternatives in Section XHI.
Trail System
Maximum landscape enhancement would be implemented along all trails including plantings at intersection nodes of central corridors. All drainage channels would be restored as green-way corridors.
Existing Parks
Redesign and landscape enhancement would be completed at all parks.
Greenspace for Norco
74
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
]
1
1
J
1
J
1
J
1
1
1
I
1
1
?
1
1
Legend
liwnal Trail 100
5F- STAGE 4 - IDEAL GREENSPACE
Greenspace for Norco
CALITORNtA STATE POLYTECHNIC UNIVERSITY POMONA
PARKS A RECREATION DEPARTMENT
GRADUATE STWfcS IN LANDSCAPE ARCI IfTECTVKI;
IZH
0 I0W 20OT	«K»’	HXXT NORTH
Decision Stages' 75
Greenspace Stages - A General Implementation Guide
	Landscape Features	(* see Lake Norconian in Central Park)	■			Trail System	
	Norco Hills	Beacon Hill	Santa Ana River	Hamner Avenue	6th S'
Stage 1 Immediate	•	Identify sensitive areas and maintain these areas through developer dedication. •	Minimum erosion control in vulnerable areas •	Encourage wildlife enhancement on private lands ■ Determine the best method for acquiring greenspace in the hills	• Secure visual open space	•	Preserve river's "natural state" •	Provide pedestrian access •	Establish hiking trails - Access to river basin from the east and west side of Hamner Ave. •	Safety trail amenities along bluffs	■ Establish trail ranking system - Minimum landscape enhancement	•	Give miniiriLuu landscape cnhacenment •	Schcdul maintenanc program •	Establish bike lane:
Stage 2	•	Maintain visual open space -	Conserve primary ridges -	Maintain wildlife corridors in residential areas •	Acquire land for greenspace buffer	• Establish trail system	•	Provide more access points into the river basin •	Establish trail maintenance program - Consider "River Inn1' restaurant	• Provide landscape enhancement (trees and shrubs) •Incorporate seating	•	Incorporate pedeslria paths *	Also pedestrian and equestrian rest stops - Theme trail treaLmei
Stage 3	•	Maintain the mountain park visual greenspace •	Conseve primary ridges with wider buffers ■ Develop nodes of enhanced wildlife habitat •	Establish city or volunteer patrol	• Provide rest stops for pedestrians and equestrians	• Establish city of volunteer trail patrol	•	Establish pocket park •	Establish a paving system throughout (pedestrian circulation)	* Establish pocket pad
Stage 4 Ideal	•	Maximize open space and visual open, space ■ Conserve primary and secondary ridges •	Maintain large "roadless" areas •	Maximum hillside restoration, revcgetalion and management		• Restore native vegetation (must be done on a regional basis)	•	Place planting islands •	Landscape enhancement at intersection nodes •	Maximum landscape maintenance program	• Maximum landscape enhancement at intersection nodes
	Central Park				Existing Parks
	Connections	* Lake Norconian	Riverside Community College	Civic Center/Business Park	
Stage 1 Immediate	■ Build trail system to link civic center, Beacon Hill, RCC and Santa Ana River and future parks •	Provide hitching post along trail •	Link trails to primary trail system		•	Work out details for joint-use facility agreement. Consider frisbee golf course •	Encourage the use of Norco’s natural areas for educational purposes	•	Establish "Central Green Park" - Maximum landscape enhancement •	Protect visual open space of the ’'Knolls"	•	Establish design guidelines •	Utilize design professionals or local universities 'Establish court facilitir Snipes Park •	Expand access to school
Stage 2	• Establish pedestrian and equestrian rest stops	•	Open partial access •	Establish a teen recreation or "adventure" program	•	Incorporate warm-tip arena . •	Encourage an equestrian/animal-husbandiy progam - Develop an entry statement along trail •	Link trails to drainage channel	• Extend property to include "Knolls" - Incorporate amphitheater into "Civic Center Park"	•	Utilize design professionals for park redesign - Relocate facilities at Clarks Field and sell property. •	Establish new community center facility at Parmentcr Park
Stage 3		* Give full public access to lake and clubhouse	• Incorporate educational exhibits along trail	» Establish direct trail linking civic center and Lake Norconian i.	•	Implement park upgrades in accordance with redesign •	Redesign Ted Brooks Park and relocate warm-up arena to Horsemen's Park (HP-1)
Stage 4 Ideal	«■	■ Navy no longer present	* Expand joint-use facility agreement	• Implement trail enhancement (landscape) to Lake Norconian	
Greenspace for Norco
76

Trail System (continued)
Primary	Secondary	Tertiary	Drainage Channels	Natural Trails
minimum landscape ennancemcnt ■ Establish bike lanes • Link trails to drainage corridors and landscape features (hills and river)	■ Provide minimum landscape enhancement		• No Access	•	Establish trail crossing at llamner Ave., River Rd., A Arlington ■ Establish mountain bails •	Connect to National Trail 100 •	Provide minimum access to river and hills »Implement minimum erosion control treatment
*	Incorporate pedestrian paths •	Build partial barrier treatment - Modify horse crossing (more continuous surfacing)	• Incorporate pedestrian paths and link to major features, such as parks and schools.	• Implement additional landscape enhancement	’ Minimum access •	Place safety barriers •	Incorporate storm water retention ponds •	Restore earthen channels	•	Link mountain trails to regional trails •	Restore hillside with native vegetation in areas outside of designated traits •Allow mountain bike access: yes/no?
• Implement full barrier treatment	• Place additional barriers	• Incorporate "soft” shrub barriers	•	Develop bail system fully •	Establish linear parks - Enhance wildlife habitat •	Restore portions of concrete channels (riprap and vegetation)	- Hamtier Ave. bridge overerossing • Provide shade bees (native) along bails ■ Enhance wild corridor vegetation
• Give maximum landscape enhancement	■ Give maximum landscape enhancement	* Give maximum landscpe enhancement	• Restore all drainage channels	•	Santa Ana River bridge overcrossing •	Maximize access points to river and hills •	Maximize erosion control treatment •	Maximize vegetative enhancement of wildlife corridors
Proposed Park				
Neighborhood Park	Specialty Park	Horsemen's Park	Pocket Park	Linear Park
• Neighborhood park fNP-3) lboibood park (NP-4)	•	Acquire land for Specialty park (SP-2) •	Design Specialty park (SP-3) •	For (SP-4), work out agreement with developer to acquire land, maintain trail access	•	Acquire land for Horsemen's park (HP-1) •	Develop Horsemen's park (HP-3) •	Provide erosion control	• Park dedication	■»
• Neighborhood park (NP-1)	•	Develop Specialty park (SP-2, SP-3) •	Acquire land for Specialty park (SP-1) ■ Provide water and hitching post for Specialty park (SP-4)	•	Warm-up arena for Horsemen's park (HP-1) •	Consider amphitheater (HP-3)		
	■ Develop Specially park (SP-1)	•	Develop Horsemen’s park (HP-1) •	Develop all Horsemen's park (HP-3)	• Develop pocket park along 6th St.	•	Acquire easement •	Minimum landscape treatment •	Establish trail patrol
• Neighborhood park (NP-2)	• Develop Specialty Park (SP-4)	• Acquire land for Horsemen's park (HP-2) and start development process	• Develop pocket parks along Hamner Ave.	•	Develop Linear parks (LP-4, LP-5) fully •	Develop remainder of Linear parks
Decision Stages 77
y/'’
THE CENTRAL GREEN
Grcenspace for Norco 78
Planning and Design Recommendations
CIVIC/BUSINESS PARK DESIGN CONCEPT
Section X
This section contains specific recommendations
concerning form and content of key components of the greenspace system proposed in Section IX. In the larger context of the whole system, these might be considered as design details. It is such details that can realize the full potential of the system.
The Central Green
The central green forms the interior hub of the greenspace system. Its central location provides a nucleus for the community trail system and gives the town a vital central focus that combines private and public uses of the land. It
also allows for the retention of areas of open greenspace. Elements included within the central green are: the proposed city Civic Center/business park with a proposed urban greenspace plaza and amphitheater, the Riverside Community College campus and Lake Norconian. A trail network binds these elements together and connects them via trail easements to: Sixth Street, a vista rest stop at the crest of Beacon Hill and through Wayne Makin Park to the horsemens park, H-l, and the Santa Ana River. .
A Central Plaza
An arrangement must be worked out through which greenspace may be secured within the Civic Center complex. Greenspace within the complex will add vitality to the business environment. It will be used by the customers and employees of the businesses surrounding the greenspace and provide an additional attractant to draw people into the business district.
Planning and Design Recommendations 79
reenspace for Norco
Greenspace will enhance the environmental image of the central business core. Developer dedication of land for greenspace in the center will yield a high rate of return on the investment.
The site design suggested for the complex incorporates greenspace as an integral component of the design, a central plaza reinforcing the theme of the Rural Town. Its form, abstracted from the Santa Ana River, meanders through the complex, bringing the Spirit of Place into the town center. Near Civic Center, the river pours life into a grand allee that offers a view corridor from Hamner Avenue, directly up to the knolls.
Il 'A'
Vehicular------
Entry
Planning and Design Recommendations 81
The Hills
Acquiring the Greenspace
The resolve of the community to maintain greenspace in the hills should be polled, hate in the focused interview process, a question was added to the poll asking residents how much their household would be willing to contribute
annually toward the preserving open space in the hills. Inasmuch as only a few citizens were queried on that issue, their answers are not included in the Greenspace Demands and Trends discussion; however, the few responses received were strongly positive. Figures offered ranged from $200 to more than $1000 per year. These figures, high compared with responses to similar questions asked in other parts of the country, indicate the possibility of a greater community sentiment in Norco for conserving the natural landscape.
The city should prepare and distribute a mail survey to determine the community's actual commitment to acquiring permanent greenspace in the hills. If interest seems sufficient, a municipal bo nd proposition might be put to the voters. The tax base provided by planned commercial developments in the city may provide the city with greater future revenues to repay such an obligation.
Any development in the hills w ill require the dedication of critical greenspace for for wildlife and human corridors. The areas recommended for developer dedication are shown in the greenspace aquisition strategy which is based on the suitability model in Section VII. In addition to the critical wildlife habitats of the drainage corridors, it will be necessary to conserve large areas of the open shrublands to allow for the continuance of their special wild inhabitants.
Legend
Dedicated as Natural Reserve
I Dedicated as I Conservation Easement
I Additional Conssvalion Easement
H Third Priority

ZS
0	2Gl)0r	4000- NORTH
ACQUISITION STRATEGY
Greenspace for Norco
82
Some of this conserved habitat will be on the rocklands of the radio facility peak, where slope and soil conditions combine to render the land unsuitable for development. [Perhaps a contest among the local students might find a name for this peak.] Ideally, any development will conserve several large shrubland patches of varying slope and aspect and connect them with corridors. Residents of the proposed developments will be rewarded with the sweet song of meadowland birds-
In addition to developer dedication, the community may decide to purchase additional greenspace. The order of priority for such purchases is indicated on the stradegy diagram The basic strategy is to conserve an increasingly larger buffer area around the mountain park with its bisecting regional trail. The ideal result would conserve a large roadless area for the benefit and attraction of human and wildlife residents.
Restoration and Management
The quality of the hills greenspace can be improved by long-term restoration and management. Reintroduction of native perennial bunch grasses would be a worthy challenge for certain areas. This might be pursued with the assistence of local educators and volunteer crews. Eroded drainage corridors would benefit from restorative stabilization with their natural plant cover. Management of shrub and grassland communities can facilitate their long-term viability. Where these communities interface with residential communities, fire management measures will preclude serious problems. Selective thinning and pruning of the shrubs can be accomplished in transition zones near residences, leaving much of the natural beauty of the land intact. In some fire-prone plant species, the newer vegetation holds lower concentrations of voladile oils. Timely prunings can reduce the potential for spontaneous combustion. Prescribed burning can avert problems as well as regenerate both shrub and grassland
communities.
For grassland communities an additonal alternative to prescibed burning is managed grazing. Sheep can be brought in to graze areas at a time when exotic annual species are setting seed, that is the sheep do the weeding. They are never permitted to remain in or return to a revegetated area more than that area can sustain.
Through proper management, the hills can become a living museum for indigenous species.
I

Planning and Design Recommendations 83
The Mountain Park
With a regional trail bisecting its axis, the mountain park can provide an entry statement for trail travelers coming into Norco. The natural landscape is featured here with judicious additons of shade-giving oaks. Other ammenities include, in order of priority: shaded hitching posts; water pumped by solar, wind or hand-powered pumps (possibly from a source on Wyle Laboratory property); and rustic picnic tables. These tables and seats might be huge flattish granite boulders to blend organically with their environment. An example of seats done this way can be seen at the former Rocky Hills Hideaway. (Refer to Regional Corridors in this section.)
As Norconians enter the park from the northwest canyon, the view of the prominent peaks of La Sierra might be framed by Engleman or Coast Live Oaks. The opposite entry might receive a similar treatment. The open feel of the landscape should be retained. The valley bottom can become a carpet of Purple Needle Grass,
Stipa pulchra and other perennial native grasses. Drifts of oaks may be added in a few locations. Hitching and picnic facilities will be located under these. All landscape plantings must be sustainable without suplemental irrigation, once established.
This park may be maintained as a strictly day-use park or might be opened up to a few back country-style campsites for overnight use by regional trail travelers. A pack-it-in-pack-it-out policy should be promoted. Periodic pick-up by paid or volunteer crews will undoutably be necessary, as well.
Greenspace for Norco
84
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
a
3
3
3
3
3
Rest Stops
A major component of the greenspace system is the trail network. The trails and their facilities such as rest stops should convey the town's emphasis on maintaining its rural character. Rest stops located at various points along the trails will provide relaxing space for the equestrian traveler as well as those on foot. Rest stops located in the Norco hills, near the Santa Ana River, top of Beacon Hill and near Riverside Community College/Lake Norconian area, offer the traveler the opportunity to enjoy the scenic value of the landscape with possibilities for greater social interaction. Rest stops should incorporate amenities such as shelter from the heat, seating, hi tching posts and potable water at some locations, all in an effort to provide a comfortable environment for the traveler.
Wildlife Sanctuaries
Private landholders can demonstrate their commitment to maintaining a healthy wildlife community by creating sanctuaries on their lands. Wyle Laboratories is particularly encouraged to consider a commitment to habitat conservation. The National Institute for Urban Wildlife manages The Urban Wildlife Sanctuary Program which certifies, publicly recognizes and provides management information and other benefits for private land holders who allow wildlife sanctuaries on their property. For more information, contact:
Urban Wildlife Sanctuary System of the National Institute for Urban Wildlife 10921 Trotting Ridge Way Columbia, MD 21044	(301) 596-3311
Planning and Design Recommendations 85
Sixth Street
Because of its equestrian commercial and community emphasis, design for Sixth Street should enhance the existing business environment as well as allowing for future growth. Landscape theme plantings, store-front design, equestrian circulation, and traffic slowing elements, for example, can reinforce the equestrian community theme of Norco, including its focal point, the Ingalls Park Plaza at the east end of Sixth Street. Design improvements can also accommodate a growing recreational activity, the use of horse-drawn carriages and pony carts.
Information, including minimum and maximum requirements for trail width, turning radius, escape routes and other design considerations for horse-drawn-
carriage and pony-cart trails, was provided by David and Coleen Politte, owners of Classic Horse-drawn Carriages in addition to other Norco citizens involved in the Heels and Wheels Club. Coincidentally, Riverside County is currently developing design guidelines for horse-drawn-carriage trails.
Vehicles and pedestrians can infringe upon or enhance the business environment. Adding carriage trails requires sensitive planning and broad cooperation among business owners and community groups in order to produce optimal benefit. Sixth Street is experiencing dramatic changes because of the 1-15 freeway completion in April 1989. As motorists enter and exit the freeway, there is a temptation to exceed speed limits along the wide, straight thoroughfare that is the existing image of Sixth Street. Elimination of some traffic lanes along with
NORTH
SIXTH STREET CIRCULATION CONCEPT
o
Cteenspace for Norc
86
strategically placed stop signs and, perhaps, a traffic signal could significantly reduce traffic speed, thereby creating a more hospitable community environment for the patrons of local businesses. Planted median strips can reduce the confusion and danger posed by cars turning across traffic at every business entrance.
The plan view illustrates one circulation possibility: 12 foot wide vehicle lanes with turning lanes set into median strips; pedestrian circulation on both sides of the street; a 20 foot wide carriage and horse trail on the soutn side of the street; and a 10 foot wide bicycle trail on the north side of the street with barriers . The 20 foot width is recommended for the carriage/horse trail in order to allow horse riders and carriages going in both directions to pass each other as well as to allow necessary carriage turn-around space. During Western Week, Fourth of July and other festivals. Sixth Street might be closed in order to allow for hay rides and other equestrian activities related to Ingalls Park at the culmination of the street.
A landscaped pedestrian path on both sides of the street could provide benches and pooling areas for business patrons and other travelers along Sixth Street. Masses of shrubs might undulate along the edges of the equestrian trails. Tree canopies offer cooling shade while shrub Nantings strengthen the barrier between auto traffic,
edestrians and equestrians establishing a feeling of greater security for animals and people.
The following landscape plant palette, based on the "Spirit of Place" theme emphasizes water-conserving local native plants: Street trees: Platanus racemosa
(Western Sycamore); Quercus engelmannii (Mesa Oak) and Quercus agrifolia (Coast Live Oak); Shrubs: Rhamnus californica 'Eve Case" (Coffeeberry), Prunus illicifolia (Holly Leaf Cherry), Mahonia aquifolium 'Golden Abundance' (Oregon Grape-although this is not a local native, its parent species is native to Northern California); Ground Covers: Baccharis pilularis (Coyote Brush), Iva hayesiana (Hayes Iva).
Additionally, granite boulders from the local hills can provide indigenous sculpture where strategically placed in the landscape. These can be partially submerged into the ground for a natural appearance. Smaller rocks can be used as a ground cover, applied in meandering patterns that mimic the flow of the nearby river.
Inasmuch as Sixth Street is currently lined with immature Eucalyptus species, a successional approach can be used to gradually transform the landscape. Planting can begin with dense drifts of fastgrowing Sycamores that will be thinned out later as the slower growing oaks mature. These trees are compatible with the existing Eucalyptus in their horticultural requirements.
The Holly Leaf Cherry and Coffeeberry are good choices for dividing the horse and carriage trails from vehicular traffic. These may be alternated rhythmically with other shrubs in a hedgerow of varying height and width for a pleasant undulating character. Because a dense but penetrable barrier better serves equestrians in case of emergency than an impenetrable one, escape routes for frightened horses must always be integrated into the design of city trails. In residential areas, driveways normally allow for these escape routes.

Planning and Design Recommendations 87
Ingalls Plaza
A seven-acre site located north of Ingalls Park offers a ready opportunity to develop an outdoor spaces for cultural events, community celebrations and recreational activities, and settings for informal community interaction. This space would accommodate special events such as the annual Valley Days Fair and future farmers markets or sales by local craft vendors.
Site amenities might include water features, sculptures and an intimate (usable) environment for people. The plaza would function as a linking element between Ingalls Park (high-intensity use) and a neighborhood-park (low-intensity use) environment and would also act as a focal point at the eastern end of 6th Street.
Ruck Uuiubp -
k, -- /$&&&&
0	IW	3W
INGALLS PI.AZA
INGALLS PARK
Creenspace for Norco
88
Trail Overpass
People and horses need crossings over water and traffic that allow them refuge from fast moving automobile traffic. Horses are even more sensitive to vehicular distractions than are people. Overcrossings can be extremely trying to horses when they can see the movement of traffic or water below them. Crossings should be'designed with this consideration in mind.
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
Amphitheater
An outdoor amphitheater offers a setting for a broad range of community functions as well as opportunities to explore and enhance awareness of the arts. Attractions may include the once annual blue-grass festival as well as the home for future theater groups. Appropriate planning and design of an outdoor amphitheater can reinforce the town's rural character. Such facilities should be incorporated into the natural landforms to establish this natural character. These facilities are revenue generating opportunities to assist in offsetting expenses for management and maintenance of greenspace.






Planning and
Design
Recommendations
89
Trail Access
Pedestrian Surfacing
While measures must be implemented to prevent offroad vehicle (ORV) access to recreational trails, many barrier designs fail to allow access for people with physical limitations who travel in wheel chairs and with other aids.
One suggestion for a barrier design was described verbally over the telephone to design team members by Nancy Wallrich of the Sierra Club R.O.A.D.
(Recreational Outdoor Accessibility for the Disabled) Committee. She described a gate installed on a trail in the Nicholas Flat area of Leo Carillo State Beach. This passage was designed by Sierra Club member Lou Levy and was described by Mrs. Wallrich as being S-shaped in plan view. Passers-through must negotiate a turn that is just wide enough for wheelchair passage yet too narrow to accommodate the turning radius of an ORV. The illustration is an interpretation of that concept which can be inexpensively installed at access points to all natural area trails.
— Q
A pedestrian alternative to the decomposed granite and dirt equestrian trails can be provided in Norco, while maintaining the rural atmosphere effected by the absence of concrete sidewalks. One such surface treatment goes by the trade name of Eco 550. This material is composed of polymers which are applied to roughened native soil, mixed in and allowed to harden. The composition can be varied by including portland cement, colorings and other additives, depending on the desired effect.
The resultant surface is smooth enough to accommodate strollers and wheelchairs. Depending upon the additives, the surface can offer significant shock absorbancy, important to joggers and walkers, similar to that effected by asphalt paving. Without the addition of colorings, the surface will appear the color of the native soil when it is wet.
Eco 550 and other products are available from:
American Soil Technology Corporation
15581 Product Lane, C-13
Huntington Beach, California 92649
(714) 898-4171
Greenspace for Norco 90
Drainageways as Greenspace Corridors
In many cases, concrete drainage channels force blatant intrusions into the landscape. While providing adequate flood control protection, they also neglect many opportunities for recreational, educational, ecological and aesthetic benefits as well as for social interaction. As the amount of available greenspace decreases, cities are beginning to recognize possibilities for better utilizing drainageways.
One often thinks of drainage channels as barriers, dividing the city into segments, than as connecting elements linking special features such as parks, schools and commercial areas. Recreational opportunity along the drainageways would incorporate linear parks where wider easements could be obtained. Restoration, utilizing vegetation and riprap (a soft-lined channel concept) would create a more aesthetically and ecologically suitable environment. Restoration techniques, can themselves create wildlife habitat and corridors. Retention ponds would attempt to control non-point source pollution carried in runoff and at the same time help to reduce the
volume of runoff.
Planning and Design Re
comm endations
91
The planning, design and management of greenspace can do much to strengthen ecological relationships between humans and our environment. It is in these spaces that ecological support processes must actively occur. Working with rather than against natural systems will result in economic benefits in addition to intellectual stimulation and emotional satisfaction. Regional Corridors
Much of Norco's character is drawn from its natural areas. Vitality is breathed into the community by the buzzings and stirrings of the creatures of the land. Indeed, as we humans grow in our understanding of ecological relationships, we begin to realize that our human existence is inextricably intertwined with and dependant upon innumerable other life forms and physical processes. Aside from the fact that we may just enjoy knowing they are present, our wild neighbors' sustainability means our own.
Southern California's natural environment has given life to myriad human communities. Meanwhile our development patterns have fragmented communities of plants and animals with grave consequences. Now, as that environment dwindles to the brink of destruction, humans can breath life back into the ailing fragments.
In Norco's immediate region, there exists a golden opportunity to set in place a structure to greatly bolster the viability of existing wildlife habitat islands. The process involves:
• Conserving habitat islands that are Currently unprotected. This includes Norco's hills, the Pedley Hills, the Jurupa Mountains and whatever may be conserved in the Lake Mathews area. With the exception of a part of the Jurupa Mountains, all of these lands lie within Riverside County.
•	Linking habitat islands to one another through corridors. Ideally these would be wild corridors, wide enough that a mountain lion would not feel threatened passing there. But, given that many human-built obstacles lie in the way of complete connectivity, the implementation of corridors can proceed in a step-wise fashion.
Begin with parking strips, hedgerows and underpasses clothed in the trappings of the native landscape. Linear plantings along drainage channels may be particularly effective. Connect these planted corridors with natural riparian corridors. Over time the corridors can be expanded along with complete restoration of urban drainageways, but planting the seeds for that eventuality must begin now.
•	Inviting the public to share corridors with the wild creatures. Wildlife corridors can coexist symbiotically with recreational trails. Grant funds may become available to support either or both. Providing humans with exposure to wild landscapes helps to ensure to the persistence of both.
Green1 space for Norco 92
»
Greenspace as an Ecological Support System
Section' XI
REGIONAL CORRIDORS
Close to home, the connection between Norco's hills and the Lake Mathews area may be made via the Buchannon Street (City of Riverside) overpass of the Riverside (91) Freeway. Current traffic volume is not high there and the roadside easements are wide enough for linear shrub plantings and unpaved trails. The overpass would benefit from additional features to prevent horses and wildlife from being alarmed by the freeway traffic below. At some future date the structure might be widened. Or the freeway itself may be restructured to allow a wide passage below it.
An interesting attraction alongside Buchannon where the trail would lead south out of Norco’s hills, is the granite bedecked remains of Rocky Hills Hideaway. The former owner (now dead) had intended to open a restaurant there. The site and its eclectic group of stone sculptures and seats, offer great potential as some kind of rest stop along the trail. It might become a trail camp or equestrian bed and breakfast inn.
Completing the connection between the hills and the Santa Ana River may be initiated by installing something as simple as a large diametpr culvert beneath Arlington Avenue. Better still might be one large enough to accommodate equestrians and a smaller one just for wildlife. This corridor assemblage can be expanded in time, as well.
While certain pro-active governmental agencies may be doing their best to attend to such details as corridors, their efforts might be strengthened by an outpouring of public encouragement. Trail associations (particularly equestrians) in Riverside County have become a key force in trail and greenspace planning. The vitality of trail users is needed in the planning process. It is recommended that the trail users of Norco become proactive about making their trail systems as effective as possible.
Creensptet ns an Ecological Support System 93
Animal Waste Options
Norco's animal wastes can benefit greenspace lands.
The restorative nature of composted manure applied to the land can regenerate the life of soil, which in turn promotes vegetation and wildlife habitat Compost and mulch applied to road construction sites reduces erosion and sedimentation and restores the soil structure to reestablish vegetation. Norco's composted animal waste can provide abundant supplies of a soil amendment that is useful and economical for developing and maintaining the greenspace system. This can occur, however, only if the compost materials are properly managed.
Norco is an animal keeping community with the opportunity to develop a model system for animal waste management. Animal wastes are an important resource not currently being taken advantage of. Improperly managed animal waste results in environmental problems such as pollution of runoff and groundwater, flies and other pests, odors and unsightly piles. Sound environmental practices for dealing with animal waste can be implemented by the Parks and Recreation Department (the Parks and Recreation Director manages Animal Control), by citizen groups and by individual efforts through programs and guidelines initiated by city government.
Currently within the City of Norco much of the manure is dumped into the El Sobrante Landfill. Residents pay for bins in which to deposit trash and animal waste.
These are provided and picked up by the city waste removal system. Not all residents with animals are willing to pay the high bin fees. Ins tead, some pay standard trash pick up fees and deposit manure into trash bags even though this is illegal. The municipal code definition of refuse excludes manure, and trash collectors cannot pick it up if they see it mixed in with trash. Some residents also haul manure to the dump themselves or pay an independent company to do so. Many residents utilize manure on their own property,
tilling it into gardens as fertilizer or as a device to help break up hard soil. It is occasionally deposited on hot walker rings to be compacted by walking horses or may be stored on the perimeter of the property until it becomes a serious problem necessitating removal. Some residents dump manure illegally - frequently into the Santa Ana River.
The volume of waste and thus the scope of the problem is considerable. The City of Norco Animal Control estimates that there are about 18,000 horses and other livestock such as sheep, goats and chickens within the city limits. This figure is based on the number of households in Norco (7000) and units of animals allowable by law per unit size of property (though not all residents own animals). Norco is unique in that more animals are allowed by law within a given number of square feet here than in most other animal keeping communities. According to Animal Control, one animal is allowed for approximately each 5,000 square feet in the city as contrasted with 6,800 to 8,000 square feet per animal in other cities. Residents are permitted five units of animals per half acre. A horse, cow or pig counts as one unit, a goat or sheep as a half unit. By law, five animal units can include no more than two pigs. Five horses on a half-acre property (each horse producing approximately 36 pounds of manure a day) can be estimated to produce approximately 180 pound of manure daily. In volume, a single horse produces approximately .07 cubic yards of manure a day, 25.5 cubic yards per year. Four horses produce enough manure to fill a two-cubic-yard bin weekly according to animal owners who participated in community workshops conducted by the 606 Studio. Norco thus generates 459,000 cubic yards of manure a year.
In response to this volume of animal waste and the opportunities to use it as a resource, seven general management options are proposed. To mitigate present problems, a city ordinance requiring ma. nre and yard waste to be separated from trash needs to be enacted as soon as possible. This requirement will facilitate all of the management programs discussed below. Eventually
Greenspace for Norco
94
a program for separating house wastes like plastic, glass ’tid metal would be ideal. Yard waste can be chipped • .d composted either separately or in combination with manure. It can thus be converted into a useful material supporting the greenspace system.
The project team has identified seven different approaches to resolving Norco's animal manure problem. These are as follows:
1.	Current Waste Removal Program-Removal to the dump, yard use and illegal dumping.
2.	Regional Private Enterprise Compost Program-Divert manure from landfill to one of the regional composting companies.
3.	Local Private Enterprise Compost Program-Diver t manure from landfill to a compost company within Norco city limits.
4.	Institutional Compost Program-California Rehabilitation Center, the future Riverside Community College and the Naval Weapons Station Fleet Analysis develop separate or joint-relationship compost programs.
5.	City Park and Greenspace Compost Program and Public/Private Compost Program- The resource benefits the city through the use of compost in public greenspace and the yards of Norco residents.
6.	Biogas Plant-Electricity may be produced through the use of biogas derived from the bio-digestion of compostable materials.
7.	Combinations of the above alternatives-Phased development of portions or combinations of the above options for the benefit of the entire city.
Option 1 is a continuation of present practices which are undesirable for environmental and esthetic reasons. Options 2 and 3 would produce a large volume of compost most of which would be sold commercially. In options 4 and 5, the compost produced would be used to maintain the viability of Norco's public greenspace areas. Option 6 would produce salable electricity and a nutrient rich residue which could also be applied to the public landscape. Option 7 would produce usable materials for public and private use. The 606 Studio recommends that the City of Norco further study options 4, 5 and 6 to determine their practical and economical advantages and disadvantages and implement the one that proves most feasible.
Alternatives:
Current Program
Regional Private Enterprise Compost program
H
rises:
)—>
Land Fill	
Yard Use	
Illegal Dumping	.	. J
	Landscape Industry	T,
>		Commercial Industry	
	Homeowner	
	Agriculture	
	Landscape Regeneration	—
Local Private Enterprise Compost Program
Institutional Compost Program		Institutional Greenspace including City Parks t Norco Public
City Park/Green space and Public/Private Compost		
Biogas Plant	—>	Produce Electricity F -------
Combinations of the above options
Benefits For City and Resident of Norco Resource
3----)
Norco Animal and Yard Waste Management Alternatives an.’ Uses
95
Stormwater Treatment and Retention Ponds
Retention ponds hold stormwater long enough to allow for biological purification of runoff contaminated with non-point source pollution. With sensitive design, they can become nodes of wildlife habitat as well as recreational amenities. Due to the biological concentration of pollutants, the use of this type of feature should be restricted to created wetlands. Please refer to Appendix A for further discussion of the effectiveness of such features.
Water and Nutrient Flows
The diagram provides an illustration of some of the changes aggressive greenspace implementation can bring about in the flow of water and nutrients, two major determinants in the functioning of the ecosystem. The City of Norco lies above a portion of its own aquifer, the Chino Basin. Therefore it is in the city's best interests to implement strategies for the improvement of the basin water quality. By doing so, Norco can set an example for its neighbors situated above the aquifer, as well.
Composting of animal wastes can bring about many positive changes wherein potential groundwater contaminants are xemoved from the soil surface and processed into useable nutrients for the enrichment of the soil and the life it supports. Land and other resources Eire conserved along with a reduction in wastes transported to landfills outside of town.
The catchment of stormwater runoff and its direction into retention and biological treatment ponds can further reduce the influx of pollutants into local groundwater supplies. Contaminants such as oil, gasoline and other roml grime are among the impurities which may be removed in this manner. Significantly cleaner water may then be allowed to replenish the aquifer through infiltration.
The use of porous materials on large paved surfaces can reduce pollutant-laden runoff while allowing the relatively clean rainwater to percolate into the ground, further replenishing groundwater supplies.
Sedimentation, one of the largest contributors to nonpoint-source pollution can be greatly reduced by lessening the erosion caused by off-road vehicles and standard development practices. Sensitive development in the hills, with the retention, restoration and management of earth-stabilizing native vegetation can protect critical areas of the city's watershed. Grazing can be managed so as to prevent depletion of native vegetation. Properly-timed grazing can actually be an aid in revegetation and fuel-reduction for fire management.
Great savings can be realized in the cost of irrigation water through the use of water-conserving landscape p’ants. Catchment and recycling of irrigation and grey water can further reduce water consumption. Commercial nursery operators in Orange County have realized savings in fertilizer costs by the recycling of fertilizer-laden irrigation water. With water and nutrient recycling, Norco can reap significant savings, as well.
Consider tire greenspace system as a nearly self-sustaining ecosystem, through which wastes are processed and fed back into the system. Consider the improvements in the quality ol life with native plant communities in the hills, an abundance ol wildlife and clean water in the aquifer. Consider the money saved on imports when water and nutrient-; are used prudently and recycled.
Greenspace clearly offers models for surtainable living.
Greenspace for Norco
96
Legend
0
0
IT~1
Ivn
Water flow
Nutrient flow
Water & nutrient flow
Human contributions
Precipilaltan I
Greenspace Elements a Greenspace Ecological Impacts
1
1
1
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
a
a
a
a
i
Reduction Jr | I $ Imported I I human food I
I r	Orange County	{-	
>■ ~ 1		
Improvement of	t-	■	Reduction >n deterioration of 1
and wildlife		local hydrogical 1
habitat value b.J	!	L	system	Jf
		
2
treatment fad Hl j

WATER AND NUTRIENT FLOWS
Greenspace as an Ecological Support System
97
Greenspace Standards
Section XII
Each community is unique, based on its geographical, cultural, climatic and socioeconomic conditions. Greenspace standards should reflect this uniqueness.
Greenspace standards herein represent minimum acceptable areas. These standards are based on observation and evaluation of the ability of the city or county to afford and maintain public land. Recommendations refer to published general standards. As general rule, standards "should be of a magnitude to provide sufficient land or recreation space for the full range of activity and facilities needed for the community" (Recreation, Park and Open Space Standards and Guidelines, 1983).
The following standards are presented in acres of greenspace, developed as opposed to undeveloped per thousand population and reflecting the quantity of recreation facilities per thousand population. The Greenspace Standards also reflects Norco's projected growth of twenty-eight thousand. Currently the developed greenspace system equals 105.2 acres or 3.7 acres per 1000 pop. Note this figure does not include River Trails Park (277 acres) as part of the developed greenspace system.
The Stage One-Immediate Decisions plan recommends that the City consider a Greenspace Standard of 4.3 acres per 1000 pop. This includes approximately 15.3 acres of additional developed parklands. and also reflects the necessary decisions the city must consider in developing the Ideal Greenspace plan.
The Stage Four-Ideal Greenspace plan recommends that the City considers a Greenspace Standard of 8 acres per 1000 pop. This includes approximately 68 acres of additional developed parklands and includes utilizing the existing drainageways, approximately 51 acres. The combined total of developed greenspace would equals approximately 225 acres or 8 acres per 1000 pop.
Fadlty	(N.R.P.A.) Standards	(Norco) Standards	To be added to existing greenspace system
Basketball	1/3/500	1/5,000	3
(Schools not included)	1/5,000	1/7,000	2
Baseball			
Community	1/15/500	1/15,000	1
Center			
Equestrian	N/A	1/4,000	4
Warm-up			
Arena			
Football/Soccer	1/20,000	1/4/500	2
Racquetball	N/A	1/3/500	5
Rifle Range	N/A	1/50/500	1
Soccer Field	1/10/500	1/4/500	2
Softball Diamond	1/5/500	1/4,000	2
Swimming	1/20/500	1/9,000	1
Tennis	1/2/500	1/2/500	3
Volleyball	1/5/500	1/5/500	5
(Outdoor)			
I
Creenspace Standards 99
Bibliography
Adams, Lowell W. and Louise E. Dove, 1989. Wildlife Reserves and Corridors in the Urban Environment. National Institute for Urban Wildlife, Columbia, Maryland.
Adams, Lowell W. and Daniel L. Leedy, Editors, 1986. Integrating Man and Nature in the Metropolitan Environment. National Institute for Urban Wildlife, Columbia, Maryland.
Agonia, Henry, Director, 1987. Public Opinions and Attitudes on Outdoor Recreation in California - 1987. Department of Parks and Recreation; Resources Agency, State of California, Sacramento, California,
Anonymous,undated. Norco Facts. Essay in the files of the Corona Library Heritage Room, Corona California.
Arnold, Robert K., Stephen Levy and Craig Paxton, 1982. Recreation Activity in California 1980 with Projections to 2000. Center for Continuing Study of the California Economy, Palo Alto, California. Prepared for the Planning Division, Department of Parks and Recreation; Resources Agency, State of California, Sacramento, California.
California Department of Fish and Game. Natural Diversity Data Base.
California Department of Fish and Game, Lands and Natural Areas Project. 1988 Annual Summary of Significant Natural Areas of Calif ornia, Draft.
Carson, Scott E. and Jonathan Matti, 1985. Contour Map Showing Minimum Depth to Groundwater, Upper Santa Ana River Valley, California, 1973 - 1979. "Miscellaneous Field Studies Map". Department of the Interior, U. S. Geological Survey.
Elfers, Karl and Maynard M. Hufschmidt, 1975, Open Space and Urban Water Management. Department of City and Regional Planning, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Gould, Janet Williams. Corona Source Book - Volume I. Personal notes in the collection of the Corona Library Heritage Room, Corona California.
Hansen, Nancy Richardson, Hope M. Babcock and Edwin H. Clark II, 1988. Controlling Nonpoint-Source Water Pollution. The Conservation Foundation, Washington D.C. in conjunction with National Audubon Society, New York.
Hays, Loren R., November, 1988. Final Report: The Status and Management of the Least Bell's Vireo Within the Prado Basin, California, During 1988. California State University, Long Beach Foundation, Long Beach,
California. Prepared for the State of California Department of Transportation, District 8, San Bernardino, California.
Johnston, Bernice Eastman, 1962. California's Gabrielino Indians. Southwest Museum, Los Angeles, California.
Jones, Laurie, Dave Lemieux and Sara Rudman; assisted by Stacy Morris, Suzanne Martineau Palmer and Cheryl Wiegand, 1988. Site Design for Hillside Development. Prepared for the City of Los Angeles by the 606 Studio, Department of Landscape Architecture, California State Polytechnic University, Pomona.
Lancaster, Roger A., Editor, 1983. Recreation, Park and Open Space Standards and Guidelines. National Recreation and Park Association.
Leopold, Luna B., 1974. Water, a Primer. W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco.
Lyle, John Tillman, 1985. Design for Human Ecosystems.
Van Reinhold Company, New York.
Meiorin, Emy Chan, 1986. Urban Stormwater Treatment at Coyote Hills Marsh: Final Report. Association of Bay Area Governments, Oakland, California.
Midgeley, Jayne, undated. How Norco Was Named and a Thumbnail History of Norco. Essay in the files of the Corona Library Heritage Room, Corona California.
Norco Planning Department, 1982. City of Norco General Pla:.
100
Riverside County Parks Department, November, 1977.
Hidden Valley Wildlife Area Management Plan.
San Diego Association of Governments, lead agency,
April, 1989. Draft Santa Ana River Habitat Conservation
Plan. San Diego, California.
Soil Conservation Service, November, 1971. Soil Survey
Western Riverside Area, California. United States
Department of the Interior.
Tri-County Conservation League, undated manuscript.
The Ecology of the Santa Ana River.
U.S. Geological Survey, 1967 - photorevised 1981.
California Quadrangles: Corona North, Corona South,
I Riverside West and Lake Mathews. United States
Department of the Interior.
Personal Contacts
I
Mark Adelson, Engineering Associate, California Regional I Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, i Riverside, California. (Telephone conversation).
Terry Brown, Assistant, California State Department of
Water Resources. (Telephone conversation).
Loren Hays, Field Biologist, U.S- Fish and Wildlife
Service, Laguna Niguel, California. (Telephone conversation).
Diana Harris, Dean of the Norco campus of Riverside
Community College, Riverside, California.
Mark Hoshovsky, Natural Areas Coordinator, Lands and
Natural Areas Project, Nongame-Heritage Program,
California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento,
California. (Telephone conversation).
Phillip Krause, Park Planner I, County of San Bernardino
Environmental Public Works Agency, Regional Parks
Department, San Bernardino, California,
Emy Chan Meiorin, Senior Environmental Engineer and Water Quality Program Manager, Association of Bay Area Governments, Oakland, California. (Telephone conversations).
Cathy Nowak, Planner, Environmental and Special Projects Division, Orange County Environmental Management Agency, Santa Ana, California. (Telephone conversations).
Thomas Paulek, Field Biologist, California Department of Fish and Game, Long Beach, California. (Telephone conversation).
John Palmer, Endangered Plant Project, Natural Diverstiy Data Base. (Telephone conversation).
William Pumford, Staff Assistant, U. S. Naval Weapons Fleet Analysis Center, Norco, California.
William H. Roley Jr. Ph.D., Environmental Consultant, Laguna Beach, California.
Paul Romero, Director and Sam Ford, Deputy Director, Riverside County Parks Department, Riverside,
California.
Joanne Schneider, Environmental Program Manager, California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, Riverside, California.
Gary Stuart, Senior WRC Engineer, California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, Riverside, California.
Dr. Robert Tullock, Professor, Department of Soil Science, California State Polytechnic University, Pomona and resident of the City of Norco. (Telephone conversation).
Roger Turner, Environmental Specialist, California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, Riverside, California.
1
101
Achieving Viable Greenspace for Wildlife and Humans in the Urbanizing Environment by Verna Jigour
The following is an excerpt from a larger paper which is included in a separate appendix volume. The larger work draws together literature on the causes of species extinction with an emphasis on cases particularly applicable to California. The evidence points to the necessity of conserving wildlife habitat long before the point at which species qualify for inclusion on federal and state endangered species lists.
Nodes of habitat richness should be conserved while they still hold their full complement of species. Movement of animals and plants among the nodes is essential to their genetic health. Wildlife habitat corridors can be the circulatory system, providing the body of the ecosystem with its sustenance. Humans are a part of this body and can live in harmony with it. Recommendations are made here for achieving public spaces that will support the long-term persistence of wildlife as well as people and allow for their harmonious interaction.
A General Conservation Program
Objectives for any local conservation program should include the buffering of habitat nodes with compatible land uses, their linkage with one another into a coherent system and the continuing interactive relationship between the network of habitat nodes and the surrounding natural environment. "Existing patterns of high-quality nodes should be examined relative to potential travel corridors and dispersal barriers, and a scheme should be devised to utilize and develop the existing pattern into a landscape conservation scheme '
(Adams and Dove, 1989).
For inclusion in the conservation programs of all urban and urbanizing areas, Adams and Dove offer the following recommended components:
Greenspace for Norco
102
•	An assessment of the wildlife resources of the area. Also the social value (and potential) of those resources.
•	Formulation of policies for wildlife conservation.These should be integrated where appropriate, with other planning objectives.
•	Definition of practical requirements for implementing the wildlife strategy, and obtaining the necessary commitments from those who will have to make the resources available.
Specific objectives should include:
•	Protection of best sites, e.g. habitats of great value. [The high value "nodes" of Noss
and Harris (1986) discussed in the larger paper.]
•	Minimization of impact of development of other sites.This might include modifications to designs to reduce impact and/or creation of new habitat.
•	Where appropriate, integration of plan with countryside (rural) conservation areas.
•	Maximization of wildlife potential of land within local authority ownership or control.
•	Provision for public use. Local people should be encouraged to use the habitat network. However, not every site will be capable of sustaining free and regular access. Control should be instituted, where necessary, by site design, location of access points or attractive footpath networks, or by more rigorous methods, if needed.
•	Promote wildlife conservation in general.
(ibid.)
Appendices
Appendix A
Some Suggestions for Implementation
Parks
i Parks can perform more "life-promoting" functions by being structured as multiple-use modules. Parks could and probably should be associated with nodes of biological
. diversity as parts of the buffering system. The intensity of recreational use can diminish along a gradient from human use to wildlife use. So too must the degree of human maintenance of the landscape. Local native plants must predominate in the transition zones. The vertical and horizontal strhcture of the vegetation should blend
' with the indigenous forms. Generally, there should be , decreasing supplemental irrigation along the gradient
toward the natural landscape.
I
Where the natural landscape has been degraded by
• human activities, restoration is the ideal goal for , management. Restoration may involve limiting public
access or applying physical restoration techniques such as
; revegetation, erosion controls and prescribed burning.
Ideally, all plants and animals involved in the restoration effort will be derived from sources as close as possible in distance and micro-environment to the treated site. By enhancing the biological viability of the local natural ecosystem, parks can provide richer recreational experiences for their human users.
Where natural or man-made water bodies are a part of the
1 park landscape, areas of the shoreline should be set aside wherein wildlife can have access to the water without intrusion from human activities. The lake with the road or path lining its entire shoreline is less accessible and desirable to many species than one with a more sensitive design. Islands are highly desirable for attracting wildlife and can provide opportunities for non-threatening wildlife observation.
Retention Ponds
Retention ponds can serve as high diversity nodes, as well as focal areas in water quality improvement and their more common role in flood control. They can and have been successfully integrated into parks, as well (Adams, et al, 1986 and Meiorin, 1986).
With respect to water quality improvement, retention basins (as distinguished from the more temporal detention basins) can promote the physical entrapment, including sedimentation, of pollutants. With the proper design, they can also achieve the biological incorporation of pollutants. Retention ponds have demonstrated removals of more than 90% of the suspended particles and lead, 69% of total phosphorus and about 50% of the biochemical oxygen and chemical oxygen demand (BOD and COG), nitrogen, copper and zinc from urban runoff. This results in the improved quality of water entering local aquifers.
The design of retention ponds determines their effectiveness in water quality improvement as well as their potential for wildlife habitat and self-sustainability. Generally, ponds designed with a variety of microenvironmental conditions will function best on all accounts. "The Demonstration Urban Stormwater Treatment (DUST) Marsh at Coyote Hills Regional Park in Fremont (Alameda County), California was designed as a prototype system and research facility to study wetland creation for stormwater treatment in the San Francisco Bay Area" (Meiorin/ABAG, 1986). Three different system designs were constructed. Two years of monitoring showed significant improvements in the quality of urban stormwater, with a follow-up study to be conducted after another two years.
The most successful marsh, both in terms of water quality and wildlife value, incorporated a series of differently structured relationships among the soil, vegetation and
Appendix A
103
^fcbsystem proved to ' birds to its shallow noting sides of this ■^*r shorebirds, herons,
- — The dry portions of
as loafing spots for is." (Adams et al.
—^apparently responsible j»s well, in that it
—sire of the water to the nteria reside (Emy
April, 1989). The extract diving birds,
-* *ey also hold a yearly
smbusia affinis), carp
by the ABAG
=cfcan stormwater i rue ted
_ significance of o the food
“ should not be s^Lese risks are official wetlands • . ontrolled and hedging or
s-e acceptable, n runoff i>ae
—ions. As Previous land
—Kay leave higher ^B-arious
i-s soil is =■-.wetland, these =iaed into the
-”ully stabilized, woundwater,
Bj.ctually J the DUST ^tatively fresh
:-ABAG, 1986).
The recreational value of retention ponds is primarily as an aesthetic backdrop for low-intensity recreation such as picnicking, jogging and strolling. Psychologically, the presence of water in a landscape conveys a perceived cooling. Situated upwind of a recreation area, water can have an actual cooling effect on the ambient air as it is blown across the water body.
Perhaps the greatest detractor to the use of these ponds is the potential weedy appearance of some areas that may be brought on by fluctuating water levels. This is. partially a problem of human perception and impatience. Initially, such a constructed pond area will likely be invaded by opportunist species between periods of inundation. But, over time, a succession will begin to develop. This succession can be further tipped by restoration techniques aimed at imitating similar situations observed in nature.
California's vernal pools are known for their colorful bands of wildflowers that move with the rising and ebbing of their rain-filled basins. Numerous examples exist in the central valley of the state, but Riverside County is fortunate to have some relictual vernal pools protected by The Nature Conservancy at its Santa Rosa Plateau Preserve. These can. serve as appropriate local model ecosystems whose emulation can be sought. There is evidence to suggest that a vernal pool ecosystem may have once existed around a pond in the Norco hills area which was recently annexed to Corona. The vegetative structure around that pond has been virtually destroyed, apparently through the activities of off-road vehicle users. Any efforts to create such an ecosystem around a stormwater retention pond might only be considered a fitting reparation to the local landscape.
Considerations for Drainage ways
Natural streams and drainageways provide a landscape with some of the hi ghest quality corridors. Forman (1983) offered that " The s tream corridor should be wide enough to effectively perform its functions both of controlling water and nutrient fluxes from upland to stream, and facilitating the movement of forest interior animals and plants along he stream system." The width of buffer zone necessary to sustain the riparian ecosystem has been much debated, but very li c tie research has been completed on the
Some Suggestions for Implementation
Parks
S Parks can perform more "life-promoting" functions by being structured as multiple-use modules. Parks could and probably should be associated with nodes of biological diversity as parts of the buffering system. The intensity of recreational use can diminish along a gradient from human use to wildlife use. So too must the degree of human maintenance of the landscape. Local native plants must predominate in the transition zones. The vertical and horizontal structure of the vegetation should blend with the indigenous forms. Generally, there should be decreasing supplemental irrigation along the gradient toward the natural landscape.
i
Where the natural landscape has been degraded by t human activities, restoration is the ideal goal for , management. Restoration may involve limiting public
access or applying physical restoration techniques such as revegetation, erosion controls and prescribed burning. Ideally, all plants and animals involved in the restoration effort will be derived from sources as close as possible in distance and micro-environment to the treated site. By enhancing the biological viability of the local natural ecosystem, parks can provide richer recreational experiences for their human users.
Where natural or man-made water bodies are a part of the i	park landscape, areas of the shoreline should be set aside
wherein wildlife can have access to the water without intrusion from human activities. The lake with the road or path lining its entire shoreline is less accessible and desirable to many species than one with a more sensitive design- Islands are highly desirable for attracting wildlife and can provide opportunities for non-threatening wildlife observation.
Appendices
Appendix A
Retention Ponds
Retention ponds can serve as high diversity nodes, as well as focal areas in water quality improvement and their more common role in flood control. They can and have been successfully integrated into parks, as well (Adams, et al, 1986 and Meiorin, 1986).
With respect to water quality improvement, retention basins (as distinguished from the more temporal detention basins) can promote the physical entrapment, including sedimentation, of pollutants. With the proper design, they can also achieve the biological incorporation of pollutants. Retention ponds have demonstrated removals of more than 90% of the suspended particles and lead, 69% of total phosphorus and about 50% of the biochemical oxygen and chemical oxygen demand (BOD and COG), nitrogen, copper and zinc from urban runoff. This results in the improved quality of water entering local aquifers.
The design of retention ponds determines their effectiveness in water quality improvement as well as their potential for wildlife habitat and self-sustainability. Generally, ponds designed with a variety of microenvironmental conditions will function best on all accounts. "The Demonstration Urban Stormwater Treatment (DUST) Marsh at Coyote Hills Regional Park in Fremont (Alameda County), California was designed as a prototype system and research facility to study wetland creation for stormwater treatment in the San Francisco Bay Area" (Meiorin/ABAG, 1986). Three different system designs were constructed. Two years of monitoring showed significant improvements in the quality of urban stormwater, with a follow-up study to be conducted after another two years.
The most successful marsh, both in terms of water quality and wildlife value, incorporated a series of differently structured relationships among the soil, vegetation and
-Appendix A
103
depth of water. An overland flow subsystem proved to attract the greatest diversity of waterbirds to its shallow water and mudflats. "The gently sloping sides of this subsystem provided feeding areas for shorebirds, herons, egrets, coots and dabbling ducks .... The dry portions of the overland flow subsystem served as loafing spots for waterfowl, shorebirds, gulls and terns." (Adams et al.
1986). This overland flow feature is apparently responsible for most of the phosphorus uptake as well, in that it allows the greatest amount of exposure of the water to the soil, where phosphorus-utilizing bacteria reside (Emy Chan Meiorin, telephone interview, April, 1989). The deeper open waters of the system attract diving birds, including cormorants and grebes. They also hold a yearly supply of water for mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis), carp and other fish (Adams, et al. 1986).
Among the recommendations made by the ABAG investigators are the following:
1.	The use of wetlands to treat urban stormwater runoff should be limited to constructed wetlands. Because the degree and significance of bioaccumulations of pollutants in the food chain is as yet unclear, such risks should not be imposed on natural wetlands. These risks are more appropriately taken in artificial wetlands where conditions may be better controlled and periodic maintenance such as dredging or harvesting of vegetation would be acceptable.
2.	Wetlands established for urban runoff treatment should be sited with due consideration of existing conditions. As evidenced in the DUST marsh, previous land use practices, such as farming, may leave higher than normal concentrations of various 'pollutants' in the soil. When this soil is exposed in a newly constructed wetland, these pollutants may actually be relea sed into the stormwater until the wetland is fully stabilized. Similarly, pockets of brackish groundwater, present in shoreline areas, may actually contribute metals (manganese in the DUST Marsh) and other salts to the relatively fresh stormwater.
(Meiorin/ABAG, 1986).
The recreational value of retention ponds is primarilj an aesthetic backdrop for low-intensity recreation sue: picnicking, jogging and strolling. Psychologically, the presence of water in a landscape conveys a perceived cooling. Situated upwind of a recreation area, water c. have an actual cooling effect on the ambient air as it is blown across the water body.
Perhaps the greatest detractor to the use of these pond the potential weedy appearance of some areas that mai, brought on by fluctuating water levels. This is partialh problem of human perception and impatience. Initial such a constructed pond area will likely be invaded by opportunist species between periods of inundation. Bi over time, a succession will begin to develop. This succession can be further tipped by restoration techniq aimed at imitating similar situations observed in natv
California’s vernal pools are known for their colorful bands of wildflowers that move with the rising and et of their rain-filled basins. Numerous examples exist in central valley of the state, but Riverside County is fortunate to have some relic tual vernal pools protected The Nature Conservancy at its Santa Rosa Plateau Preserve. These can serve as appropriate local model ecosystems whose emulation can be sought. There is evidence to suggest that a vernal pool ecosystem may have once existed around a pond in the Norco hills art which was recently annexed to Corona. The vegetative structure around that pond has been virtually destroys apparently through the activities of off-road vehicle u: Any efforts to create such an ecosystem around a stormwater retention pond might only be considered a fitting reparation to the local landscape.
Considerations for Drainageways Natural streams and drainageways provide a landscape with some of the highest quality corridors. Forman (19 offered that" The stream corridor should be wide enot to effectively perform its functions both of controlling water and nutrient fluxes from upland to stream, and facilitating the movement of forest interior animals an plants along the stream system." The width of buffer z necessary to sustain the riparian ecosystem has been m debated, but very little research has been completed on
Greenspace for Norco
104
subject. Perhaps the ideal buffer zone widths would best be related to stream order.
Stream order is an expression of the increasing
concentration of water from the most dispersed or ephemeral drainages to the most consolidated accumulations in the major rivers. "Entire sequences of terrestrial vertebrate species occupy similar functional niches along different-sized streams in accordance with the river continuum concept. For example, a series of carnivorous, amphibious mammals that play similar ecological functions utilize different food particle sizes, different stream orders, and occur at somewhat different elevations along the stream gradient" (Harris, 1984). According to this observation, buffer width would ideally increase with increasing stream order.
Although Harris’ statement particularly referred to the wetter climates of the Pacific Northwest, an analogous, perhaps more subtle, relationship exists along the intermittent stream courses, seeps and springs of Southern California. Unfortunately, standard development patterns tend to offer buffer widths inversely proportional to stream order.
Budd and his colleagues found that widths of 30.5 meters, just over 100 feet, were indicated to fulfill the necessary buffering functions for riparian corridors (Budd et al. 1987). In a later study, however, they conceded that political realities preclude "imposing large buffer widths on areas facing development pressures" (Adams and Dove, 1989). They recommended minimum buffer widths of 15 meters, or 50 feet, for natural, perennial waterways and 7.6 meters, or 25 feet for "all other waters, perennial or intermittent, including seepage areas, ponds, and sinks" (ibid.).
Urban Creek Restoration
Drainageways are often the only continuous open space left in the urban environment that is uninterrupted by buildings and circulation routes. Unfortunately, they often constitute glaring examples of wasted space. The typical engineered solution to flood control leaves hard-edged, slick-sided channels that are dangerous to animals or humans who might happen to stumble into them.
Scraped bare of vegetation, these channels are an eyesore as well as a death-blow to what was usually a most vital wildlife habitat.
Wildlife habitat can be incorporated along restored streams by the selective planting of native trees, shrubs and groundcovers. Non-native plants with particularly high wildlife value may be useful, provided they are not invasive. Waterways have been the mode of travel for many invasive exotic species that take over riparian areas, pushing out the indigenous vegetation which supports the local fauna. The vegetation should be structured so as to allow for all the stratified layers that would be present along a native stream course. Some areas should be left impenetrable by humans. Trails may be meandered around these sections.
Wildlife observation alcoves may be camouflaged in the manner of duck blinds with tree canopies and benches. Along intermittent stream courses, "drip stones" can be an efficient and aesthetically pleasing way to provide water for avian friends. These consist of a drip irrigation emitter threaded through a hole drilled into a rock or stacked rocks. Water is allowed to slowly seep from this emitter and fill up a depression in the rock, ideally dripping over its edge into a lower pool before saturating the ground below, where moisture-needy plants will soak it up. Indigenous-appearing drip stones provide an attractive focal point for observation of small birds and other creatures that frolic in these pools.
Lisa Schicker, Department of Landscape Architecture at North Carolina State University, Raleigh, has provided a wonderful study of relationships between children and wildlife (in Adams and Leedy, eds., 1987). Schicker has been quoted as follows: "If one were forced to choose a single neighborhood open space that best suits wildlife and kids simultaneously, it should be a greenbelt park along a stream corridor with small patches or clumps of vegetation and pathways for bicycle travel. The closer to home, the better” (Adams and Dove, 1989).
A p p e it d i x
105
a
Hedgerows and Other Corridors
The discriminate grouping of trees and shrubs can provide effective wildlife corridors for birds and small mammals, while fulfilling various utilitarian and aesthetic functions for people. Many linear landscape treatments already exist in our urban, suburban and rural landscapes. Parkways and hedgerows are common examples. Many of these serve as corridors for various wildlife. But most commonly, habitat has not been considered in their design, and the result is an overabundance of the urban "nuisance" species that may actually ward off the shyer native fauna.
The importance of spatial heterogeneity in properly structured systems cannot be overstated. Complete structural heterogeneity, or the variety provided by Lhe combination of canopy, shrub and groundcover vegetation, may not be necessary for every corridor. Some corridors in Mediterranean-type climates like southern California's may exclude tree canopies from all or a portion of their reaches, in order to continue the matrix of native shrub communities through the human landscape. But heterogeneity must be sought in the network system as a whole and in certain corridors, individually, depending on their geographic locations.
DeGraaf and Chadwick (1984), DeGraaf (1986) (and DeGraff in Adams and Leedy, eds., 1987) have illustrated the significance of vertical and horizontal structural heterogeneity, or layering, to bird species diversity. The 1984 article presented classification schemes that assigned avian species to "guilds" based on their foraging behavior during breeding season. Then, the relationships of both species and guilds were compared with several age classes of 11 different forest types. Features considered in guild assignment were: primary food habit: omnivore, insectivore, molluscovore, vermivore, and carnivore; substrate: ground, bark, canopy, air, stream bank, and flower; and feeding behavior: driller, scaler, gleaner, forager, sallyer, hover-gleaner, prober, and pouncer. The nesting substrate guilds assignee! were: ground/herb, shrub/vine/bramble, tree twig, tree branch, tree cavity/crevice, cliff, and nest parasite.
"Results .... indicate that foraging quilds are more related to general cover types than are nesting substrate guilds, but bird species (composition) reflect(s) habitat differences to a greater degree than do either guild scheme" (DeGraaf and Chadwick, 1984). These results indicate that foraging and nesting substrate guilds tend to be similar across different forest types, their occurrence more related to structural characteristics such as vertical distribution of foliage, than to the specific tree species or age class. This knowledge suggests design possibilities for corridor landscape structure that might promote integrated pest management. For a given type of insect pest, the appropriate vegetative structure can be created to attract foraging birds who will prey on that pest.
Degraaf (1986 and 1987) provides clear diagrammatic graphics to illustrate the relationships of bird breeding habitat to vertical and horizontal landscape structure. Among his conclusions in that paper are is that "The general effects of urbanization on breeding birds are fairly well known: edge species fare well, and forest species generally decline; overall densities rise as the avifauna is dominated by a relatively few abundant (often exotic) species. Insectivores, cavity- and ground-nesters also decline. These general effects can likely be offset in urban residential and suburban environs if avian habitat needs are considered in landscape design". (DeGraaf, 1986)
"These effects can be mitigated by retention of predevelopment landscape features and selection of material for the planted environment .... The prospects for enhancing urban and suburban avifaunas are good. By retaining pre-development fields and woodlots, increasing vegetation volume, especially in spatially concentrated patches, and by the familiar practice of planting species useful to birds, it is almost certain that the number of breeding bird species can be increased" (DeGraff in Adams and Leedy, eds., 1987). It should be noted that in western states, water must be provided for wildlife whose historic access to it has been cut off by human
development patterns.
With respect to viable widths for southern California native shrub community corridors, Soule and colleagues (1988) suggest that hedgerow corridors of the native shrub
Creenspace for Norco
106

species, as little as one meter wide may be enough to permit passage of chaparral-requiring species such as Wren-Tits and Rufous-sided Towhees. California Quail, California Thrashers and Bewick's Wren have been observed in strips less than 10 meters wide. Of course, optimal widths would allow the passage of the largest predators, but where that may be currently difficult to achieve in many locations, narrower widths can still serve an important function.
Wherever wildlife habitat is desired, management practices must not result in an overly "tidy" landscape. In order to achieve a self-sustaining ecosystem, all elements of the system must be there. The goal is to effect nodes at all levels of the biological hierarchy. Wherever possible, dead wood, leaves and other organic debris must be allowed to accumulate on the ground where the decomposers can effect their breakdown. This "humusphere" to borrow William Roley's excellent term, is often forgotten in human-designed landscapes, but is an integral and largely essential component in self-sustaining systems. The living inhabitants of the decaying log must not be forgotten.
References:
Adams, Lowell W. and Louise E. Dove, 1989. Wildlife Reserves and Corridors in the Urban Environment. National Institute for Urban Wildlife, Columbia, Maryland.
Adams, Lowell W. and Daniel L. Leedy, Editors, 1986. Integrating Man and Nature in the Metropolitan Environment. National Institute for Urban Wildlife, Columbia, Maryland.
Adams, Lowell W., Thomas M. Franklin, Louise E. Dove and Joan M. Duffield, 1986. Design Considerations for Wildlife in Urban Stormwater Management, Transactions of the North American Wildlife and Natural Resource Conference Vol, 51 pp. 249-259.
Budd, William W., Paul L. Cohen And Paul R. Saunders, 1987. Stream Corridor Management in the Pacific Northwest: I. Determination of Stream-Corridor Widths. Environmental Management Vol. 11, No. 5, pp. 587-597
Cohen, Paul L., Paul R. Saunders, William W. Budd and Frederick R. Steiner, 1987. Stream Corridor Management in the Pacific Northwest: II. Management Strategies. Environmental Management Vol. 11, No. 5, pp. 599-605.
De Graaf, Richard M. and Nan L. Chadwick, 1984. Habitat Classification: a Comparison Using Avian Species and Guilds. Environmental Management Vol. 8, No. 6, pp 511-518.
De Graaf, Richard M., 1986. Urban Bird Habitat
Relationships: Application to Landscape Design. Transactions of the North American Wildlife and Natural Resource Conference Vol. 51 pp. 232-248.
Forman, Richard T. T., 1983. Corridors in a Landscape: Their Ecological Structure and Function. Ekologia Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 375-387.
Harris, Larry D-, 1984. The Fragmented Forest (Island Biogeographic Theory and the Preservation of Biotic Diversity). The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lyle, John Tillman, 1985. Design for Human Ecosystems. Van Reinhold Company, New York.
Meiorin, Emy Chan, 1986. Urban Stormwater Treatment at Coyote Hills Marsh: Final Report. Association of Bay Area Governments, Oakland, California.
Noss, Reed F. and Larry D, Harris, 1986. Nodes, Netwoks and MUMs: Preserving Diversity at All Scales. Environmental Management Vol. 10, No. 3, pp 299-309.
Soule, Michael E., Douglas T. Bolger, Allison C. Alberts, John Wright, Marina Sorice and Scott Hill, 1988. Conservation Biology Vol. 2, No. 1, pp 75-92.
Personal Contacts:
Lowell Adams, Vice President for Research, National Institute for Urban Wildlife; Columbia, Maryland. (Telephone conversation).
Appendix X 107
Eric Jessen, Chief, Program Planning and Acquisition, Orange County Environmental Management Agency, Santa Ana, California. (He may not realize it, but he provided some of the inspiration for this research.)
Mark Hoshovsky, Natural Areas Coordinator, Lands and Natural Areas Project, Nongame-Heritage Program, California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, California. (Telephone conversation).
Emy Chan Meiorin, Senior Environmental Engineer and Water Quality Program Manager, Association of Bay Area Governments, Oakland, California. (Telephone conversations).
Cathy Nowak, Planner, Environmental and Special Projects Division, Orange County Environmental Management Agency, Santa Ana, California. (Telephone conversations).
William H. Roley Jr. Ph.D., Environmental Consultant, Laguna Beach, California.
The Society for Ecological Restoration and Management First Annual Meeting, January, 1989 in Oakland, California - where keynote speaker Chris Maser provided some of the many inspirational observations.
Greenspacc for Norco
108
Urban Creeks and Floodway Channels: A Hidden Resource Considerations for Design and Implementation By Gary Vasquez
Introduction
Too often our society tries to control nature rather than work in harmony with it. This becomes evident when dealing with the flow of water in, out and through our cities in creeks, streams and floodway channels. Opportunities to incorporate recreational, social, economic and ecological benefits are often overlooked by development. Nationwide, examples abound showing that creek restoration and floodway improvement projects offer recreational, social, economic and aesthetic values.
Creeks are part of our natural history. Their waters carve distinctive signatures upon the landscape, shaping it into patterns that reflect the natural laws governing all physical elements. Creeks are vital natural resources, offering substantial benefit to the communities within their creekshed borders; their landscape is deserving of protection and preservation in much the same way that architectural landmarks are protected and preserved.
As cities grow, the pressure to develop on flood-prone land increases. Acceptance of this development depends mainly on the ability to provide adequate flood protection through engineered solutions. Evidence of these engineered solutions is seen in the straightening and smoothing of water courses. In an effort to promote environmentally sensitive solutions that are generally long-term cost-effective and to provide greater opportunity for community interaction, the following considerations have been asembled. The goals is to initiate community interest in rediscovering hidden natural resources in creeks, streams and floodway channels and to take into account design considerations, implementation strategies and the roles of agencies, departments and policies.
Appendix B
Community involvement is often the primary driving force for initiating creek restoration projects. Local community interest is often essential in obtaining project funding as well as in developing environmental awareness. Local interest groups can play critical roles in restoration, providing commitment and motivation necessary for such projects. Not uncommon by, the people of a community will rally when their city identity is at stake.
As a natural pattern on the land, creeks can provide means of enhancing a community's character and establishing its unique identity. "Man must learn to protect himself and his environment by calling in nature as his working partner. For instance, when safeguarding engineered earthworks, it is more sensible to plant grasses, shrubs, and trees to hold and protect the soil than to use dead materials which are not only less effective but ugly. Man must learn how nature maintains her balance and work with her rather than fight against her.” (Schiechtl, 1980)
Concrete Channels:
An Artificial Environment
Stream restoration and floodway enhancement projects can be costly to implement due to the amount of labor involved. The perceived function of flood control is to engineer structures that contain peak flow; these include open and closed culverts, bypasses to storm sewer systems and channelization projects. But an artificial environment of this kind destroys a creek's ability to self-regulate and maintain equilibrium through natural processes such as (e.g., the pool and riffle sequence). The loss of aquatic and terrestrial wildlife due to these measures can contribute to excess erosion and siltation. Indeed, the negative impacts generated by channelization extend from the upper reaches of a stream to coastal regions.
Appendix B 109
Environmentally unstable and visually unfavorable, channelization is also very expensive. Flood control in urbanized areas costs communities millions of dollars each year for constructing concrete channels and culvei ts and widening, lining and diverting of creeks and streams. High construction costs, negative long-term effects and the public's desire for conservation have all prompted the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers to look into alternative "soft-fix" systems, those that allow natural processes to repair problems. Such approaches use utilizes living plants and inert material. (Lehan, 1985)
Drainageways as Greenspace Corridors
As the demand for greenspace increases, local creeks, streams and floodways will become more important. Utilizing these landscape features reflects a community’s need for recreational and educational experiences and a desire to reestablish a connection with nature. Floodway channels and creeks can then become unifying components, rather than barriers dividing cities into segments. Too often, however, buildings and freeways and other urban features define outer and inner city boundaries.
A stable stream should maintain equilibrium
mechanisms such as low-flow channels, floodplains, meandering channels, pool and riffle sequences and a diverse stream-bank vegetation providing habitat and stream life. An ecosytematic approach to creek restoration or floodway enhancement should include the following:
1.	Preservation or restoration of the pre-development stream dynamics by permitting pre-development hydrologic processes to govern project design.
2.	Reduction in erosion and consequent reduction of sedimentation and siltation in streams.
3.	Restored wildlife habitat.
4.	Restored riparian plant communities
5.	Improved water quality in stream channels.
6.	Runoff capture and local infiltration where feasible
7.	Reclaimed use of floodplain and flood way for public education and recreation.
8.	Improved visual quality in stream channels.
9.	Enhancement of property values.
10.	Reduction in cost to taxpayers who subsidize repair of flood-damaged areas
(Kudija, 1988)
Providing adequate flood-control protection can take place at the same time as enjoying advantages of the natural features of streams. Concepts that addresse streambank stabilization may now fall under classifications of the bio technical or bioengeering. Only in the late ’seventies and early ’eighties have these concepts emerged as a formal discipline. Their techniques use local plant species and local inert materials for streambank protection; bioengineering techniques can provide adequate flood-control protection and encourage recreational, social and visual opportunities.
Greenspace for Norco
no
Departments, Agencies and Policies
rhe following summary provides general background to issues regarding policies, agencies and departments. The author is grateful to Bethia Stone, author of Changing Channels , who should be recognized for her
contributions to understanding the bureaucratic quagmire of regulations and agencies connected with creek and stream restoration.
The Environmental Review
The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969 requires the preparation and review of an environmental impact statement (EIS) on all projects that will have an effect on the environment and that are undertaken with federal financial assistance. The state counterpart to NEPA is the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) of 1970. CEQA requires the preparation of environmental impact reports (EIRs) for a wide range of public and private activities. The federal and state acts taken together direct full consideration to environmental impact of a given project's function. They are central to the regulatory process regarding watershed development. But there are no unified codes protecting streams, and development continues to damage creeks and
compromise their benefit.
ity and County Levels
dities and counties are required by the state to adopt general plans. A general plan addresses a various elements, including open space, safety, conservation, circulation, noise and housing. Questions of creeks and streams are usually addressed in connection with open space or land use. All elements and amendments must be adopted by the city council or county board of supervisors. Proposed changes to the general plan require public hearings and review. It is within this political arena that concerns for stream protection may be incorporated into the greenspace system.
Special-issue ordinances and specific plans are may be used to implement a general plan in a designated portion
of the city or county. Specific such plans are important because they can be brought to bear areas facing development pressures, such as the fringes of a city. Specific plans must be consistent with the general plan and must include a program of implementation measures. Such measures would normally have the greatest impact at the local level. Specific plans have been considered in several localities for the protection of stream corridors.
Local Flood Control Districts
It is important to note that local planning does not stop at the city or county planning departments. Special-purpose districts, flood control districts, contribute importantly to the decision-making process. Financed through property taxes, these special-purpose districts are mandated by the California Water Code. County supervisors hold the power to create these districts to prevent the obstruction of waterways and to protect the banks of rivers and streams and the surrounding floodplains.
Flood control districts lack regulatory powers comparable to those of local planning agencies, but they have the power tc conduct flood hazard studies and to make recommendations to county supervisors on land-use issues and improvement. Flood control districts work with the Army Corps of Engineers and the Department of Agriculture's Soil Conservation Service. Because such arrangements do require involvement at the local planning level, typical approaches to seeking engineering solutions of problems of creeks, streams and floodway systems are reinforced.
State Level
Department of Fish and Game
The Department of Fish and Game (DFG) plays a significant role in the development of state environmental policies. It coordinates with the Corps of Engineers on permit applications. The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review process is often the first contact DFG officials may have with a
Appendix B
in
proposed project. The DFG review of environmental > impact reports can usually determine whether mitigation
measures for the proposal are adequate; if not, the DFG may recommend measures.
DFG jurisdiction is provided under the authority of the California Fish and Game Code Sections, 1601 and 1603. Under this code, a Streambed Alteration Agreement is required with the department for any proposal that will alter or modify a streambed, channel or bank. Essentially, the code establishes it is unlawful to divert, obstruct, alter or stop the flow of a stream.
A.Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) is required with the party performing channel maintenance. MOUs require that no heavy equipment be used in the streambed, that modification work be done in periods of low flow (July l to October 15) and that vegetation removal in stream bottoms be done only with hand tools. Federal Level
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers This federal agency has primary regulatory authority over streams. The corps was initially granted responsibility for the improvement of navigation on the nation's rivers. It now conducts floodplain information studies and administers permit programs to regulate the use of navigable waters by private developers and state and local governments.
Flood-control projects and the permit process are important components in stream management and protection. Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 gives the Corps responsibility for reviewing applications from those to discharge dredged or fill material into navigable waters. Under the statute, the Corps is authorized to review proposals and issue or deny permits for projects that Involve the discharge of dredge or fill material into a waterway. The Corp consults with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) concerning impacts on wildlife.
The Section 404 regulatory process requires public notice and public hearings. The Corps is under no obligation to follow the advice it receives and can proceed with a project regardless of harm to wildlife. All structural flood control works must meet its design standards and criteria.
Soil Conservation Service
The Soil Conservation Service (SCS) is the second-ranking federal agency with authority in stream-management issues. SCS has the authority to cooperate with state and local agencies in planning and carrying out projects for the improvement of soil conservation and flood-damage protection. Projects include irrigation, drainage, recreation and fish and wildlife enhancement.
Federal Emergency Management Agency The agency (FEMA) manages the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). Only 10 percent of the population (those immediately adjacent to a project) benefit from the construction of a project that an entire taxpaying population pays for. ( source). The Army Corps of Engineers and the California Department of Water Resources assists FEMA in determining flood elevations and administering of the program.
Design Considerations
Believing it is possit'? to restore a creek to its pristine o. pre-developed state may be unrealistic, depending on the physical limits and constraints caused by development.
But natural stream features can be incorporated to some degree and thus reflect the dynamic and self-healing • potential of a water course.
A stream's morphology-its size and form-is dependent on a variety of physical features, including topography, soil composition, vegetation, streambank roughness and magnitude of water flow. Understanding a creek’s natural properties can establish ideal goals for urban creek restoration and floodway improvement projects. Maintaining these properties improves a stream's equilibrium at the same time that it increases its stability
Greenipacc for Norco
112
and self-regulating potential. This balance, if well maintained, can prevent siltation.buildup, improve riparian/wildlife habitat, encourage water infiltration and decrease downstream erosion.
The Pool and Riffle Sequence
The pool and riffle sequence establishes a dynamic equilibrium within a creek or stream, providing visual as well as ecological advantages. Equilibrium becomes disturbed as channelization and increased urban runoff occur. Pools collect sediment during low flows and deposit sediment on the inside of meanders referred to as "point bars.”. The riffles collect sediment during high flows and are scoured during low flows. If the pool and riffle sequence is lost, the diversity of water velocities and aquatic habitat is lost. (Jewell, 1981) When restoring creeks or streams and integrating the pool and riffle sequence, one must consider the following criteria:
1.	For gravel bed channels with widths less than 80 feet,
. pools and riffles should be constructed with an average slope not greater than about 0.005%.
2.	Channel morphology observes a ratio of average particle size to the average channel slope. Relatively high valves of ratio usually indicates stream with regularly spaced pools; low values indicate unstable conditions without regularly spaced pools. Measurements of this ratio on stable, unaltered natural channels can aid in the design of low-flow channels.
3.	Pools should have an asymmetric cross section (steeper sideslope on the deep side) and riffles, a symmetrical cross section;
4.	Pools should be spaced five to seven channels of width apart (center to center).
5.	In straight reaches, the deep side of pools should alternate from bank to bank. In bends, the pools should be located so that the deep side is near the outside of the bend.
6.	Rapid drastic changes in land use change should be prevented.
(Kudija, 1988)
Vegetation
The proper use of streambank vegetation can contribute greatly to the success cf a restoration project. As a visual effect, plants create linkages, provide visual direction and act as buffers against the elements. Vegetation is also critical to support the local wildlife and enhance its habitat; it may serve to funnel cool summer breezes in specific locations. Greenspaces corridors create microclimates, providing an opportunity for plants to. survive where they otherwise might not.
Vegetation along streambanks acts as a binding network of roots that increase the shear strength of the soil. Special consideration should be given protecting of trees along the streambank, for trees have the ability to stabilize a streambank approximately five times the diameter of the tree truck. (Jewell, 1981). Vegetation increases surface ■ roughness, slows the velocity of runoff and acts as a buffer against the effects of transported materials. The selection of plant material is of prime importance; successful restoration projects encourage the use of vegetation that shares identical or similar ecological conditions. The benefits of proper plant selection will become evident over time, whereas structural solutions may deteriorate over time.
Unsuitable plant material has in fact been the major reason for failure of bioengineering methods in the past. Planning bioengineering works should take into account the following: (Schiechtl, 1980)
1.	The ecological conditions at the work site.
2.	The propagation techniques for each species and the best time for gathering any' tree-propagation material.
3.	Biotechnical suitability, plant vigor and growth rate.
4.	The final goal of the bioengineering works, the practical effects and the desired aesthetic effect.
An example of a technique utilizing vegetation is one known as twilling or wattling. The technique uses live branches bound together and inserted into the streambank, thereby providing bank stability as these cuttings begin to root. Willows have been found to root easily and rapidly.
X p p c n d i x tf
113
Bank stabilization can be achieved by using vegetation in combination with riprap, a concrete material broken into workable size. Riprapping used outside a stream bank meander provides protection from scouring. Riprap can also be used for stonewalls or paving surfaces. The size of riprap stone is usually up to two feet in diameter. Smaller stones (6 inches to 12 inches) have been found to be more stable, easier to install and adequate for sufficent vegetative coverage. For cost-saving reasons, restoration projects should take full advantage of available material. Protecting Creeks and Streams
Creeks and streams are living systems, indicators of water quality. We often neglect the value of the living systems in the urban landscape when we adversely afffect the ability of the stream to maintain an environmental quality acceptable for human as well as wildlife interaction. In no places have these systems been more vulnerable than within cities.
The first flush (approximately one inch) of rainwater carries the highest concentration of contaminants across the landscape into creeks, streams and reservoirs. Any such stream's dynamic system can be significantly affected, for example in increased water temperatures or overall chemical imbalance. Appropriate measures can be taken to maintain the integrity of these systems. A better understanding of the impacts of a creek's watershed will encourage measures to control these non-point source pollutants, for example, urban and agricultural runoff and natural erosion.
Nonpoint-source pollution, because diffuse, is less susceptible to regulation than point source pollution. It is a major concern in attempting to maintain an acceptable water quality. Such pollution is sometimes considered at least as great a threat to water quaji ty as point source pollution and can be contained less expensively (Sawikci & Judd, 1983). In the 1990s the Clean Water Act, administered by the Environmental Protection Agency, will require cities to maintain runoff at a given water-quality level.
The following methods are suggestions for controlling of non-point source pollution at the community level. The general concept is to control urban drainage to allow for collection and treatment of polluted waters from city streets, parking lots and automobile and industrial residues prior to their reaching the sensitive creek system. Creek restoration or floodway improvement projects might consider incorporating a non-point source pollution control-program for the benefit of maintaining a balanced system.
•	Infiltration basin: the use of "soft" channeling and retention basins (to store peak runoff) or ponds. Ephemeral runoff can be diverted or detained off channel with dams or gates. Water can be diverted to a temporary holding basin where it seeps into a storage pond or park lake.
•	Open Basin-an earth depression with a soil or vegetative cover.
•	Rock-filled basin-hides standing water in void spaces.
•	Rainwater cisterns
•	Check dams-used to stabilize headwaters and to prevent erosion from occurring in upper gullies.
•	Porous Pavement-integrated in parking lots, parking aprons and roads with low volume traffic.
•	Vegetative linings-offers reduced construction costs and soil erosion; increased groundwater recharge potential; sediment trapped and water quality improved.
•	Site planning-buildings clustered to minimize areas of paving and to incorporate runoff collection basin into site surface; opportunity to recycle water for irrigation.
•	Hillside maintenance-a healthy vegetation cover on hillsides allowing for greater infiltration. Any drainage swale or ditches should be under 10%. in grade.
•	Grading-grading a site to allow for gentle slope with greater water .contact time and less water runoff; use landform grading employed to divert water from planting areas with low water demand.
Grccnspace for Norco
114
Community Involvement: litiating the Process
Ideas for restoration of creeks or floodway channels are often generated at the community level. Citizens thereby enjoy good opportunity loparticipate in planning, design and implementation phases.
Community involvement serves two purposes: elevating community awareness of recreational, educational and environmental possibilities and assisting with economic feasibility through grant funding. Often these possibilities overlap within the restored system. A community seeking to identify an appropriate site for creek or channel restoration should considered the following questions: Have any problems and their causes existing along the creek or channel, such as increased erosion and sedimentation, been defined? Who is responsible for these problems (private land owners, city, county, state and federal departments or agencies), and what are resultant negative impacts? Local authorities would need to be kept informed;
The implementation of a restoration project depends on approvals of city, county departments and/or state and federal agencies. Maneuvering this bureaucratic web can be frustrating. To streamline this process, proponents
ust understand who the decision makers are at each ±evel of involvement and become familiar with local ordinances, rules and procedures governing creeks and floodway channels.
Before any restoration, intitial steps in the design process must include surveying documenting the physical and biological features and condition of the creek or floodway channel. Planners also need to note the level of the restoration project and surrounding land uses and to determine in which governmental jurisdiction the project lies. Much of this key information is available through various public agencies.
Citizen management plans and volunteer-based management plans are beginning to have an impact throughout the country. A program in North Carolina established by the State Department of Natural Resources and Community Development conducts a streamwatch program that encourages community members to adopt a stream and inventory its resource and management needs. In California an Urban Creek Council was. established by the Department of Water Resources to restore urban creeks and streams.
At the community level, interest groups can generate the necessary people power to make an impact. Sponsorship of the responsible governmental agency or a non-profit organization and arrangements with local colleges or . universities (if research is required to assist grant funding) all help bring a project to reality. Restoration attempts should be publicized during the implementation phase to encourage community awareness and .a sense of. stewardship. Documenting the entire process and making it a part of community history may inspire future efforts. Potential Funding Sources
The following list of potential funding sources for stream restoration has been compiled by Ann Riley of the Department of Water Resources.'
Mr. Clyde Edon .
Wildlife Conservation Board Department of Fish and Game 1516 Ninth Street, Suite 401 Sacramento, CA 95814 (916) 324-7908
Mr. Russel Porter
Park Bond Programs
Office of Grants Administration
P.O. Box 2390
Sacramento, CA 95811
4 p f ft ix B 115
Mr. Kieth Steinheart
Land and Water Conservation Fund Department of Parks and Recreation (916) 322-9576
Mr. Jack Hanson
Dingle-Johnson Funds
Department of Fish and Game 1416 Ninth Street, 12th Floor Sacarment, CA 95814
Mr. Ken Hashagen
Fisheries Restoration Act Program (SB 400) Room 1237-3 Department of Fish and Game 1416 Ninth Street Sacramento, CA 95814 (916) 323-7323
OR
Mr. Forest Reynolds
Fisheries Restoration Act Program (SB 400) Room 1251-3 Department of Fish and Game 1416 Ninth Street Sacramento, CA 95814 (916) 323-7323
Ms. Ann Riley
Stream Restoration Program P.O. Box 388 Sacramento, CA 9582 (916) 323-9544
Urban Open Space Program (Robert - Z’berg Funds)
Department of Parks and Recreation (916) 445-4441
Mr. JimKing -
Coastal Streams
California State Coastal Conservancy 1330 Broadway, Suite 1100 Oakland, CA 94612 (415) 464-4167
Ms. Dianna Jacobs
State Lands Commission Land Bank Fund 1807 Thirtieth Street Sacarmento, CA 95814 (916) 445-5034
Bibliography
Aultfather, Allyson, G., Talma, Kevin T., and Trap, Patricia Murphy, 1988. Master Plan for the Lower Arroyo Seco, for the City of Pasadena. Master Degree Project. California State Polytechnic University, Pomona.
Cummins, Kenneth W., 1974. "Structure and Function of Stream Ecosystems". In BioScience , Vol. 24 No. 11.
Fergunson, Bruce K., 1983. "Infiltration Basins”. In Landscape Architecture Magazine, November-December, pp. 89-91. American Society of Landscape Architects, Washigton D.C.
Gunn, Clare A., 1972. Cultural Benefits from Metropolitan River Recreation San Antonio Prototype. College Station. Texas A&M University.
Jewell, Linda., 1981. "Alternative to Channelization". In Landscape Architecture Magazine, July, pp 488-490. American Society of Landscape Architects, Washington D.C.
Henderson, and Sheilds, 1982. Environmental Features, for Streambank Protection Projects, Report E-84-1, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Waterways Experiment Station pubications.
Creenspace for Norco
116
Jigour, Verna, 1988.Urban Stream Restoration Program a 'trategy for Implementation. Student Report. California jtate Polytechnic University, Pomona.
Keller, E.A., 1985. "Channelization: A Search For A Better Way", May. Geology .
Kudija, Chistine M., 1988. Ecosystematic Stormwater and Flood Management Practices of Southern California. Landscape Architecture Master Thesis, California State Polytechnic University, Pomona.
Lehan, Mark,, 1985 Natural Techniques reapplied to. Urban Rivers, Senior Project. California State Polytechnic University, Pomona.
Leopold, Luna B., 1974. Water a Primer. W.H. Freeman and Company, San Fransico.
McDaniel, Tomas G*, 1986.The Santa Ana River: Where it is and where its going. Senior Project. California State Polytechnic University, Pomona.
Nohl, Werner., 1985. "Open Space in Cities: Inventing a New Esthetic". In Landscape Magazine,, pp 35-40. Vol. 28 No. 2.
Tunnally, Nelson R.,1978. "Stream Renovation: An alternative to Channelization." In Environment Management, pp 403-411. Vol. 2 No.5.
Nunnally, Nelson R., and Shields, F.D., 1985.
"Incorporation of Environmental Features in Flood Control Channel Projects", Technical Report E-85-3. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksberg, Mississippi.
Riley, Anne L., 1987. California Department of Water Resources: Urban Stream Restoration Program. 12pp. pamphlet; State of California - The Resouces Agency. Scarmento, California. September.
Schiechtl, Hugo, 1980. Bioengineering For Land • Reclamation and Conservation. The University of Alberta Press, Alberta, Canada.
Stone, Bethia G., 1985. Changing Chaannels: Preservation, Protection and Restoration of Urban Creeks, Professional Project, Master of Landscape Architecture in the Graduate Division of the University of California, Berkeley.
Stream Enhancement Guide, 1980. Ministry of
Environment, Canada, March.
Stream Obstruction Removal Guidelines, 1983. Prepared by Stream Restoration Guidelines Committe, the Wildlife Society and American Fisheries. ' ■	.	.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 1985. Environmental Features for Streamside Levee Projects, Waterways ' Experiment Station, Vicksberg, Mississippi, October. Hynson, et al. Report E-85-7.
Warner, Richard E. and Hendrix, Kathleen M., 198L California Riparian Systems: Ecology, Conservation, and
Productivive Management. Symposium Proceedings:’ California Riparian Systems Conference, University, of California Davis. September. University of California Press, Berkley, California.
Engineering Considerations in Small Stream
Management, 1986. Edited by William L. Jackson. Reprint, from Water Resources Bulletin, Available from the American Water Resources Association^ Vol. 22 No. 3.
Zeldin, Marvin and W. Carlyle Blakcney, Jr., 1982. "How to Cope with the Corp", Ecopress, Charleston, South Carolina, pg. 7.
/I p.p c tt d i x B 117
Appendix C
Sources of Funding for Parks and Open Space	by Lisa Schenck
The following is a listing of sources for both acquisition and maintenance funding. It is by no means complete, and any parks agency should consider having one person on staff to monitor and seek these sources, or hire a private consultant who pursues funding for a city. Payment usually consists of a percentage of the monies acquired.
GENERAL FUND
This is usually financed by the city's property and sales taxes. It is traditionally a source of funds for park development, maintenance and programming. Based on these monies, a city may or may not have established:
Capital Redevlopment Fund. This is established as a reserve fund to be used for the replacement of park facilities and amenities. It's based on the established life of existing and future parks. Every year an evaluation of the current value of the existing amenities is made, divided by their estimated life.
Maintenance and Programming. Since most Master Plans acknowledge that the annual costs of maintaining park systems will increase with inflation and the addtion of ■ new programs and facilities, a commensurate increase in this allocation should be reflected.
DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATED FUNDS
QUIMBY ACT
This is one of the largest potential contributors to the development of park and recreation facilities. It was established in 1965 by the State Legislature in response to the growing pressures of urbanization and the. need to preserve open space and park lands.
Under this act, a local city council can establish a Park and Recreation Dedication and Fees Ordinance that is applied
to applications for development. In exchange for city approval of the application, the developer must provide a fee, dedication, or combination of them both.
A typical way of determing Quimby fees is the
establishment of a base goal ratio of parks and open space acreage to population for the city. The devloper's dedication must then reflect the proportional share their project represents. The city will usually provide an established square footage requirement of dedication according to dwelling type. Fees, in lieu of dedications, can be calculated according to the fair market value of the square footage amount.
AB1600 (GOV'T. CODE 66000)
This bill became effective on January 1,1989. Its purpose is to balance development interests with local government concerns over the cost of capital facilities necessitated by new development. It allows for the imposition of fees by a city at the time of new project approval when a relationship between the need for a new facility and the project being developed is established.
In order to apply development fees, all cities must meet the following requirements:
1.	Identify the purpose and use of the fee
2.	Substantiate a "reasonable relationship" or "needs nexus" between the fee and the development on which the fee is imposed
3.	Deposit, invest and account for the fees
4.	Refund uncommitted funds on a pro-rated basis after five years
5.	Establish fees commensurate with the impact.
Typical facilities that are funded through AB1600 include streets, sewers, water mains, acquisition and development of park and recreation facilities, bike lanes and trail systems.
CONVEYANCE TAX
This is a proportional tax based on a percentage of real property value that is conveyed of transferred. The tax is
Greenspace for Norco
118
applied to residential and commercial properties.
!
examples of the successful use of this type of taxation can be found in the cities of San Jose, California and Nantucket Island off the Massachusetts coast, in San Jose the city has used a percentage of this tax to fund its citywide park system since 1973. On Nantucket Island, a 2% real estate transfer tax was imposed in 1983 as a means of funding open space land acquistions. By 1985 the local Land Bank Commission was able to issue $11.5 million in tax-free bonds, with $4.5 million backed by the community. These funds enabled them to put over 2.5% of the island into a protective status within three years of imposing the tax. (19)
EXCISE TAX
The state has empowered local goverments to impose excise taxes on new construction. Some of the advantages of this tax are that it’s not subject to the need to establish a "reasonable relationship" between the fee and the development, and that the monies collected don't have to be earmarked to specific projects. The purpose of the tax is to raise revenues and cannot be used as a means of regulating land or development.
The city of Corona, California currently applies a "Dwelling Development Tax" to all new residential units, '"he total charge of $960 per unit has $785 available for ' pital improvements. The Parks and Recreation department is one agency eligible to utilize these funds for park improvement and development funding.
BENEFIT ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS
This is a means of financing public improvements by the imposition of a tax on individual parcels of property that benefit from the improvements. This assessment may be initiated by a petition of the property owners, or by a direct action of City Council, it requires approval by two-thirds vote in the affected properties. The projects' are usually financed by the issuance of bonds which are repaid over time by the assessment district.
Critical criteria in establishing a fee assessment are: a clear identification of benefit and a clear identification of the specificity of the benefit. This disallows the use of these
monies for general benefits to a community.
MELLO-ROOS ACT OF 1982
Designated districts are established where a levy or tax is applied to new development to fund increased service requirements necessitated by the development. This is typically used where land is undeveloped and the property owners are interested in development.
Typically a flat fee based on land use or square footage is applied to the designated district. Districts can be established by City Council or by a petition signed by a minimum of 10% of the registered voters or land owners in the area. Incurred bonded debt or taxes must be approved by two-thirds of the voters within the district.
The advantages of this act over the establishment of Benefit Assessment Districts are:
1.	the ability to acquire financing for general benefits
2.	the ability to utilize funds for any capital financing
3.	the fact that it can be used for on-going operating costs
4.	the fact that the tax is deductible from federal income taxes for the affected property owners.
The disadvantage of this act, like all the others, is the ■ , . requirement of a two-thirds voter approval.
LANDSCAPE AND LIGHTING ACT OF 1972
This allows for the formation of an assessment district by City Council that can provide funding for park and. . recreation improvements, maintenance and administration of the district. The assessment Is collected with property taxes and must be fairly distributed in proportion to the benefit received. Public hearings are necessay to set the annual levy, but no voter approval is required for its impostion.
This method is currently being used by the cities of San Dimas and Rancho Cucamonga and its use has been upheld in court. It is a popular means of fund acquistiori because it's based on the premise that all residents of a community should contribute their "fair share" for parks and recreation benefits.
Appendix C
119
REDEVELOPMENT TAX INCREMENT
These are Redevelopment Agency tax increment revenues that are sometimes used to finance development of park and recreation facilities.
The revenue is derived form a development related tax increment which can be pledged to bond financing for the acquistion and development of park sites of recreation facilities.
GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS
These are tax exempt securities secured by a city with two-thirds voter approval. The total amount of bonds cannot exceed a specified percentage of the city domain. These represent a lower cost expense for taxpayers, but are difficult to obtain due to the two-thirds vote requirement,
LEASE-BACK
Non-traditional, long term land uses that can be associated with park development are used to generate revenues that can be used toward debt service incurred by site acquistion expense. Some typical land uses are golf courses, tennis or swimming complexes, or other recreation activities that have revenue potential. Other uses have included residential, highway, restaurant operations, hotels and motels, office or industrial uses. JOINT DEVELOPMENT
Municipal parks are developed in conjuction with school district capital improvement programs through the shared use of recreation facilities.
REVENUES AVAILABLE FROM OTHER AGENCIES Many park development projects have been financed by grants from State Park Bond funds. The implementation of the California Wildlife Coastal and Park Conservation Bond Act of 1988 has made funds available in a number of programs.
PER CAPITA GRANT PROGRAM
Funds are available to cities, counties, park and recreation districts, regional park districts, open space districts and other qualifying districts to aquire, develop, rehabilitate or restore park and recreation lands or facilities. The available allocation is based on population.
ROBERTI-Z'BERG-HARRIS URBAN OPEN SPACE GRANT PROGRAM
Funds are available to cities, counties and other qualifying districts on a 70% state and 30% local matching basis. Funds are provided for acquistion, development, special maintenance and implementation of innovative programs based on competitive need and block grant allocation.
TRAILS GRANT PROGRAM
This provides funds for competitive grants to be awarded to public agencies and non-profit organizations for the acquistion and development of trails.
HISTORICAL PRESERVATION GRANT PROGRAM
Funds are available for competitive grants to be awarded to public agencies and non-profit organizations for the acquistion, development, restoration or rehabilitation of historical or archaeological resources.
URBAN FORESTRY PROGRAM
Funds are available for competitive grants to be awarded to public agencies and non-profit organizations for urban tree-planting programs.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANTS These are designated for assistance to low and moderate income areas and families. Funds may be earmarked .' parks and recreation program and facilities.
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES - SB821
This designates 2% of the Transportation Development Act sales tax funds to be allocated for pedestrian and bicycle facilities. 60% of the annual available funds go to local governments upon application, with the award size based on population. The remaining 40% is awarded on a competitive basis.
Requirements and consideration for the awarding of competitive grants are as follows:
1.	The facility must have a regional component.
2.	The funds are primarily for Class I and Class II bicycle paths.
3.	The use of matching funds is looked upon favorably.
Greenspace for Norco
120
... 4. There must be a clear demonstration of demand or intended use.
5.	There must be a readiness and ability to implement the project within the community.
6.	The cost effectiveness of the plan.
These funds are administered by the California State Department of Transportation, application is through the LA County Transportation Commission.
SANTA ANA RIVER PROJECT PROGRAM A 50% federal matching grant program has been established for improvements connected with the Santa Ana River Project.
ON-GOING REVENUE SOURCES
Despite the effects of Proposition 13 and the Gann initiative on local municipalities, many cities have been able to finance the acquisition and development of park sites from General Fund revenues.
USER FEES
Parks and recreation fees can be used to divert some of the General Fund revenues, that would otherwise be allocated to operations, into the support for capital improvements. This revenue enhancement is possible with a more aggressive fee and concessionaire policy.
ACQUISTION THROUGH DONATION This has been a significant resource of park and recreation lands for a number of cities in the Los Angeles area. It's particularly attractive when the land in question has severe development constraints.
ADOPT-A-PARK
Service clubs are encouraged to"adopt-a-park", providing the necessary revenues for the parks operation and maintenance, and contributing funds for capital improvements.
CORPORATE DONATIONS
Usually in exchange for the identification of a donors name with a facility, corporations have donated portions of sites for park development, or have financed facilities within parks.
NON-TRADITIONAL REVENUE SOURCES
LAND BANKING
Acquired sites that aren't quite ready for development, can be economically warehoused by allowing interim land uses that will generate revenues. These may be such activities as: park and ride facilities, agriculture and landscape growing areas, and low intensity storage yards. PUBLIC/PRIVATE CO-OPERATION
CONCESSION REVENUE
Concessions are encouraged that are likely to generate revenue in excess of the operating costs and therefore contribute to a reduction of the debt service. Typical concessions are: baseball and softball diamonds, handball courts, tennis courts, bicycle rentals, batting cages, equestrian facilities, polo grounds, swap meet grounds, and food and beverage concessions.
FACILITIES AND PARK USER FEES
Physical amenities associated with parks can provide locations for non-transitional uses that would be fee generating. Some financially proven uses are: swap meets, special interest group meeting locations, special concession uses such as wedding, concerts, consumer shows, bazaars, auto shows, group picnics, Christmas tree lots and carnivals.
TURNKEY FACILITIES
Facilities are developed by the public sector through their use of tax exempt financing, and then leased to the private sector on a long-term basis. The lease revenues must be high enough to recover development costs. This arrangement eventually provides the public with a fully amoritized recreation facility.
EASEMENTS AND TAX INCENTIVES The acquisition of open space easements give cities opportunities for the use of quasi-public use of private lands in trail system of bikeways. The use of private can be encouraged through the provision of tax incentives to the land owner or developer. The enabling mechanisms are as follows.
Appendix C
121
1.	OPEN SPACE EASEMENT ACT OF 1974 (GOVT CODE 51071-51097).
This is the principal piece of legislation, in the state of California, available for the protection of open space. Participation is voluntary, and is encouraged through the provision of properly tax relief and the probable availability of state and federal income deductions. This act requires the participation of the local government in the granting of easements.
In exchange for the donation of an easement to a local agency or qualified non-profit organization, the landowner receives use-related property tax assessment of his land. This can result in a substantial reduction. The landowner retains title to the land, giving up only certain development rights.
The easement consists of the imposition of certain restrictions on open space lands that will insure their preservation for a length of time as specified by the easement. The mandatory requirement in a easement agreement is that it contain a covenant which applies to the present and all future landowners that ".....the landowner will not construct or permit the construction of any improvements not consistent with the easement...." (20)
A prerequisite to the establishment of an Open Space easement, is the adoption of an Open Space Plan by the city or county. Consistency with the General Plan, especially the Open Space element is also essential. Approval of the grant for easement must be approved by the local governing bodies and based on the consistency with the General Plan as well as the meeting of one of the following requirements. These determine that an easement is in the "best interests” of the city or county:
•	The land has scenic value, is a valuable watershed, or is a wildlife preserve
•	The retention of open space will "add to the amenities of living in neighboring urbanized areas or will help preserve the rural character of the area in which the land is located" (21), or
• "The public interest will otherwise be served in a manner consistent with the purposes of (the act) and Section 8 of Article XHI" (22) of the California Constitution.
2.	CALIFORNIA CONSERVATION EASEMENTS ACT OF 1979 (CIV. CODE 15-816)
This is act was passed to provide conservation
organizations with a way to make use of conservation easements without governmental participation. It also assures the legality of these easements and exLends their use to any state, city county or other local governmental agency as well as non-profit conservation organizations.
The favorable property tax provisions of the Open Space Easement Act are absent here and it's not yet known how much this will aaffect its use. These easements are in ten ted to be granted in perpetuity.
3.	SCENIC EASEMENT DEED ACT OF 1959 (GOV’T. CODE 6950-6954)
This was the first piece of conservation easement legislation enacted. It gave local agencies the power to acquire easements for conservation purposes. It has rarely been used because it doesn't give any direction to local governments in its use and doesn't provide any tax incentivies for land holders. This was replaced by the Open Space Easement Act.
It does allow cities and counties to bypass the procedural requirements of the Open Space Easement Act though, and should be known of for this reason.
The act authorizes any city or county to acquire fee or lesser interests in real property for the purpose of open space conservation. Open space is defined as any space which is characterized by great natural scenic beauty, or whose openness, natural conditions, or present land uses, would enhance the present of potential value of adjacent urban development, or maintain the conservation of the natural or scenic resources.
Greenspace for Norco
122
4.	THE WILLIAMSON ACT OF 1965/LAND
CONSERVATION ACT (GOV'T. CODE 51200-51295)
This legislation was primarily designed for the preservation of agricultural lands, however, since 1977 it has been amended to provide for the preservation of open spaces as well with the substitution of an open space easement for a Williamson Act contract. This act is highly thought of as the best way, short of full fee purchases, to preserve long-term land preservation.
This act allows landowners whose lands fall within a city or county in an agricultural preserve area to contract with the local governments to restrict the use of their land to agricultural or other open space uses such as: recreation, scenic highway corridors, wildlife habitat, salt ponds, managed wetlands and submeerged areas. In exchange, the landowner receives a use-related property tax assessment. The length of term is defined by the contract with a minimum of ten years.
RELATED LEGISLATION
ARTICLE XII, SECTION 8 OF THE CALIFORNIA CONSTITUTION
This was approved by the electorate as Proposition 3 in 1966. Its intent was to facilitate the preservation of open space and was basically a consolidation of Article XXVHI which provided the groundwork for the property tax relief embodied in the Williamson Act and Open Space Easement Acts.
1970 AMENDMENTS TO THE PLANNING AND
ZONING LAW, OPEN SPACE LAND
(GOV'T. CODE 65560-65912) AND
OPEN SPACE ZONING (GOV'T. CODE 65910-65915)
Additions were made to the state Planning and Zoning
laws in responce to the land planning use. These
amendments ade the preparation of a local Open Space
Plan mandatory for every city, and county in the state. All
city and county actions had to be consistent with this plan
and all were required to also adopt Open Space Zoning
ordinances.
No conservation easement can be accepted or approved by any city of county without prior adoption of this local open space plan.
CALIFORNIA TIMBERLAND PRODUCTIVITY ACT OF 1982 (GOVT. CODE 51100-51155)
Operation is similar to the Williamson Act, but participation is mandatory here. The purpose is to maintain the state's threatened timberland base and insure long term productivity of forest resources. Timberland is defined as land used for the growing and harvesting of timberland, at set minimum amounts, and for associated uses such as watershed, or wildlife preservation.
The act includes special property tax provisions, and was intended to replace the Williamson Act for the protection of timberlands.
OPEN SPACE SUBVENTIONS OF 1972 (GOVT. CODE 16140-16154)
This provides for the partial reimbursement, by the state, of revenues that have been forgone by the local governments as a result of their participation in the Williamson Act, or before Jan. 1, 1975, the Scenic Easement Deed Act, or Open Space Easement Act of 1969.
It also provides back-up powers to the state for the enforcement of these restrictions for which subventions were given.
OPEN SPACE AMENDMENTS TO REGIONAL PARK DISTRICTS LAW, 1975 AND 1982 (PUB. RES. CODE 5500-5595);
RECREATION AND PARK DISTRICTS (PUB. RES. CODE 5780-5791)
This authorizes the creation of regional park and open space districts by neighboring communities whether they are in the same or differing counties. It also sets forth the powers and procedures of these districts.
They possess the express power to acquire real and personal property and "rights" in these, by any means, including condemnation. The open space lands subject to easements granted in these districts, are qualified for automatic land use evaluation for property tax assessment as provided for in Article XIII, Section 8 of the California Constitution.
Appendix C
123
Section 5780-5791 also grants these same powers to the local city of county and recreation districts, enabling them to acquire and hold conservation easements under the Conservation Easement Act.
ROBERTI-Z 'BERG URBAN OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION PROGRAM ACT OF 1976 (PUB. RES. CODE 5620-5632)
This establishes a funded state grant program,
administered by the State Department of Parks and Recreation. Its purpose is to provide grants to cities, counties, and regional and local park districts, to be used for the acquisition and development of recreation or open space lands and facilities.
OPEN SPACE MAINTENANCE ACT OF 1965
(GOV'T. CODE 50575-50628)
This act provides a means by which local governments may form Open Space Maintenance Districts for tire purpose of levying a special annual assessment on real property within the district. The purpose is to provide funds for the cost of maintaining a districts open space.
The act is directly linked to the Scenic Easement Deed Act and was intended to provide a means of maintaining open space acquired under that act.
ABSOLUTE IMMUNITY OF PUBLIC LAND TRUSTS FROM PERSONAL INJURY LIABILITY ON STATE-SANCTIONED PUBLIC ACCESS LANDS;
QUALIFIED IMMUNITY FOR RECREATION ON PRIVATE LANDS
(GOV'T. CODE 8315 AND CIVIL CODE 846)
This provides absolute immunity to all public entities and their employees from liability to any person for injuries caused by any natural condition existing on unimproved public lands. The purpose is to prevent the threat of tort liability from restricting the number and quality of park, recreation and open space activities on public lands.
This was extended in 1980 to include conservation easements of public Land Trusts that are linked to an access agreement with named state agencies.
Civil Code 846, enacted in 1963. made immunity from
liability available to all owners of real property who permit public access onto lands for recreation purposes. This is the most protective when public access for recreation is incidental.
PRESUMPTIONS AFFECTING THE BURDEN OF PROOF IN EMINENT DOMAIN PROCEEDING (CODE OF CIV. PROC. 1240.670, .680, & .690)
This empowers public entities that have the power of eminent domain, the right to exercise that over lands already appropriated to public use. The requirement for this action is that the public use for which the property is sought, is considered to be "more necessary" than the current public use.
The legislation makes it more difficult to condemn certain open space lands by declaring these uses to already be the "best and most necessary public use." (23) This puts the burden of proof onto the condemning agency.
KEENE-NEJEDLY CALIFORNIA WETLANDS PRESERVATION ACT OF 1976 (PUB. RES. CODE 5810-5818)
This act charges the state Fish and Game department and the Parks and Recreation department to work together toward a program that will preserve and enhance wetland areas. It empowers either department to acquire real property interests less than the fee, including development rights.
This act also allows for the local management of wetland areas under certain circumstances.
Bibliography
Adams, Lowell W. and Dove, Louise E., 1989. Wildlife Reserves and Corridors in the Urban Environment. National Institute for Urban Wildlife; Columbia, Maryland .
Allen, Margit Galas et al, June, 1987. Crafton Community Planning Study. Department of Landscape Architecture. California State Polytechnic University, Pomona, California.
Greempace for Norco 124﻿GENERAL FLAN
SAFETY ELEMENT
UPDATE ADOPTION DATE: January 16, 2013
NORCO
SAFETY ELEMENT
2013 UPDATE
ADOPTED BY CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION NO. 2013-03 January 16, 2013
CITY COUNCIL
Kathy Azevedo, Mayor Berwin Hanna, Mayor Pro Tem Kevin Bash Herb Higgins Harvey Sullivan
PLANNING COMMISSION
Robert Wright, Chair Dave Henderson, Vice Chair Pat Hedges Phil Jaffarian Robert Leonard
STAFF
Beth Groves, City Manager Brenda Jacobs, City Clerk Steve King, Planning Director Alma Robles, Senior Planner
TABLE OFCONTENTS:
TITLE	PAGE NUMBER
1.0	INTRODUCTION TO THE SAFETY ELEMENT.. .. ....................................................... 1
1.1	Purpose of the Safety Element....................................................................1
1.2	Scope and Format of Element......................................................................2
2.0 SAFETY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES.........................................2
2.1	Safety Issues and Problems........................................2
2.1.1	Seismic Hazards.............................................2
2.1.2	Fire Hazards................................................3
2.1.3	Flood Hazards...............................................6
2.1.4	Security, Police, and Medical Service......................10
2.1.5	Damage or Loss of Property.................................10
2.1.6	Land Use and Development in Hazard Prone Areas.............10
2.1.7	Evaluation and Restoration of Lost Services................10
2.1.8	Evacuation and Shelter.....................................10
2.1.9	Management of Hazardous Materials..........................11
2.1.10	Airport Land Use Compatibility............................11
2.2	Seismic Safety Goal..............................................15
2.2.1	Seismic Safety Policy......................................15
2.3	Fire Hazard Safety Goal..........................................16
2.3.1	Fire Safety Policy.........................................16
2.4	Flood Safety Goal................................................17
2.4.1	Flood Safety Policy........................................17
2.5	Security, Police, and Safety Goal................................18
2.5.1	Security and Safety Policy.................................19
2.5.2	Police Service Policy......................................19
2.5.3	Security Design Program Policy.............................19
2.6	Evacuation and Emergency Management Goal.........................20
2.6.1	Medical Emergency Response Policy..........................20
2.6.2	Evacuation Policy..........................................21
2.7	Animal Safety Goal...............................................21
2.7.1	On-going Animal Protection Policy..........................21
2.7.2	Animal Rescue Policy.......................................21
2.8	Hazardous Material Management Goal...............................21
2.8.1	Hazardous Material Management Policy.......................21
2.9	Airport Land Use Compatibility Goal..............................22
2.9.1	Airport Land Use Compatibility Policy......................22
3.0 SAFETY PLAN IMPLEMENTATION...............................................23
3.1	Mitigation to Potential Geologic Hazards.........................23
3.1.1 Development Standards for Geologic Hazards.................23
3.1.2	Rehabilitation/Replacement of Public Infrastructure........23
3.2	Mitigation to Potential Flood Hazards............................23
3.2.1	Development Standards for Flood Hazards.....................23
3.2.2	Maintenance of Flood Control Facilities.....................24
3.2.3	Floodplain Management.......................................24
3.3	Mitigation to Potential Fire Hazards..............................24
3.3.1	Development Standards for Fire Hazards......................24
3.3.2	Strategies to Prevent or Mitigate Wildland Fire Hazards.....25
3.4	Emergency Contingency Plans.......................................25
3.4.1	Emergency Response and Evacuation...........................25
3.4.2	Emergency Housing and Reconstruction........................25
4.0 GLOSSARY OF TERMS	26
LIST OF EXHIBITS:
EXHIBIT	PAGE NUMBER
1	Seismic Hazards Map......................................................4
2	Fire Zones Map...........................................................5
3	Master Drainage Plan	8
4	Flood Hazards Map........................................................9
5	Airport Land Use Compatibility Map......................................12
LIST OF TABLES:
TABLE	PAGE NUMBER
1
Airport Land Use Criteria..................................................................13
1.0 INTRODUCTION TO THE SAFETY ELEMENT
The California State Legislature has placed specific responsibilities on local government for identification and evaluation of natural hazards and formation of programs and regulations to reduce risk. Specific authority is derived from Government Code Sections 65302(f) an 65302.1 which require Seismic Safety and Public Safety Elements of all city and county general plans, as follows:
“A Seismic Safety Element consisting of an identification and appraisal of seismic hazards such as susceptibility to surface ruptures from faulting, to ground shaking, to ground failures, or to the effects of seismically induced waves such as tsunamis and seiches.”
“The Seismic Safety Element shall also include an appraisal of mudslides, landslides, and slope stability as necessary geologic hazards that must be considered simultaneously with other hazards such as possible faulting, ground shaking, ground failure, and seismically induced waves.”
“A Safety Element for the protection of the community from fires and geologic hazards including features necessary from such protection such as evacuation routes, peak load water supply requirements, minimum road widths, clearances around structures, and geologic hazard mapping in areas of known geologic hazards.”
The effect of these sections was to require cities and counties to take seismic and other natural hazards into account in land use planning. The goals and policies addressing these have been combined into the Safety Element of the City of Norco General Plan. The City was incorporated to preserve a small plot agricultural/animal keeping/equestrian lifestyle. The Land Use Element establishes the primary land use goals of the community designed to maintain that lifestyle, and all other elements of the General Plan must be consistent. The Safety Element works in conjunction with the Land Use Element in providing the life quality standards that will maintain the health, safety and welfare of the City, its citizens, and the animal-keeping community. Land use based on Safety Element guidelines directs development so as not to unduly place population and development in areas with high propensities for damage due to natural disasters, without appropriate mitigation efforts in place.
1.1	PURPOSE OF THE SAFETY ELEMENT
The purpose of the Safety Element is to prevent the loss of life and property and minimize injuries and property damage in the event of hazards such as floods, fires, earthquakes, landslides, and other hazards. Natural disasters and crime safety are major concerns for any community. Norco’s setting with steep hillsides to the east, the Santa Ana River to the north, and the Prado Dam basin to the west, within a seismically active region makes the Safety Element critical to buffer against the impacts of disasters
Norco
General Plan Safety Element
1
(natural or man-made) and avoid potentially disruptive effects to City government and economic and social dislocation.
1.2	SCOPE AND FORMAT OF ELEMENT
The element is composed of four sections. The first section includes a description of the Element’s purpose and background. The second section contains the City’s goals and policy statements in the event of disasters. The third section is the implementation measures. The fourth section is a glossary of terms.
2.0 SAFETY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
2.1	SAFETY ISSUES AND PROBLEMS
The Safety Element provides the goals and policies for responding to potential natural hazards from earthquakes, flooding and fire to providing community protection services. Goals and policies for each of these public safety issues offer a specific framework that allows the City to monitor and evaluate its efforts in the provision of public safety services.
2.1.1	SEISMIC HAZARDS: The Safety Element must establish policies to minimize the loss of property and life as a result of earthquakes. The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act, the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act, and the Unreinforced Masonry Law in addition to map resources and information from the state Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, provide the base regulations for establishing local policies. The Alquist-Priolo Act restricts development on surface traces of known active faults. The Seismic Hazards Mapping Act directs the State Geologist to map soils susceptible to earthquake effects and the Unreinforced Masonry Law directs governments to identify susceptible buildings for abatement through retrofitting or destruction.
There are several types of seismic hazards that can be grouped in a cause-and-effect classification that is the basis for the order of their consideration. Earthquakes originate as a shock waves generated by movement along an active fault. The primary seismic hazards are ground shaking and the potential for ground rupture along the surface trace of the fault. Secondary seismic hazards result from the interaction of ground shaking with existing soil and bedrock conditions, and include liquefaction, settlement, landslides, tsunamis or “tidal waves”, and seiches (oscillating waves in lakes and reservoirs).
There are no active or potentially active faults in the Norco area. However, moderately strong shaking can still be expected in the City as a result from faults in the Chino/Elsinore zone. There is also potential for liquefaction and landslides due to slope instability in the event of any strong earthquake. This potential is
Norco
V7 General Plan Safety Element	2
relatively minor in Norco relative to other areas in California because of the hard bedrock that underlies most of the City and the absence of clay- coated bedding that is typical in most California landslides.
Thin alluvium that amplifies earthquake shaking also contributes to a moderately high liquefaction potential and can occur in Norco where the bedrock is shallow and retards the downward flow of groundwater. The only area where this is an issue is along the Santa Ana River channel. In terms of slope instability caused by ground-shaking most of the City is in an area of either Low or Very Low potential. The only area where there is a Moderate potential for slope instability is on vacant land immediately adjacent to the river in the northeast corner of the City (See Exhibit 1- Seismic Hazards Map). Nonetheless, the City can help minimize risks and have quick response to emergencies in the aftermath of seismic events when they do occur.
In 1933 unreinforced masonry commercial buildings were prohibited statewide and in 1986 the Unreinforced Masonry Law (URML) was passed requiring identification of all existing unreinforced masonry structures for seismic retrofitting (or ultimate destruction). In a report provided by the City to the California Seismic Safety Commission in 2003 there were three identified nonhistone unreinforced masonry buildings in the City. In a status update report submitted in 2004 all three structures had been brought into substantial compliance with the URML so the City is considered 100 percent compliant.
2.1.2	FIRE HAZARDS: A Safety Element should identify urban fringe and rural residential areas prone to wildland fire hazards. The Element should also identify adequate evacuation routes and establish peakload water supplies to reduce impacts from fire hazards. The goals and policies should form the basis for fire safe ordinances and a strategic fire defense system of zoning for the community. The state Office of Emergency Services has prepared the Fire Hazard Mitigation Plan that maps basic statewide fire hazard areas as well as basic recommendations for reducing risk. The State Board of Forestry has also adopted the California Fire Plan which describes the environment at risk and establishes the State Responsibility Areas as a means of reducing fuel loads. Baseline Fire Hazard Severity Zones are established for adoption by local districts and agencies.
Portions of Norco are under some threat of potential wildland fires especially along the hillside areas. From the State Fire Hazard Severity Zone Maps the Local Response Area (LRA) Zones have been developed to determine the significance of local fire hazards based on fuels, terrain, weather, and other relevant factors. These zones, then define the mitigation strategies to provide a system of fire protection for urban uses and protection from wildland fires (See Exhibit 2- Fire Hazards Map). LRA Zones I and II are the areas with the highest potential for wildfire impacts and as a result should incorporate additional
Norco
General Plan Safety Element
3
LEGEND
GROUNDSHAKING
A f" Boundary of ground shaking zone _y B based on soil and/or rock conditions
A Bedrock (weathered)
„ Alluvium of intermediate thickness (200-2000')
c Thick alluvium and soft sediments (2000’ +)
D Thin Pliestocene alluvium (10-200')
E Thin recent alluvium (10-200')
SECONDARY HAZARDS
LIQUEFACTION:
Boundary of area of potential liquefaction within which groundwater is shallower than 10 ft. (Ground shaking zone designation modified by "LL")
Boundary of area of potential liquefaction within which groundwater is shallower than 30 feet. (Ground shaking zone designation modified by "L").
SLOPE INSTABILITY
Ground shaking zones modified as follows to indicate degree of slope instability:
1 Very Low
2 Low
3 Moderate
4 High (probable landslide)
Note: Ground shaking based on the Chino (Elsinore) Fault Zone.
EASTVALE

X SEISMIC HAZARDS MAP
2 Miles J
LEGEND
Revised 1/12/2012
fire protection strategies including increased setbacks for development from fire hazard areas, better use of inflammable building and landscaping materials, vegetation clearance around structures, and maintained fuel modification zones.
The potential fire hazard situation in the City is closely related to its land use and development patterns. Residential land use constitutes a major consideration in determining fire hazard; however, due to the low density nature of the community the potential for fire hazards spreading from dwelling to dwelling is low. This same land use type, though, can also increase potential fire hazards due to excessive improper storage of flammables, old barns which contain combustible materials, limited access due to deep setbacks, improper parking in alleys and roadways, undisposed animal feces which inhibit the movement of fire personnel and equipment, wood shingle roofs, and other types of fire hazards common to residential areas.
Fire in the City’s principal commercial and industrial areas can have a large financial impact on the community in terms of property taxes, sales revenue, employment, and convenience. Fire hazards in these areas are often a result of improper storage of materials or electrical failures. These types of uses require massive and immediate fire control forces if fire loss is to be kept within acceptable limits.
Open areas surrounding and within the City are a potentially dangerous fire hazards due to established and dry vegetation communities, slopes that hamper fire personnel and equipment, and development adjacent to the open areas that increase the potential for loss. The risk is further exasperated by conservation areas designed to maintain important habitat for which there are restrictions against the removal of vegetation regardless of nearby development. Approximately 20% of the City is within an open space, conservation, or limited development area.
The availability of water is a critical component to fire protection. The City is the water purveyor. The Insurance Services Office has rated the fire protection system of the City as Class 1 for its water delivery system. Class 1 is the best possible rating. The water flow requirements for single-family residential land uses is 1,500 gallons per minute (gpm). For multi-family the rate is 2,500 gpm and for commercial/industrial it is 3,000 gpm.
2.1.3	FLOOD HAZARD: The hydrologic setting for the City of Norco is atop the moderately elevated Temescal Plateau with a mean elevation of 1,620 feet. The average rainfall is 10.85 inches most of which occurs in the rainy season from late winter to early spring (December, January, February). The Santa Ana River along the City’s northern edge is the primary drainage for a basin measuring over 2,000 square miles and extends from the San Bernardino mountains down to the Orange County coast'.
Norco
General Plan Safety Element
6
The Safety Element should identify flood hazard areas and establish the goals and policies to avoid unreasonable flood risks. Floodplains should be mapped with restrictions against intensive new development with mitigations against flood impacts for development that does occur. The Element should minimize flood impacts to existing development by establishing a capital improvement program to build the facilities needed to ensure flood protection.
Flooding is usually a regional problem crossing jurisdictional boundaries and needs to be addressed cooperatively with area local, state and federal agencies. The City of Norco is a participating city under the jurisdiction of the Riverside Country Regional Flood Control and Water Conservation District which constructs and maintains facilities region-wide for flood control. The Master Drainage Plan for the City of Norco is shown on Exhibit 3. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maintains and periodically updates Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) that are used to set the flood insurance rates for communities that adopt regulations that limit development in flood zones which Norco has done. The FIRM identify where the zones are located to help guide land use development and policies.
Flooding hazards in the Safety Element are considered in two categories: natural flooding and dam inundation. Natural flooding hazards are those associated with major atmospheric events that result in the inundation of developed areas due to overflows of nearby stream course, or inadequacies in local storm drain facilities. Dam inundation hazards are those associated with the downstream inundation that would occur given a major structural failure in a nearby water impoundment.
The City is naturally insulated against extensive natural flooding hazards from the Santa Ana River by steep bluffs that exist along the south bank of the river. In the event of a 1% Annual Flood (100-year) storm, the only areas likely susceptible to flooding would be limited to the Silverlakes Equestrian Center located in the north side of the City, a portion of the Santa Ana Riverbed along the west border, and small pockets of land around the City’s flood control channels. The Safety Element identifies flood hazard areas in Exhibit 4 (Flood Hazards Map) and provides for land uses and facilities which will minimize risk to lives and property.
Remaining areas of the City are relatively flat, and in the past, this aspect of local topography has created substantial drainage problems. To help alleviate this problem, the North Norco Channel was excavated to a nominal drainage capacity, and has proven marginally adequate for storms of moderate size. However, the channel’s capacity during a 1% Annual Flood storm would be inadequate and resultant flooding in the area of Sierra Avenue could be anticipated. The South Norco Channel, much like the North Norco facility, has a nominal capacity, and would also be expected to flood in the event of a 1% Annual Flood storm.
Norco
General Plan Safety Element
7
LEGEND
Basin
Plan Boundary Norco City Limits
Storm Drain
Open Channel
Q = 250 10 Year Facility
Q = 250 100 Year Facility
NOTE
Q = cubic feet/second
Trap channel side slope = 1.5:1 unless otherwise noted.
NORCO MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN
SUBJECT TO PERIODIC REVISION
SOURCE: Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District
* RIVERSIDE
CORONA
LEGEND
FLOOD ZONES
. FLOOD HAZARDS MAP
FLOODWAY AREAS WHERE BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS ARE DETERMINED
The floodway is the channel of a stream plus any adjacent floodplain areas that must be kept free of enroachment so that the 1 % annual chance flood can be carried without substantial increases in flood heights.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS SUBJECT TO INUNDATION BY THE 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD
The 1% annual flood (100 year-flood), also known as the base flood, is the flood that has a 1 % chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
The Special Flood Hazard Area is the area subject to flooding by the 1% annual chance flood.
OTHER FLOOD AREAS
Areas of 0.2% annual chance flood; areas of 1 % annual chance flood with average depths of less than 1 foot or with drainage areas less than 1 square mile; and areas protected by leveees from the 1% annual chance flood.
Please refer to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps for a more detailed analysis of the flood hazards within the City.
2 Miles
The City is not subject to inundation from failure of nearby dams and/or reservoirs. Even though the upper reaches of the Prado Basin would extend up the Santa Ana River channel adjacent to Norco during capacity flood conditions, the water would stay within the established river channel. The City does not lie in the inundation pathway of any major damns or reservoirs. Failure of the Seven Oaks Dam located approximately six miles upstream from Redlands in the San Bernardino Mountains should not cause significant inundation as far south as Norco.
2.1.4	SECURITY, POLICE, AND MEDICAL SERVCE: Like in all communities, residents are desirous of feeling secure and protected in their homes and community. For the City to maintain its equestrian/animal-keeping lifestyle in addition to enhancing its image as a desirable place to live and work there needs to be a plan that ensures public safety. The General Plan Safety Element assists by providing infrastructure to provide adequate response in the event of disasters and by encouraging development standards that minimize crime potential.
2.1.5	DAMAGE OR LOSS OF PROPERTY: During emergency events City personnel through the Emergency Operation Center (EOC), along with local emergency response groups and agencies should establish, and continually monitor and update locations throughout the City where damage has occurred, the extent of the damage, and the loss of property to aid individuals and businesses to reestablish and normalize conditions as quickly as possible using state and federal funds that may become available.
2.1.6	LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT IN HAZARD PRONE AREAS: Development in hazard-prone areas shall include review by the appropriate agencies with jurisdiction over the types of hazards that could occur and affect the development being considered, so as to include appropriate mitigation measures to minimize to the extent feasible, potential damage from events.
2.1.7	EVALUATION AND RESTORATION OF LOST SERVICES: During emergency events City personnel through the EOC will establish contact as quickly as possible connections to local utility providers to provide a list of locations where service has been interrupted with updates, as available, as to when services are anticipated to be restored.
2.1.8	EVACUATION AND SHELTER: The City will maintain, in cooperation with the Corona-Norco Unified School District, local churches, and other places of assembly locations where evacuation centers and temporary shelters can be established during emergency events. Should they be needed, evacuation routes should be established based on the location and magnitude of an event. The City’s main evacuation routes are the 1-15 Freeway and Hamner Avenue. Secondary routes include Second Street and River Rd./Archibald Ave., California
______Ave./North Dr., and Mountain Ave, and Hidden Valley Pkwy./McKinley Ave.
Norco
Vj*/ General Plan Safety Element	10
2.1.9	MANAGEMENT OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Many businesses transport, store, use, and dispose of hazardous materials. Extensive federal, state, and local regulation of these materials are established to ensure that such chemicals are not released into the environment. Even with the extensive regulations on the use and transport of these materials, there is still the potential for an accidental release into the environment. And requirements change regularly so those involved in the use or transport of hazardous materials need to maintain updated permits and information from the appropriate agencies.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Riverside County Health Department are the primary agencies that regulate the use and transport of hazardous materials in Norco. The U.S. Department of Transportation, California Department of Health Services, and Caltrans also get involved in tracking shipments, marking vehicles, and performing periodic vehicle inspections. The Fire Department maintains an updated list of businesses that store hazardous materials on-site so as to provide the appropriate response for containment during times of emergencies.
2.1.10	AIRPORT LAND USE COMPATIBILITY: Portions of the City lie within the airport influence area of the Corona Municipal Airport that is located west of the City. The influence area of an airport is determined in the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ref. Exhibit 5). The principal airport/land use compatibility concerns are:
1)	Exposure to airport noise;
2)	Land use safety with respect to both people on the ground and occupants of aircraft;
3)	Protection of airport airspace; and
4)	General concerns related to aircraft overflight.
Compatibility is defined in terms of zones related to distances from runways and airport activity. Zone E is the lowest impact area. All of the areas in Norco that are within the airport influence area are within Zone E.
Table 1 shows the compatibility criteria for development within Zone E. Basically there no limitations on the density of dwelling units or the density of people per acre for commercial and other non-residential types of land uses. The only restriction is that any building structure taller than 100 feet and any single solitary structure such as an antenna higher than 35 feet need review by the Airport Land Use Commission first.
Norco
11
General Plan Safety Element
LEGEND
COMPATIBILITY ZONES
— Airport Influence Area Boundary Norco City Limits Area A
Area B1
Area B2
Area C
Area D
Area E
NOTE
Compatibility criteria for each area is found on Table 1.
Airport influence boundary measured from a point 200 feet beyond runway ends in accordance with FAA airspace protection criteria (FAR Part 77). All other dimensions measured from runway ends and centerlines.
SOURCE: Riverside
AIRPORT LAND USE COMPATIBILITY MAP
CORONA MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
General Plan Safety Element
12
TABLE 1
AIRPORT LAND USE CAMPATIBILITY CRITERIA
(Table continues on next page)
Maximum Densities / Intensities
Additional Criteria
Zone Locations		Residen- tial (d.u./ac) ’	Other Uses (people/ac)2		Req’d - Open g Land’	Prohibited Uses4	Olher Development Conditions5
			Aver- Single age1 Acre'	with Bonus			
	A Runway	0	0 0	0	All	> All structures except ones with location set	> Avigation easement dedication
	Protection				Remain-	by aeronautical function	
	Zone				ing	> Assemblages of people	
and						> Objects exceeding FAR Part 77 height limits	
within Building						> Storage of hazardous materials	
	Restriction Line					> Hazards to flight9	
	B1 Inner	0.05	25	50	65	30%	> Children’s schools, day care centers, libraries	> Locate structures maximum
	Approach/	(average				> Hospitals, nursing homes	distance from extended runway
	Departure	parcel size				> Places of worship	centerline
	Zone	>20.0 ac.)				> Bldgs with >2 aboveground habitable floors	> Minimum NLR of 25 dB in res-
						> Highly noise-sensitive outdoor nonresidential	idences (including mobile
						uses ”	homes) and office buildings13
						> Aboveground bulk storage of hazardous ma-	> Airspace review required for
						terials ”	objects >35 feet tall14
						> Critical community infrastructure facilities12	> Avigation easement dedication
						> Hazards to flight9	
	B2 Adjacent	0.1	100 200	260	No	Same as Zone B1	> Locate structures maximum
	to Runway	(average			Req’t		distance from runway
		parcel size					> Minimum NLR of 25 dB in res-
		>10.0 ac.)					idences (including mobile
							homes) and office buildings13
							> Airspace review required for
							objects >35 feet tall14
							> Avigation easement dedication
	C Extended	0.2	75	150	195	20%	> Children’s schools, day care centers, libraries	> Minimum NLR of 20 dB in res-
	Approach/	(average				> Hospitals, nursing homes	idences (including mobile
	Departure	parcel size				> Bldgs with >3 aboveground habitable floors	homes) and office buildings13
	Zone	>5.0 ac.)				> Highly noise-sensitive outdoor nonresidential	> Airspace review required for
						uses ’°	objects >70 feet tall”
						> Hazards to flight9	> Deed notice required
	D Primary	(1) <0.2	100 300	390	10%	> Highly noise-sensitive outdoor nonresidential	> Airspace review required for
	Traffic Patterns	(average				uses	objects >70 feet tall”
	and	parcel size				> Hazards to flight9	> Children's schools, hospitals,
	Runway	>5.0 ac.)					nursing homes discouraged17
	Buffer Area	or”					> Deed notice required
		(2) >5.0					
		(average					
		parcel size					
		<0.2 ac.)					
	E Other Airport	No	No Umit	8	No	> Hazards to flight9	> Airspace review required for
	Environs	Umit			Req’t		objects >100 feet tall ”
							> Major spectator-oriented sports
							stadiums, amphitheaters, con-
							cert halls discouraged beneath
							principal flight tracks ”
	yi Height Review	Same as Underlying			Not	Same as Underlying	> Airspace review required for
		1 Overlay	Compatibility Zone			Applica-	Compatibility Zone	objects >35 feet tall14
					ble		> Avigation easement dedication
Page 13
TABLE 1
AIRPORT LAND USE CAMPATIBILITY CRITERIA
NOTES:
1	Residential development must not contain more than the indicated number of dwelling units (excluding secondary units) per gross acre. Clustering of units is encouraged. See Policy 4.2.5 for limitations. Gross acreage includes the property at issue plus a share of adjacent roads and any adjacent, permanently dedicated, open lands. Mixed-use development in which residential uses are proposed to be located in conjunction with nonresidential uses in the same or adjoining buildings on the same site shall be treated as nonresidential development. See Policy 3.1.3(d).
2	Usage intensity calculations shall include all people (e.g., employees, customers/visitors, etc.) who may be on the property at a single point in time, whether indoors or outside.
3	Open land requirements are intended to be applied with respect to an entire zone. This is typically accomplished as part of a community general plan or a specific plan, but may also apply to large (10 acres or more) development projects. See Policy 4.2.4 for definition of open land.
4	The uses listed here are ones that are explicitly prohibited regardless of whether they meet the intensity criteria. In addition to these explicitly prohibited uses, other uses will normally not be permitted in the respective compatibility zones because they do not meet the usage intensity criteria.
5	As part of certain real estate transactions involving residential property within any compatibility zone (that is, anywhere within an airport influence area), information regarding airport proximity and the existence of aircraft overflights must be disclosed. This requirement is set by state law. See Policy 4.4.2 for details. Easement dedication and deed notice requirements indicated for specific compatibility zones apply only to new development and to reuse if discretionary approval is required.
6	The total number of people permitted on a project site at any time, except rare special events, must not exceed the indicated usage intensity times the gross acreage of the site. Rare special events are ones (such as an air show at the airport) for which a facility is not designed and normally not used and for which extra safety precautions can be taken as appropriate.
7	Clustering of nonresidential development is permitted. However, no single acre of a project site shall exceed the indicated number of people per acre. See Policy 4.2.5 for details.
8	An intensity bonus may be allowed if the building design includes features intended to reduce risks to occupants in the event of an aircraft collision with the building. See Policy 4.2.6 for details.
9	Hazards to flight include physical (e.g., tall objects), visual, and electronic forms of interference with the safety of aircraft operations. Land use development that may cause the attraction of birds to increase is also prohibited. See Policy 4.3.7.
10	Examples of highly noise-sensitive outdoor nonresidential uses that should be prohibited include amphitheaters and drive-in theaters. Caution should be exercised with respect to uses such as poultry farms and nature preserves.
11	Storage of aviation fuel and other aviation-related flammable materials on the airport is exempted from this criterion. Storage of up to 6,000 gallons of nonaviation flammable materials is also exempted. See Policy 4.2.3(c) for details.
12	Critical community facilities include power plants, electrical substations, and public communications facilities, See Policy 4.2.3(d) for details.
13	NLR = Noise Level Reduction, the outside-to-inside sound level attenuation that the structure provides. See Policy 4.1.6.
14	Objects up to 35 feet in height are permitted. However, the Federal Aviation Administration may require marking and lighting of certain objects. See Policy 4.3.6 for details.
15	This height criterion is for general guidance. Shorter objects normally will not be airspace obstructions unless situated at a ground elevation well above that of the airport. Taller objects may be acceptable if determined not be obstructions. See Policies 4.3.3 and 4.3.4.
18 Two options are provided for residential densities in Compatibility Zone D. Option (1) has a density limit of 0.2 dwelling units per acre (i.e., an average parcel size of at least 5.0 gross acres). Option (2) requires that the density be greater than 5.0 dwelling units per acre (i.e., an average parcel size less than 0.2 gross acres). The choice between these two options is at the discretion of the local land use jurisdiction. See Table 2B for explanation of rationale. All other criteria for Zone D apply to both options.
17	Discouraged uses should generally not be permitted unless no feasible alternative is available.
18	Although no explicit upper limit on usage intensity is defined for Zone E, land uses of the types listed—uses that attract very high concentrations of people in confined areas—are discouraged in locations below or near the principal arrival and departure flight tracks. This limitation notwithstanding, no use shall be prohibited in Zone E if its usage intensity is such that it would be permitted in Zone D.
Page 14
2.2 SEISMIC SAFETY GOAL - TO CREATE A SECURE PUBLIC ENVIRONMENT WHICH MINIMIZES SOCIAL, ECONOMIC, ENVIRONMENTAL AND PROPERTY LOSSES DUE TO SEISMIC HAZARDS
2.2.1	SEISMIC SAFETY POLICY: Preparedness for primary seismic hazards (earthquakes, ground shaking) and secondary seismic hazards (liquefaction, landslides) shall continue to be promoted through the enforcement of the latest building and safety codes in both old and new structures.
Policy 2.2.1a. Continue to require all new development to conform to the currently adopted Uniform Building Code and seismic safety regulations.
Policy 2.2.1b. Maintain a program to systematically mitigate existing seismic-related structural hazards (i.e. mitigation program for unreinforced masonry buildings).
Policy 2.2.1c. Give special consideration to hazardous structures deemed to be of historical value when determining whether alteration or destruction of these facilities is necessary in mitigating the identified geologic hazards.
Policy 2.2.1d. Require site-specific geologic engineering studies in accordance with the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act as part of the development review process, especially in areas of high potential for liquefaction as presented in Exhibit 1 (Seismic Hazards Map).
Policy 2.2.1e. Not permit an emergency or critical facility in an area of potential liquefaction and seismic geologic hazards without requiring a detailed site analysis that determines that the location of such facility will not be hazardous.
Policy 2.2.1f. Require site specific soils and geologic engineering studies to assess natural and graded slope stability for proposed developments in any areas which may be found to be of moderate to high landslide risk. Slope stability calculations should incorporate the groundshaking parameters (i.e., soil depth, groundshaking potential, and liquefaction potential) presented in Exhibit 1 (Seismic Hazards Map).
Policy 2.2.1g. Make available to the public pertinent information regarding earthquake safety, damage prevention, mitigation measures, and appropriate responses to seismic events.
Policy 2.2.1 h. Continue monitoring new construction techniques and materials designed for earthquake safety and resistance to include in the design review process and incorporate into the City Municipal Code as feasible.
Norco
General Plan Safety Element	15
Policy 2.2.1 i. Evaluate the risks to emergency and critical facilities from seismic activity. Take measures to minimize the risks to these facilities and ensure their continuous operation during seismic events.
2.3	FIRE HAZARD SAFETY GOAL.
2.3.1	FIRE SAFETY POLICY - The City shall maintain adequate fire protection in both urban and hillside areas through the enforcement of the latest fire codes, encouraging cooperation between the Fire department, Planning, and building divisions, and coordinating with neighboring fire departments.
Policy 2.3.1a. Coordinate with other fire protection agencies to provide adequate levels of fire protection throughout the General Plan Area, through a combination of both aggressive prevention and suppression activities.
Policy 2.3.1b. Pursue mutual response agreements between area fire districts and departments. These agreements should provide equal and reciprocal benefits and enhance the ability of local entities to provide levels of adequate fire protection.
Policy 2.3.1c. The minimum fireflow standard for low density residential construction should be 1,000 gallons of water per minute.
Policy 2.3.1d. The minimum fireflow standard for multiple-family residential construction should be 1,500 gallons of water per minute.
Policy 2.3.1e. The minimum fireflow standard for commercial and industrial developments should be 2,500 gallons per minute.
Policy 2.3.1f. Endeavor to meet and maintain adequate fire response time for all residents and businesses.
Policy 2.3.1q. Evaluate all new development to be located in or adjacent to wildland areas to assess vulnerability to fire and the potential as a source of fire. Specific design and landscaping requirements may be established to reduce fire risks to development in these areas.
Policy 2.3.1 h. Encourage all fire prevention measures taken in rural or wildland areas to meet the functional needs for fire prevention, while maintaining the aesthetic character of the natural area.
Policy 2.3.1 i. Consider the needs of fire prevention and suppression during project review of development projects. These include, but are not limited to, providing adequate access to buildings, adequate separation between buildings, and adequate building setbacks from fuel modification areas. Fire suppression
______measures also include continued implementation of adopted fire and building
Norco
General Plan Safety Element	16
codes (Title 15) pertaining to the installation of automatic fire extinguishing systems in new buildings.
Policy 2.3.1 j. The City Fire Department should provide input to the Planning Division for all developments that require site plan or subdivision review prior to hearings before official commissions or the City Council. Street and driveway widths shall be adequate to provide access to sites and buildings shall be configured to provide sufficient clearances for fire suppression and other emergency access needs.
Policy 2.3.1k. During project review, include conditions of approval as warranted to mitigate projects that will be within wildland urban interface fire areas.
Policy 2.3.11. Consider wildland fire potential and the incorporation of necessary fire prevention measures when establishing habitat conservation areas that might otherwise prohibit those measures once the area has been established as a condition of approval for project development.
Policy 2.3.1m. Continuously and systematically mitigate existing fire hazards related to existing development or patterns of development as they are identified and as resources permit.
Policy 2.3.1 n. Maintain evacuation plans for areas subject to wild fires.
Policy 2.3.1o. Regularly test fire hydrants throughout the City to determine their pressures and capacities. Replace or repair faulty fire hydrants, color code hydrants by capacity and schedule improvements to portions of a system that do not meet the fire flow standards established herein.
Policy 2.3.1 p. Make available to the public information regarding the prevention of wildland fires along with standard fire prevention and hazard abatement practices for all land uses.
2.4 FLOOD SAFETY GOAL - TO REDUCE POTENTIAL FLOOD HAZARDS FOR RESIDENTS AND BUSINESSES IN THE CITY OF NORCO
2.4.1	FLOOD SAFETY POLICY: Property damage and loss of life in the event of flooding shall be minimized through the construction of flood control facilities, and ensuring that structures built on the floodplain can withstand a 1% annual chance flood (100-year flood).
Policy 2.4.1a. Exhibit 3 (Flood Hazards Map) identifies the location of potential areas subject to inundation due to dam failure or a 1% annual chance flood as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Evaluate all developments proposed in these areas to minimize the risks of life or property.
Norco
General Plan Safety Element	17
Policy 2.4.1b. Maintain compliance with FEMA’s rules for development in regulatory floodplains and floodways. Establish and maintain guidelines for development of additional areas subject to periodic inundation.
Policy 2.4.1c. Relocate or protect all existing emergency or critical facilities determined to be in the 1% annual chance flood area, as shown in Exhibit 3 (Flood Hazards Map), or as later defined through specific engineering studies, as funds are available.
Policy 2.4.1d. Prohibit the placement of emergency facilities in the 1 % chance annual flood area, as shown in Exhibit 3 (Flood Hazards Map) or as later defined through specific engineering studies. Critical facilities should only be permitted if adequate flood protection measures are taken.
Policy 2.4.1 e. Encourage the continued construction of flood control facilities to protect areas threatened by inundation, emphasizing underground channels or facilities that give the appearance of natural water courses.
Policy 2.4.1f. Maintain evacuation plans for areas that could be affected by flooding or dam failure (As shown in Exhibit 3 - Flood Hazards Map) with special emphasis on critical and emergency facilities.
Policy 2.4.1q. Permit development in a floodplain only if it possesses minimal risk to lives and property and is adequately designed so that all structures are capable of withstanding a 1% annual chance flood or greater.
Policy 2.4.1 h. Discourage the construction of schools and other places of public assembly in areas subject to inundation as shown in Exhibit 3 (Flood Hazards Map).
Policy 2.4.1 i. During project review require drainage studies (as needed) by a qualified engineer to certify that new development will be adequately protected and that project development will not create new downstream flood hazards.
Policy 2.4.1k. Require erosion and flood control improvements to be consistent with Regional Water Quality Control Board Best Management Practices (BMP’s) and encourage the incorporation of natural landscaping and pervious surfaces in site design review.
2.5 SECURITY, POLICE, AND SAFETY GOAL- THE ENSURE THAT EQUIPMENT AND STRUCTURES DESIGNED TO PROVIDE EMERGENCY DISASTER SERVICES ARE LOCATED AND DESIGNED TO FUNCTION AFTER A DISASTER OR EMERGENCY EVENT.
Norco
General Plan Safety Element
18
2.5.1	SECURITY AND SAFETY POLICY: Reliable and timely emergency response during emergencies shall be maintained by ensuring the integrity of emergency facilities.
Policy 2.5.1a. Mitigate deficiencies, if any, in the location or construction of the City’s disaster and relief equipment and structures in accordance with the policies and recommendations for implementation in this Plan.
Policy 2.5.1b. Subject all future disaster relief equipment and structures to careful locational and engineering scrutiny based upon the currently adopted Uniform Building Code and other applicable regulations.
Policy 2.5.1c. Prepare, implement, and maintain a Local Hazard Mitigation Plan, which will incorporate a plan regarding the specific roles of different emergency facilities in case of a flood, fire, or seismic related disaster.
2.5.2	POLICE SERVICE POLICY: The City shall endeavor to provide a safe, low-crime environment through neighborhood watch programs, citizen patrols, and ensuring adequate police response times.
Policy 2.5.2a. Endeavor to provide a minimum response time of 5 minutes on all priority 1 calls and 12 minutes on all priority 2 calls. Priority 1 calls include those of a life-threatening nature such as: robbery in progress, accident involving bodily injury, death-threatening situation, a person unable to breathe, and violent crimes in process. Priority 2 calls include those that are not life threatening such as: burglary past, petty theft, shoplifting.
Policy 2.5.2b. Maintain inter-agency cooperation with other policing agencies within the General Plan Area to provide adequate levels of protection through a combination of crime prevention and law enforcement activities.
Policy 2.5.2c. Maintain a decentralized and neighborhood level police service with community volunteer groups such as citizen/equestrian patrols and neighborhood watch programs.
2.5.3	SECURITY DESIGN PROGRAM POLICY: The City will work to reduce crime potential in the urban environment by making sure that any input regarding crime-reduction strategies from the Planning Division and the Sherriff’s Department are considered in all development plans.
Policy 2.5.3a. Through zoning, subdivision and building regulations, and environmental assessment practices, the City should encourage development that will increase or better ensure the public’s safety.
Norco
19
General Plan Safety Element
Policy 2.5.3b. Encourage and implement appropriate utilization of defensible space design concepts in new developments.
Policy 2.5.3c. Encourage community crime prevention measures, such as building security hardware that could result in a reduction in insurance premiums and other economic incentives.
Policy 2.5.3d. Consider public security policies in the development of specific and community plans.
Policy 2.5.3e. Promote land use and design policies and regulations which encourage a mixture of compatible uses to promote and increase the safety of public use areas and pedestrian/equestrian travel.
Policy 2.5.3f. Systematically mitigate crime hazards related to urban development or patterns of urban development as they are identified and as resources permit.
Policy 2.5.3g. Advocate and support regional efforts to accelerate the adoption of crime reduction measures incorporating physical planning techniques, such as those of the Southern California Association of Governments and the California Council on Criminal Justice.
Policy 2.5.3h. Encourage and support continued research efforts, such as those funded by the Federal Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, to implement design/planning crime prevention strategies.
2.6 EVACUATION AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT GOAL- PROVIDE ADEQUATE LEVELS OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE TO ALL RESIDENTS IN NORCO.
2.6.1	MEDICAL EMERGENCY RESPONSE POLICY: The City will ensure adequate medical response times by continuing to pursue mutual response agreements, and making sure that medical responders coordinate with the Sherriff and Fire Departments.
Policy 2.6.1a. Maintain appropriate emergency response levels for medical emergencies. Maintain mutual response agreements among public service agencies that support interagency cooperation in response to medical emergencies.
Policy 2.6.1b. Establish working relationships with local amateur radio clubs and service organizations that can provide assistance in disaster assessment and recovery efforts.
Norco
\r_~y General Plan Safety Element
20
2.6.2	EVACUATION POLICY:
Policy 2.6.2a. In the event of an outbreak of a major emergency, the EOC shall establish evacuation routes immediately to implement should they become needed.
2.7	ANIMAL SAFETY GOAL- PROTECT THE ANIMAL COMMUNITY BOTH IN TERMS OF ON-GOING ANIMAL SAFETY PRACTICES AND IN EVACUATION AND RESCUE OPERATIONS DURING EMERGENCY SITUATIONS.
2.7.1	ON-GOING ANIMAL PROTECTION POLICY: The City will maintain adequate resources to monitor animal-keeping conditions with appropriate enforcement actions where animal safety is a concern.
Policy 2.7.1a. Maintain standards for the evaluation and intervention as needed to maintain animal-safety community-wide.
2.7.2	ANIMAL RESCUE POLICY: The City should continue to work with community volunteers and Animal Control for the safe evacuation of animals during emergency situations.
Policy 2.7.2a. Continue to work with community volunteers and Animal Control to ensure that animal safety is maintained to the extent feasible during emergency situations and operations.
Policy 2.7.2b. Maintain and update a list of locations available for the evacuation of animals during emergency situations.
Policy 2.7.2c. The City should offer inter-agency cooperation its experience, knowledge, and facilities for the rescue and evacuation of animals in area jurisdictions during emergency events.
2.8	HAZARDOUS MATERIAL MANAGEMENT GOAL- PROTECT LIFE AND PROPERTY FROM ADVERSE RISK FROM THE TRANSPORTING, STORING, TREATING, AND DISPOSING OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE MATERIALS WITHIN THE CITY.
2.8.1	HAZARDOUS MATERIAL MANAGEMENT POLICY: Through the annual business license renewal program ensure that businesses involved in the use of hazardous materials are in compliance with federal, state, and local regulations.
Policy 2.8.1a. For businesses or individuals involved in the use of hazardous materials require proof of compliance with all jurisdictional agencies (federal, state, and local) prior to issuance or renewal of a business license.
Norco
21
General Plan Safety Element
Policy 2.8.1b. When determined feasible and/or necessary by the Fire Department require established routes of transport or disposal of hazardous materials to avoid potential impact to sensitive land uses from materials being routinely transported.
Policy 2.8.1c. Make available to the public information on the proper use and storage of hazardous materials.
Policy 2.8.1d. The Fire Department, through project and business license reviews, should maintain a list of locations with known storages of hazardous materials along with appropriate evacuation, response, and clean-up that may have to occur during emergency events that can cause spillage.
Policy 2.8.1e. The Fire Department should maintain a list of known locations with hazardous materials for the protection of citizens and businesses in the event of spillage due to and emergency situation.
2.9 AIRPORT LAND USE COMPATIBILITY GOAL- ARTICULATE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR AIRPORT COMPATIBILITY TO PROTECT LIFE AND PROPERTY FROM ADVERSE RISK FROM AIRPORT OPERATIONS AT CORONA MUNCIPAL AIRPORT.
2.9.1	AIRPORT LAND USE COMPATIBILITY POLICY: Through coordination with the Riverside County Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) ensure that any proposed new development and any change in General Plan Land Use is consistent with the established policies of the Riverside County Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan.
Policy 2.9.1a. A determination of consistency should be obtained from the ALUC for any proposed development or General Plan Amendment that is not already deemed exempt by the Airport Land Use Compatibility Map and Policies.
Policy 2.9.1b. Proposals for new development consisting of buildings taller than 100 feet and other single solitary structures such as antenna that exceed 35 feet high shall be submitted for recommendation from the ALUC prior to receiving approval from the appropriate City body.
Policy 2.9.1c. The location within an airport land use compatibility area does not preclude: 1) the construction of a single-family home or second unit that is permitted by local land use regulations, 2) expansion or approvals on existing structures that do not exceed height limitations, and 3) lot line adjustments that do not exceed the density identified in the Airport Land Use Compatibility Criteria.
Norco
22
General Plan Safety Element
3.0 SAFETY PLAN IMPLEMENTATION
The Safety Element addresses a range of potential hazardous situations and what measures are needed to ensure maximum safety for citizens in the time of an event, minimum loss of property, and with minimal social and economic dislocation impacts. Implementation measures are summarized below:
3.1	MITIGATION TO POTENTIAL GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
3.1.1	DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR GEOLOGIC HAZARDS: Establish and implement standards prior to site development and land division ensuring geotechnical safety measures as needed, specific for the site in question, in terms of the potential for ground-shaking and secondary seismic impacts from liquefaction, slope failure, subsidence, mudslides, and seiches. Standards should also address other potential geologic hazards as needed, such as cliff erosion. Responsible Agency: Building Division, Planning Division
Funding Source: Development impact fees, exactions; application fees.
Time Frame: Ongoing
3.1.2	REHABILITATION/REPLACEMENT OF PUBIC INFRASTRUCTURE: Periodically perform inspections of primary circulation features, bridges, water delivery facilities, public safety facilities, and other critical facility infrastructure to ensure that structures built prior to current standards designed to withstand earthquake impacts, are replaced when there is reasonable concern of collapse if such an event were to occur.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department, Building Division, Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, and Riverside County Department of Transportation and Land Use Management.
Funding Source: Development impact fees/exactions, City and County capital improvement programs, and available State and Federal funds.
Time Frame: Ongoing
3.2	MITIGA TION TO POTENTIAL FLOOD HAZARDS
3.2.1	DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARDS
Establish and implement standards prior to site development or land division, for the site in question, in terms of the potential for flooding due to a 1% Annual Flood Occurrence, or inundation from other types of events including dam failure.
Norco
General Plan Safety Element
23
Responsible Agency: Building Division, Planning Division, Public Works Department, and Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District.
Funding Source: Development impact fees/exactions, application fees.
Time Frame: Ongoing
3.2.2	MAINTENANCE OF FLOOD CONTROL FACILITIES
Periodically perform inspections of flood control facilities for maintenance cleaning and repairing on an as-needed basis.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department and Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District.
Funding Source: City water funds and County capital improvement and maintenance programs, and available State and Federal funds.
Time Frame: Ongoing
3.2.3	FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Maintain non-structural approaches and cooperative alliances with area jurisdictions to support zoning and regulations needed to maintain qualification for FEMA’s National Flood Insurance Program.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department and Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District.
Funding Source: Water Department and County general funds, and available State and Federal funds.
Time Frame: Ongoing
3.3	MITIGA TION TO POTENTIAL FIRE HAZARDS
3.3.1	DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FIRE HAZARDS
Establish and implement policies, standards, and restrictions to reduce the risk from urban fire hazards in new development and land divisions.
Responsible Agency: Fire Department, Planning Division, Building Division. Funding Source: City general fund, and available State and Federal funds.
Time Frame: Ongoing
Norco
\L_js General Plan Safety Element	24
3.3.2	STRATEGIES TO PREVENT OR MITIGATE WILDLAND FIRE HAZARDS
Establish the different strategies for the protection and maintenance of property based on the fire hazard levels identified in the Fire Zones Map.
Responsible Agency: Fire Department.
Funding Source: City general fund, and available State and Federal funds.
Time Frame: Ongoing
3.4	EMERGENCY CONTIGENCY PLANS
3.4.1	EMERGENCY RESPONSE AND EVACUATION: Establish and be familiar with post-event contingency plans for emergency response and evacuation scenarios. Responsible Agency: Fire Department, Sheriff’s Department, City Emergency Operation Center staff.
Funding Source: City general fund, and available State and Federal recovery funds.
Time Frame: On-going for preparedness.
3.4.2	EMERGENCY HOUSING AND RECONSTRUCTION: Establish contingency plans for post event short term emergency housing and long term reconstruction scenarios.
Responsible Agency: Fire Department, Sheriff’s Department, City Emergency Operation Center staff.
Funding Source: City general fund, and available State and Federal recovery funds.
Time Frame: Event specific and on-going for evacuation preparedness.
Norco
General Plan Safety Element
25
4.0 GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Airport Influence Area:	Areas where airport-related factors may significantly
affect land uses or necessitate restrictions on those uses as determined by the Riverside County Airport Land Use Commission.
Airport Land Use Commission:
Established in each county through the California Public Utilities Code to ensure orderly development of air transportation facilities compatible with surrounding land uses, and vice versa. Commission members are appointed by the County Board of Supervisors, City Councils, and selection committees appointed by the Commission.
Alluvium:	Loose, unconsolidated sediment deposited by
flowing water usually in a riverbed, floodplain, or delta.
Alquist-Priolo Fault Zone: Regulatory zones that encompass surface traces of active faults that have a potential for future surface fault rupture. There is no Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone in or near the City of Norco.
Best Management Practice:
A measure implemented to control water pollution to the nations’ water stream from urban wastewater and storm water run-off.
Clay-coated Bedding:	Oriented clay coating on individual soil and mineral
grains.
Emergency Operation Center (EOC):
A central command post/control facility to bring together key personnel responsible for emergency management and continuity of operations during times of disasters affecting the City of Norco. The Norco EOC is located at the County of Riverside/Calfire Station 47 at 3902 Hillside Avenue, Norco.
Faulting:	A place where sections of the earth’s crust move
relative to one another along a crack in the crust
Norco
General Plan Safety Element	26
where one section is displaced with respect to the other.
Federal Emergency Management Act (FEMA):
	A federal agency of the United States created to coordinate responses to disasters that overwhelm state and local resources.
Fire Hazard Zone:	Fire Hazard Severity Zone maps adopted by Cal Fire that delineate those areas that are more prone to damage from wildland fires due to fire history, available fuels (vegetation), terrain, weather, and other relevant local factors that may exist.
Fire flow Standard:	An estimate of the amount and duration of water needed to provide municipal fire protection.
Floodplain:	Land adjacent to a river, stream, or tributary channel that periodically floods during high levels of rainfall and run-off in a short period of time where the runoff is not contained within the standard banks of the channel; areas that have historically flooded during these incidents.
Floodway:	The channel of a watercourse that is needed to discharge run-off from a flooding incident that has a 1% chance of occurring each year, or more commonly referred to as a “100-year flood”, the largest anticipated flood event in a 100-year period.
Fuel Modification Area/Zone:
Ground Failure:	Fuel modification area is that portion of the City within a “Very High” Fire Hazard Area where “defensible spaces” around homes should be incorporated. The fuel modification zone is that area around a home defined as the defensible space to protect the home from wildland fires. It provides adequate room for firefighters to fight fires, and is an area where the vegetation should be minimized/ reduced and replaced with fire-resistant species. A general reference to impacts caused by seismic activity that reduce the stability of the ground resulting in landslides, liquefaction, lateral spreads, etc.
Norco
General Plan Safety Element
27
Ground Shaking:
Caused by the passage of seismic waves, especially near the surface, from earthquakes and is the trigger for damage resulting from ground failure depending on the magnitude of the earthquake.
Hazardous Material:	Any item or agent (biological, chemical, radiological,
and/or physical) that has the potential to cause harm to humans, animals, or the environment, either by itself of through interaction with other factors.
Liquefaction:	A seismic event, generally cause by ground
shaking, that occurs in saturated, loose, fine to medium-grained soils that result in soils losing its bearing strength so as to behave much like a liquid. The depth of groundwater is generally within 50 feet of the surface in areas where liquefaction can be a problem. While Norco is designated “Moderate to High” for potential liquefaction threats in the Riverside County Implementation Plan based on the shallow ground water, the type of soils generally negates this potential. However, detailed soils studies will identify site specific threats before development should be allowed to occur.
Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP):
A requirement of the Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000, each jurisdiction that receives federal disaster assistance needs to have in place an LHMP to provide mitigation planning and implementation efforts of possible future disasters. The development of the LHMP includes reviews of past disasters, estimates the probability of future occurences, and sets goals to mitigate potential risks from natural and man-made disasters.
One-Percent (1%) Annual Flood:
A flood event of such a magnitude that it only has a one-in-100 chance of occurring in a one-year period; or once every 100 years.
Norco
General Plan Safety Element
28
Settlement:	Downward movement of underlying layers of soil due to excessive loading on top that is in excess of the bearing capacity of the soil below.
Seiches:	Standing waves created on rivers, reservoirs, ponds, and lakes when seismic waves pass through an area.
Subsidence:	Downward movement of underlying layers of soil due to the withdrawal of moisture causing shrinkage within the structure of the soil itself.
Wildland Fire:	A non-structural fire, natural and human-caused, that occurs in an area where development is sparse except for roads powerlines, and similar transportation facilities. A pre-scribed wildland fire is one that is ignited for management purposes to achieve specific pre-planned objectives. Wildland fire use is the appropriate management response to a naturally-ignited wildland fire to accomplish specific resource management objectives.
Norco
General Plan Safety Element
29
































