             10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
    VISION
    In 2030, the City of Chico is an active leader in protecting the environment through
    preservation and enhancement of open space, natural resources, and agriculture. The
    City has recognized the importance of protecting the natural landscape for intensive
    and non-intensive recreation by making natural areas and outdoor recreation
    opportunities accessible to the entire community, which benefits public health and
    contributes to a sense of well-being. The urban forest thrives, with the preservation of
    heritage and street trees as well as the continued planting of new street trees.
    Greenways along urban creeks with multi-purpose paths have expanded the network of
    trails throughout Chico. The community enjoys clean water for consumption and
    recreation, and the air is clean and measurably healthy.
INTRODUCTION
The Open Space and Environment Element focuses on the preservation and enhancement of
the natural environment and limiting the adverse effects on environmental resources from
General Plan build-out.
Chico residents place a high value on scenic open spaces, fertile agricultural lands, clean
water, and fresh air. The preservation and enhancement of these natural resources is a
significant part of the sense of place for Chico residents and is thus an essential component of
the General Plan. This element supports the management of natural resources and the
conservation of open space and sensitive habitats. Various funding mechanisms, community
involvement, and public/private partnerships will be necessary to implement this element.
This element provides context and sets goals and policies for the use and acquisition of open
space, and protection of biological resources, air quality, water resources and agriculture.
This element establishes City policies on the protection of natural resources. Due to the
breadth of information covered in this element, the chapter is organized into sections
addressing the following seven topics:
    •    Biological Resources
    •    Open Space
    •    Water Resources and Water Quality
    •    Air Quality
    •    Agricultural Resources
    •    Mineral Resources
    •    Urban Forest
This element works in conjunction with the Land Use Element to describe how the City will
advance the land use objectives of the General Plan while maintaining the natural resources
of the City. It also complements the Safety Element, which outlines a framework to protect
                                                                              Chico General Plan 10-1

              10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
     people and property from natural hazards, and the Sustainability Element which prioritizes
     actions that preserve and protect environmental resources. For Bidwell Park, the City’s
     largest open space land holding, the City relies on the Bidwell Park Master Management Plan
     to direct management decisions and to protect resources. This element guides and supports a
     variety of related plans as referenced throughout the chapter. Where appropriate, cross-
     references are provided to alert the reader to the applicable policies or actions in other
     elements of this Plan.
     ISSUES AND CONSIDERATIONS
     This section of the element identifies and addresses key open space and environmental issues
     raised during the outreach efforts for the General Plan Update. Policy guidance is found in
     the goals, policies, and actions section of this element. An explanation of specialized terms
     can be found in the General Plan Glossary (Appendix A).
     B IOLOGICAL R ESOURCES
     The Planning Area is rich in biological resources, and residents place significant value on
     protecting the area’s natural environment. This element recognizes known locations of
     sensitive, threatened, or endangered species and requires that they be protected consistent
     with local, state and federal guidelines. The General Plan acknowledges limits to urban
     expansion in areas containing sensitive biological resources and calls for City participation in
     regional planning efforts to preserve sensitive species and habitat.
     O PEN S PACE
                                      In and around Chico there is an abundance of open space,
                                      park land, stream corridors and unique habitats. Open space
                                      provides habitat and movement corridors for wildlife, as well
                                      as recreational, educational, aesthetic and other quality of
                                      life benefits to the community. Open space within and
                                      around the city is a defining characteristic of Chico. This
                                      element protects open space by calling for stream and
                                      agricultural buffers, retaining the Greenline, and directing
                                      efforts to acquire, maintain, and manage open space
                                      preserves and greenways.
     W ATER R ESOURCES
     The landscape of Chico is defined by its creeks and watercourses. Protecting the quantity
     and quality of water for public health and aquatic life is critical to a healthy community. The
     primary issues related to water quality in the City and Planning Area are urban storm water
     runoff, groundwater contamination from septic tanks, infiltration of urban storm water runoff,
     and pollutants from dry cleaning and industrial uses. This element establishes policy
10-2      Chico General Plan

            10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
direction to reduce water quantity and quality impacts from urban development through
treatment of storm water runoff, protection of watercourses, and water conservation efforts.
This element addresses the need to protect surface and groundwater quality and groundwater
recharge areas by supporting the use of National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
standards and implementing the Nitrate Compliance Plan which expedites connections to the
City’s waste disposal and treatment system to reduce the use of septic tanks.
A IR Q UALITY
Clean air is a basic need for most living organisms. Due to natural physiographical,
meteorological, and human-induced factors, the air quality in the Planning Area does not
meet all state and federal air quality standards. Wood burning has been identified as a major
source of PM2.5 pollution in the area during the winter months, which raises serious health
concerns. During the summer months, the City has experienced non-attainment levels of
ozone pollution, much of which travels to the area from urban areas to the south and
southwest. One of the ways this General Plan attempts to minimize local air pollution is
through planning that reduces reliance on automobiles. The Plan focuses on maintaining a
compact urban form and a multi-modal approach to transportation that allows greater choices
for mobility throughout the community. This element advances local, regional and State air
quality improvement efforts by requiring consistency with air quality regulations,
encouraging the use of low emission and renewable energy sources and emerging clean air
technologies, and directing City action to reduce wood burning and other major pollutant
emissions.
OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT CONTEXT
This section of the element provides important context
information on six topics relevant to the Open Space and
Environment goals, policies, and actions.
B IOLOGICAL R ESOURCES
The Planning Area includes a rich and diverse range of
biological resources. The most notable natural habitat
types include annual grassland, riparian woodland,
permanent wetland, vernal pools/seasonal wetlands, and
valley oak woodlands. Many of these habitats deserve special consideration due to their
limited distribution, particular sensitivity, or the presence of one or more rare, threatened, or
endangered species.
A number of species listed as rare, threatened or endangered by state or federal agencies are
known to occur within the Planning Area. Notable species include Butte County
meadowfoam, Valley Elderberry Longhorn beetle, hairy orcutt and slender orcutt grasses,
Greene’s tuctoria, Chinook salmon, and the yellow-billed cuckoo. Other sensitive species of
                                                                             Chico General Plan   10-3

                    10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
           regional importance include Butte County checkerbloom, Swainson’s hawk, Giant Garter
           snake, and various anadromous fish. Figure OS-1 shows sensitive habitats that support a
           majority of the special status species in the Planning Area.
   Cross
           Impacts to biological resources are regulated by a number of State and Federal agencies, and
 reference must be considered and mitigated as part of project review under the California
Table LU-2 Environmental Quality Act. In addition to meeting State and Federal requirements, the Land
           Use Element establishes land use designations and a special overlay to address open space
           and sensitive habitat areas as follows:
               •    Primary Open Space – POS
               •    Secondary Open Space – SOS
               •    Resource Constraint Overlay – RCO
           The Primary and Secondary Open Space land use designations, which are defined in Table
           LU-2 of the Land Use Element, identify areas that are intended for resource protection,
           intensive, or non-intensive open space uses. The Resource Constraint Overlay designation
           identifies areas that are known to have sensitive resources that would limit the potential for
           urban development but which are not currently protected as open space preserves.
           Butte Regional Habitat Conservation Plan and Natural Community
           Conservation Plan
           The Butte Regional Habitat Conservation Plan and Natural Community Conservation Plan,
           under preparation by the Butte County Association of Governments in consultation with local
           jurisdictions, is a voluntary plan that will provide comprehensive species, wetlands, and
           ecosystem conservation. The Plan will contribute to the recovery of endangered species
                                            within Butte County and provide a more streamlined process
                                            for environmental permitting for individual projects.
                                            O PEN S PACE
                                            The City owns significant open space resources, including
                                            Bidwell Park, which provides an exceptional open space
                                            corridor that runs throughout the community and into the
                                            foothills. In addition, a number of agencies and organizations
                                            own and manage open space in and around Chico. Figure
           OS-2 shows protected open space resources within the Planning Area. Currently, there is no
           coordinated approach to acquire, manage, and connect open space areas. In some cases,
           adequate funding is not available for property maintenance and management. Examples of
           the City’s open space assets include Bidwell Park, Foothill Park Preserve, Bidwell Ranch,
           Teichert Ponds, Lindo Channel, and the Comanche Creek Greenway.
           Policies found in this element, as well as the Land Use and Parks, Public Facilities and
           Services Elements, seek to protect, enhance, increase, and manage the City’s open space
           resources.
    10-4        Chico General Plan





            10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
W ATER S UPPLY AND W ATER Q UALITY
The State Water Resources Control Board has jurisdiction over nine Regional Boards, whose
charge it is to maintain water quality. The Chico Planning Area is located within the
Sacramento Valley Basin which falls under the control of the Central Valley Regional Water
Quality Control Board. The Water Quality Control Plan for this basin was revised by the
Board in 2007. Figure OS-3 shows surface water in the Planning Area.
The protection of water quality and water supply is
important for public health, biological resources, and
aquatic life. The primary regulatory mechanism for the
discharge of pollutants into water is the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit
program, which is designed to protect water quality by
regulating point sources of pollutants.
The Tuscan aquifer is the primary groundwater reservoir
underlying and providing municipal and agricultural
water to the Planning Area. The groundwater supply is
largely recharged by infiltration in the foothills located east of Chico, from Big Chico and
Little Chico Creeks, Lindo Channel, and to a lesser extent from precipitation throughout the
area. The California Water Service Company (Cal Water), the City’s water supplier, has
adopted a Water Master Plan (WMP) which analyzes the aquifer’s supply. The WMP
concludes that no substantial overdraft of the aquifer is currently occurring within the
Planning Area. In addition, Butte County continually monitors the groundwater basin and
maintains a series of monitoring and test wells located throughout the County to provide
information on water supply.
A IR Q UALITY
Clean air is a critical environmental resource. The combination of a growing urban center,
winter wood burning, local and regional agricultural operations, local topographical and
meteorological conditions, and the use of carbon-based fuels for industry, transportation and
heating have a negative effect on the City’s air quality.
The Planning Area is located in the Northern Sacramento Valley Air Basin (NSVAB) and air
quality is locally regulated by the Butte County Air Quality Management District
(BCAQMD). The BCAQMD is charged with the responsibility for developing and
implementing the planning, regulation, enforcement, technical innovation, and education on
air quality issues. The NSVAB has been categorized as “moderately non-attainment” for
ozone and particulate matter (PM), which means that the region is not meeting state or
federal standards for these air pollutants. Butte County is currently in a non-attainment status
with respect to the state ozone, PM10, and PM2.5 standards, as well as the federal 8-hour
ozone standard.
                                                                             Chico General Plan  10-9




            10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
Traditional air quality management strategies have focused on controlling stationary sources
or pollutants, primarily from manufacturing operations, and reducing motor vehicle
emissions through technological advancements. This element, like others in the General
Plan, supports an urban development pattern and a circulation system that will reduce
reliance on automobile travel, and thus help to improve local and regional air quality.
A GRICULTURAL R ESOURCES
Agriculture has helped to shape the City, and continues to be a
major component of the local and regional economy. While few
agricultural operations continue within the City, substantial
operations exist just outside of the City limits, within the
Planning Area. The City has respected a firm boundary
between urban and rural uses on the community’s western edge,
known as the Greenline, for over thirty years. Land to the west
of the City and the Greenline is almost exclusively agricultural,
while much of the land to the north and east of the City is used
for grazing. Figure OS-4 shows local agricultural resources and
the Greenline boundary.
U RBAN F OREST
The term “Urban Forest” refers to the abundance of trees found in the City. Chico’s urban
forest provides an aesthetic community benefit, energy savings from its shade canopy, areas
of refuge from warm summer temperatures, and increased foraging and nesting locations for
flora and fauna.
                                                                           Chico General Plan 10-13




          10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
  Goal OS-1 Protect and conserve native species and habitats.
  Goal OS-2 Connect the community with a network of protected and maintained
              open space and creekside greenways.
  Goal OS-3 Conserve water resources and improve water quality.
  Goal OS-4 Improve air quality for a healthy City and region.
  Goal OS-5 Preserve agricultural resources for the production of local food and
              the maintenance of Chico’s rural character.
  Goal OS-6 Provide a healthy and robust urban forest.
B IOLOGICAL R ESOURCES
     Goal OS-1: Protect and conserve native species and habitats.
    • Policy OS-1.1 (Native Habitats and Species) – Preserve native species and
       habitat through land use planning, cooperation, and collaboration.
          Action OS-1.1.1 (Development/Preservation Balance) – Direct development to              Cross
                                                                                                reference
          appropriate locations consistent with the Land Use Diagram, and protect and           LU-2.5.1
          preserve areas designated Open Space and areas that contain sensitive habitat and
          species.
          Action OS-1.1.2 (Regional Conservation Planning) – Actively participate in
                                                                                                  Cross
          regional conservation planning efforts, in particular the Butte County Habitat        reference
          Conservation Plan process, sponsored by the Butte County Association of               LU-1.1.2
          Governments, which seeks the preservation of habitat areas needed for the
          ongoing viability of native species.
          Action OS-1.1.3 (Sustainable Community Strategy) – In support of AB 32,
          work with the Butte County Association of Governments to implement the
          Sustainable Community Strategy (SB 375), which directs smart-growth
          development to urbanized areas.
          Action OS-1.1.4 (Community Collaboration) – Consult with conservation
          groups to identify sites and projects for fund-raising and volunteer participation in
          public education, enhancement, maintenance, and protection of natural resources
          within the City’s Sphere of Influence.
                                                                          Chico General Plan      10-17

                   10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
                      Action OS-1.1.5 (Control Invasive Species) – Prioritize efforts to remove non-
                      native species within Bidwell Park and other City greenways, and condition new
                      development adjacent to Bidwell Park and greenways to protect native species
                      and habitat from the introduction of invasive species.
              • Policy OS-1.2 (Regulatory Compliance) – Protect special-status plant and
                  animal species, including their habitats, in compliance with all applicable state,
                  federal and other laws and regulations.
                      Action OS-1.2.1 (State and Federal Guidelines) – Ensure that project-related
                      biological impacts are considered and mitigated, and require applicants to obtain
                      all necessary local, state and federal permits for projects that may affect special-
                      status species or their habitat.
              • Policy OS-1.3 (Light Pollution) – Reduce excessive nighttime light and glare.
                      Action OS-1.3.1 (Dark Sky Ordinance) – Consider adoption of a Dark Sky
                      ordinance.
                      Action OS-1.3.2 (Reduce Light Pollution) – Seek community cooperation to
                      reduce existing light pollution.
           O PEN S PACE
              Goal OS-2: Connect the community with a network of protected and maintained
              open space and creekside greenways to build knowledge and appreciation of
              these resources.
   Cross      • Policy OS-2.1 (Planning and Managing Open Space) – Continue acquisition,
 reference
PPFS-1.1.9        management, and maintenance of open space to protect habitat and promote
and CD-2.1        public access.
                      Action OS-2.1.1 (Open Space Plan) – Develop an Open Space and Greenways
                      Master Plan that catalogues the City’s open space land holdings, ensures that
                      management and maintenance programs are in place, identifies long-term
                      funding, coordinates with other public and private open space holdings, and
                      prioritizes additional open space acquisitions, dedications, and easements to
                      enhance connectivity, protect resources, and facilitate public access and
                      circulation.
   Cross              Action OS-2.1.2 (Funding for Open Space) – Pursue outside funding sources
 reference
PPFS-1.1.2
                      for open space acquisition, management, maintenance, and restoration.
   10-18      Chico General Plan

         10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
                                                                                          Cross reference
  • Policy OS-2.2 (Creek Corridors and Greenways) – Expand creekside greenway               PPFS-2.1.3,
                                                                                           CD-2.1.2 and
     areas for open space and additional pedestrian/bicycle routes.                           CD-2.1.3
                                                                                               Cross
         Action OS-2.2.1 (Creekside Greenway Program) – Continue collecting fees for         reference
         creekside greenway acquisition, and purchase properties as opportunities arise.    PPFS-2.1.1
                                                                                           and CD-2.1.3
         Action OS-2.2.2 (Greenway Expansion) – Seek easements and dedications
         along the City’s creeks to expand the greenway system.
  • Policy OS-2.3 (Foothill Accessibility) – Support public access to publicly held
     foothill areas for non-intensive recreational purposes, where appropriate.
                                                                                               Cross
                                                                                            reference
  • Policy OS-2.4 (Foothill Viewshed) – Preserve the foothills as a natural backdrop        LU-1.2.2,
                                                                                            LU-7.5.4,
     to the urban form.                                                                    and CD-2.4
                                                                                               Cross
         Action OS-2.4.1 (Visual Simulations) – Require visual simulations for foothill     reference
         development to assess viewshed impacts.                                          CD-2.4.1 and
                                                                                            LU-6.2.4
  • Policy OS-2.5 (Creeks and Riparian Corridors) – Preserve and enhance Chico’s               Cross
                                                                                            reference
     creeks and riparian corridors as open space for their aesthetic, drainage,            PPFS-2.1.3
     habitat, flood control, and water quality values.
         Action OS-2.5.1 (Setbacks from Creeks) – Consistent with the City’s Municipal
         Code, require a minimum 25-foot setback from the top of creek banks to                Cross
                                                                                            reference
         development and associated above ground infrastructure as a part of project       PPFS-2.1.2
         review, and seek to acquire an additional 75 feet. In addition, require a larger
         setback where necessary to mitigate environmental impacts.
  • Policy OS-2.6 (Oak Woodlands) – Protect oak woodlands as open space for
     sensitive species and habitat.
W ATER S UPPLY AND W ATER Q UALITY
   Goal OS-3: Conserve water resources and improve water quality.
  • Policy OS-3.1 (Surface Water Resources) – Protect and improve the quality of
     surface water.
         Action OS-3.1.1 (Comply with State Standards) – Comply with the California
         Regional Water Quality Control Board's regulations and standards to maintain,
         protect, and improve water quality and quantity.
                                                                       Chico General Plan      10-19

                10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
   Cross           Action OS-3.1.2 (Runoff from New Development) – Require the use of
 reference         pollution management practices and National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
PPFS-6.4.1
    and            System permits to control, treat, and prevent discharge of polluted runoff from
PPFS-6.5.3         development.
                   Action OS-3.1.3 (Discharge Enforcement) – Continue enforcement of illegal
                   discharges to Chico’s creeks.
                   Action OS-3.1.4 (Clean Creeks Project) – Continue implementation of the
                   Chico USA Clean Creeks Project which provides community-wide education
                   regarding storm water runoff, pollution management practices, and the
                   importance of clean creeks.
                   Action OS-3.1.5 (Water Quality Monitoring) – Monitor water quality in Big
                   Chico Creek (above and below Sycamore Pool) daily between Memorial Day and
                   Labor Day and monthly during the balance of the year.
                   Action OS-3.1.6 (Teichert Ponds Restoration) – Seek funding to implement the
                   Teichert Ponds Restoration Habitat Development Plan, which will enhance storm
                   water quality, wildlife habitat, public access, and education at the Teichert Ponds
                   stormwater facility.
                   Action OS-3.1.7 (Five-Mile Operation) – Work with the Butte County Public
                   Works Department to improve operation and maintenance of the Five-Mile flood
                   control system to enhance flow and sediment management and thereby enhance
                   water quality, fisheries habitat, and flood capacity.
   Cross
 reference • Policy OS-3.2 (Protect Groundwater) – Protect groundwater and aquifer
 PPFS-5.1      recharge areas to maintain groundwater supply and quality.
   Cross           Action OS-3.2.1 (Protect Recharge Areas) – Avoid impacts to groundwater
 reference         recharge areas through open space preservation, runoff management, stream
PPFS-6.3.1
                   setbacks and clustering of development.
                   Action OS-3.2.2 (Map Recharge Areas) – Work with local, state and regional
                   agencies to identify and map groundwater recharge areas within the Sphere of
                   Influence.
   Cross
 reference
                   Action OS-3.2.3 (Nitrate Compliance Plan) – Continue to implement the
PPFS-4.2.2         Nitrate Compliance Plan.
                   Action OS-3.2.4 (Monitor Contaminated Sites) – Monitor the status of known
                   groundwater and soil contamination sites within the Planning Area as identified
   10-20   Chico General Plan

         10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
         by the California Department of Toxic Substances Control and the Regional
         Water Quality Control Board.
                                                                                                 Cross
         Action OS-3.2.5 (Groundwater Protection) – Oppose regional sales and                  reference
                                                                                              PPFS-5.5.1
         transfers of local groundwater.
   • Policy OS-3.3 (Water Conservation and Reclamation) – Encourage water
      conservation and the reuse of water.
         Action OS-3.3.1 (Water Conservation Program Funding) – Work with the                    Cross
         California Water Service Company to implement a water conservation program            reference
                                                                                               PPFS-5.3
         to reduce per capita water use 20 percent by 2020 pursuant to the requirements of
         the State Water Plan.
         Action OS-3.3.2 (Reduce the Use of Turf) – Limit the use of turf on landscape           Cross
         medians, parkways, and other common areas in favor of native and drought              reference
                                                                                              SUS-4.2.1
         tolerant ground cover, mulch, and other landscaping design elements, and support         and
         the conversion of existing turf to less water-intensive ground cover types.          PPFS-5.4.1
         Action OS-3.3.3 (Parkway Irrigation) – Design and monitor irrigation systems
         in medians and parkways to maximize efficiency and minimize nuisance run-off.
                                                                                                 Cross
         Action OS-3.3.4 (Reclaimed Water) – Determine the feasibility and costs and           reference
         benefits of reusing the City’s treated wastewater for irrigation.                    PPFS-5.3.1
         Action OS-3.3.5 (Water Efficient Landscape Irrigation) – Enforce the
         requirements of state water conservation legislation when reviewing landscaping
         plans for new projects.
A IR Q UALITY
    Goal OS-4: Improve air quality for a healthy City and region.
   • Policy OS-4.1 (Air Quality Standards) – Work to comply with state and federal               Cross
      ambient air quality standards and to meet mandated annual air quality                    reference
                                                                                              SUS-1.2.1
      reduction targets.
         Action OS-4.1.1 (Air Quality Impact Mitigation) – During project and
                                                                                                Cross
         environmental review, evaluate air quality impacts and incorporate applicable        reference
         mitigations, including payment of air quality impact fees, to reduce impacts          SUS-6.3
         consistent with the Butte County Air Quality Management District’s CEQA Air
         Quality Handbook.
                                                                           Chico General Plan    10-21

                    10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
                       Action OS-4.1.2 (Wood Burning) – Implement measures to reduce air pollution
                       from wood burning.
     Cross             Action OS-4.1.3 (Pollution from City Equipment) – As viable alternatives
  reference            become available, replace City-owned, gas-powered equipment with less
 SUS-3.4.1
                       polluting models.
     Cross
  reference            Action OS-4.1.4 (Leaf Removal) – Enforce the City’s no burn regulations,
 PPFS-8.1.1            encourage composting, and continue the residential leaf pick-up program.
     Cross
  reference
                       Action OS-4.1.5 (Reduce Traffic Pollution) – Reduce pollution from traffic by
   CIRC-1,             providing a well-connected circulation system with complete streets, enhancing
  CIRC-2.,             bicycle facilities, supporting transit, and implementing traffic calming techniques
   CIRC-3,
CIRC-4, and            such as roundabouts, narrowed streets, and chicanes.
   CIRC-5
               • Policy OS-4.2 (Air Quality Education) – Participate in public education efforts
                   to improve air quality.
                       Action OS-4.2.1 (Air Quality Education) – In consultation with the Butte
                       County Air Quality Management District, disseminate information to educate the
                       community about how to improve air quality.
     Cross     • Policy OS-4.3 (Greenhouse Gas Emissions) – Implement and update, as
  reference
SUS-6.1 and        necessary, the Climate Action Plan to achieve incremental greenhouse gas
   SUS-6.2         emissions reductions.
            A GRICULTURAL R ESOURCES
                Goal OS-5: Preserve agricultural areas for the production of local food and the
                maintenance of Chico’s rural character.
     Cross     • Policy OS-5.1 (Urban/Rural Boundary) – Protect agriculture by maintaining the
  reference
  LU-1.2.1         Greenline between urban and rural uses.
     Cross     • Policy OS-5.2 (Agricultural Resources) – Minimize conflicts between urban and
  reference        agricultural uses by requiring buffers or use restrictions.
   LU-2.6
                       Action OS-5.2.1 (Agricultural Buffers) – Require buffers for development
                       adjacent to active agricultural operations along the Greenline to reduce
                       incompatibilities, and explore opportunities for public uses within buffers.
     Cross
  reference    • Policy OS-5.3 (Support Agriculture) – Support local and regional agriculture.
    SUS-7.1
     10-22     Chico General Plan

          10. OPEN SPACE AND ENVIRONMENT
   • Policy OS-5.4 (Agricultural Lands) – Promote the continued use of land within
      the City Limits for local food production while working with property owners to
      minimize impacts to and from agricultural operations.
U RBAN F OREST
    Goal OS-6: Provide a healthy and robust urban forest.
   • Policy OS-6.1 (Healthy Urban Forest) – Ensure the continued protection and                 Cross
                                                                                              reference
      management of the urban forest to reduce energy demand, increase carbon                CD-4.1.2 and
      sequestration, and reduce urban heat gain.                                               SUS-6.4
          Action OS-6.1.1 (Urban Forest Maintenance) – Maintain and expand the urban
          forest by:
          •    Maintaining existing City trees through regular, scheduled service.
          •    Planting new trees to replace those that require removal and to enhance the
               street tree canopy, where needed.
          •    Requiring street and parking lot tree planting in new development.
          •    Working with commercial parking lot owners to improve the shade canopy.
          •    Implementing the Municipal Code’s tree protection regulations.
          •    Using volunteer groups and property owners to plant new trees, care for
               newly planted trees, maintain young trees, and provide information and
               instructions regarding such care and maintenance.
          Action OS-6.1.2 (Utility Impacts) – Where feasible, require new underground           Cross
                                                                                              reference
          utilities that are in close proximity to trees to be designed and installed to
                                                                                               OS-4.1.1
          minimize impacts to trees through consultation with the Urban Forester.
                                                                          Chico General Plan    10-23

             11. CULTURAL RESOURCES AND
                    HISTORIC PRESERVATION
    VISION
    Chico reflects and retains its Native American roots, agricultural heritage, gold rush
    innovation, historic architecture, and identity as a valley town in the year 2030. Chico
    strikes the balance of honoring its past residents, both the more recent and the ancient,
    weaving their lasting character and physical expressions into the ever-changing fabric
    of the City.
INTRODUCTION
The Cultural Resources and Historic Preservation Element identifies important local cultural,
archaeological, and historic resources and establishes goals, policies, and actions for the
protection and preservation of those resources.
The Chico area has been inhabited for at least 3,000 years. This rich heritage is part of
Chico’s unique culture and enriches its sense of place. The First People of the area are
members of the federally recognized Mechoopda Indian Tribe of Chico Rancheria. The
Mechoopda people are part of the larger Northwestern Maidu Tribe and spoke a Konkow
dialect prior to European-contact. Their subsistence activities included hunting, fishing, and
gathering a variety of plant resources. During the second half of the eighteenth century, the
first European-contact occurred as a result of Spanish military expeditions of exploration in
the northern Sacramento Valley. Later, during the 1820s and 1830s, American and British
Hudson Bay Company fur trappers (including Jedediah Smith) traversed the Sacramento
Valley and established temporary contacts with local Native American tribes. The first
arrival of permanent white settlers (such as Peter Lassen and Pierson Reading) came with the
issuance of Mexican land grants in the Sacramento
Valley during the early and mid-1840s. It was during
this period that John Bidwell, then living at Sutter’s
Fort and working for John Sutter, made his first visits
to the Chico area. The first gold strike on the Feather
River that brought whites in large numbers to the area
was made in July 1848 by John Bidwell and several
partners. By 1850, there were already many white
gold miners in what is now Butte County, and
Bidwell himself had already purchased and settled
upon Rancho del Arroyo Chico in 1849.
Chico was founded in 1860 by John Bidwell and incorporated as a city in 1872, quickly
becoming an important regional economic hub. With the completion of regional roads and
railroads, Chico was established as an important and convenient locale for the growth of
industry, including wheat, flour and lumber milling. At this time, agriculture was also
expanding, particularly the production of crops such as almonds and peaches.
                                                                             Chico General Plan 11-1

              11. CULTURAL RESOURCES AND
                      HISTORIC PRESERVATION
     The City has continued to grow and change in response to local economic forces. Through
     growth, Chico carried forward and preserved physical and cultural reminders of its past.
     Figure CRHP-1 illustrates areas of archaeological sensitivity in the Chico area. As
     illustrated, areas of high archaeological sensitivity occupy much of the Chico area, even areas
     of existing development where archaeological resources are often discovered.
     This element continues the tradition of preserving Chico’s heritage through regulation,
     collaboration, and education. During the public outreach for this update, Chico historians
     expressed the desire to recognize the City’s history as a continuum with additional historic
     resources being established with each passing year and to recognize the various components
     of the community’s history throughout time. Recognizing the past is critical to the vitality of
     the community now and in the future. This element, along with the Community Design
     Element and Downtown Element, establishes policy guidance and actions to identify and
     carry forward the City’s rich history. Specifically, this element protects archaeological,
     historical, and cultural resources through City programs, support for reuse of historic
     structures, and partnerships for historic and cultural preservation.
11-2      Chico General Plan



            11. CULTURAL RESOURCES AND
                    HISTORIC PRESERVATION
ISSUES AND CONSIDERATIONS
This section of the element identifies and addresses primary cultural resource and historic
preservation issues raised during the outreach efforts for the General Plan Update. Policy
guidance is found in the goals, policies, and actions section of this element. An explanation
of specialized terms can be found in the General Plan Glossary (Appendix A).
T RIBAL C ONSULTATION P ROTOCOL
In June 2008, the City Council adopted a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between
the City and the Mechoopda Indian Tribe of the Chico Rancheria, committing to establish a
protocol for consultation between the City and the Tribe. The MOU also directs the City to
prepare a Cultural Resources Management Plan (CRMP) which will detail the appropriate
management of specific cultural resources. This element incorporates appropriate policies
and actions in support of the MOU.
H ISTORIC P RESERVATION P ROGRAM
In recent years, cultural awareness and historic preservation has gained wider support by
Chico residents and City officials. Direction by the City Council has resulted in establishing
a comprehensive Historic Preservation Program which includes partnerships with the local
Mechoopda Indian Tribe. This element establishes the policy guidance for the Historic
Preservation Program.
The primary components of the City’s Historic Preservation Program include: 1) the Cultural
Resources and Historic Preservation Element of the 2030 General Plan; 2) a Historic
Preservation Ordinance; and 3) a Historic Preservation Board. These three components have
qualified Chico to become a Certified Local Government (CLG) as determined by the State
Historic Preservation Office (SHPO). The City Council has adopted an Historic Resources
Inventory establishing an official survey of
historically significant properties in Chico which
serves as the basis of the historic preservation
ordinance. Chico’s Historic Preservation Program
establishes the City’s commitment to the
preservation of its irreplaceable heritage. This
element formalizes the City’s commitment to be a
CLG and to protect historic resources.
                                                                           Chico General Plan  11-5

              11. CULTURAL RESOURCES AND
                      HISTORIC PRESERVATION
     REGULATORY CONTEXT
                                            Local planning and preservation of cultural and historic
                                            resources requires coordination and compliance at the
                                            federal, state, and local levels. This section of the
                                            element identifies several laws, agencies, and documents
                                            that are important to understand as context for this
                                            element. Additional information about relevant
                                            regulations can be found in the 2030 General Plan
                                            Existing Conditions Report and Environmental Impact
                                            Report.
     F EDERAL R EGULATIONS
     National Historic Preservation Act of 1966
     Congress made the Federal Government a leader in historic preservation when it adopted the
     National Historic Preservation Act of 1966. Congress recognized that national goals for
     historic preservation could best be achieved by the Federal Government’s support of local
     preservation efforts. In the words of the Act, the Federal Government's role is to "provide
     leadership" for preservation, "contribute to" and "give maximum encouragement" to
     preservation, and "foster conditions under which our modern society and our prehistoric and
     historic resources can exist in productive harmony." This legislation is the umbrella
     document to most other federal regulations related to the preservation of historic resources.
     Federal Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties
     The U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with
     Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings
     are intended to provide guidance to historic building owners and building managers,
     preservation consultants, architects, contractors, and project reviewers as they are preparing
     to work on a historic property or site. The standards apply to a wide variety of resource types,
     including buildings, sites, structures, objects, and districts. In California, someone altering or
     modifying the exterior of a resource listed on the California Register of Historical Resources,
     is required to follow the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic
     Properties with Guidelines. Interior alterations to registered public buildings are also subject
     to compliance with these guidelines.
     National Register of Historic Places
     The National Register of Historic Places is the official list of the Nation's historic places
     worthy of preservation. Authorized by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, the
     National Park Service's National Register of Historic Places is part of a national program to
     coordinate and support public and private efforts to identify, evaluate, and protect America's
     historic and archeological resources. The City of Chico is proud to recognize nine properties
11-6      Chico General Plan

            11. CULTURAL RESOURCES AND
                    HISTORIC PRESERVATION
currently listed on the National Register, including the South of Campus Neighborhood
National Register District which contains 116 contributing properties.
S TATE R EGULATIONS
California Environmental Quality Act
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires an analysis and full disclosure of
the environmental impacts of a project before it may be approved. If a project includes the
demolition or alteration of any resource listed, or eligible for listing, in the National or
California Register of Historical Resources, CEQA requires consideration of whether the
project will significantly impact the resource’s historic significance.
California Native American Traditional Tribal Cultural Places (SB 18)
Senate Bill (SB) 18 provides California Native American tribes an opportunity to participate
in local land use decisions at an early planning stage for the purpose of protecting or
mitigating impacts to cultural places. SB 18 requires local governments to consult with tribes
prior to making certain planning decisions, including the adoption and amendment of general
plans.
California Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act
The California Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 2001 was enacted
to ensure that all California Indian human remains and cultural items are treated with dignity
and respect. Other provisions of California law address the discovery of human remains
outside a dedicated cemetery and require consultation with appropriate Native American
individuals for disposition of the remains. The Public Resources Code establishes the Native
American Heritage Commission and the State’s Sacred Places List.
Comprehensive Statewide Historic Preservation Plan for California
The Comprehensive Statewide Historic Preservation Plan for California provides guidance to
the Office of Historic Preservation and the preservation community for the identification,
registration, protection, and preservation of important historic resources. It encourages both
the consideration of historic preservation during planning activities at the local level and
public and professional support for historic preservation.
State Historic Building Code
Since current building codes often do not consider historic
construction techniques and materials, the State Historic
Building Cod provides alternative building code regulation
s for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, relocation
or reconstruction of buildings or structures designated as
qualified historic buildings or properties. The City of Chico
adopted the State Historic Building Code in 2007.
                                                                            Chico General Plan 11-7

              11. CULTURAL RESOURCES AND
                      HISTORIC PRESERVATION
     California Register of Historical Resources
     The California Register of Historical Resources was established in 1992. It serves as an
     authoritative guide to be used by state and local agencies, private groups, and citizens to
     identify the state's historical resources and to indicate what properties are to be protected
     from substantial adverse change. The City of Chico is proud to recognize 116 properties
     currently listed on the California Register.
     LOCAL R EGULATIONS
     Historic Preservation Ordinance
     A historic preservation ordinance of the Chico Municipal Code specifically affords protection
     for properties listed on the City’s Historic Resources Inventory and provides a mechanism to
     add historic properties to the Inventory through Landmark Overlay zoning districts. The
     ordinance also provides development incentives to owners of designated historic property
     and establishes a number of exempt activities such as ordinary maintenance and repair.
     Proposals to significantly alter or demolish structures listed on the City’s Historic Resources
     Inventory are reviewed by the City’s five-member Architectural Review and Historic
     Preservation Board. The Board also reviews nominations to the City’s Inventory and
     forwards recommendations to the City Council for a final determination of listing.
11-8      Chico General Plan

          11. CULTURAL RESOURCES AND
                  HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
  Goal CRHP-1:       Protect and preserve archaeological, historical and other cultural
                     resources to serve as significant reminders of the City’s heritage
                     and values.
  Goal CRHP-2:       Reinvest in the archaeological, historical and other cultural
                     resources that frame Chico’s character and identity.
  Goal CRHP-3:       Engage in and facilitate preservation efforts with local
                     preservation and cultural entities.
  Goal CRHP-1: Protect and preserve archaeological, historical and other cultural
   resources to serve as significant reminders of the City’s heritage and values.
       Policy CRHP-1.1 (Historic Preservation Program) – Maintain a comprehensive              Cross
       Historic Preservation Program that includes policies and regulations which            reference
                                                                                              DT-8.1
       protect and preserve the archaeological, historical and other cultural resources
       of Chico.
        Action CRHP-1.1.1 (Historic Preservation Ordinance) – Maintain and update             Cross
                                                                                             reference
           as necessary the City’s Historic Preservation Ordinance.                          DT-8.1.2
        Action CRHP-1.1.2 (Historic Resources Inventory) – Maintain and update the
           City’s Historic Resources Inventory.
        Action CRHP-1.1.3 (Architectural Review and Historic Preservation Board)
           Appoint members of a new Architectural Review and Historic Preservation Board
           who meet the qualifications of a Certified Local Government and who serve a
           dual role in the architectural design review of new development and in the review
           of historic preservation decisions affecting the City’s Historic Resources
           Inventory or new Landmark overlay zoning districts.
        Action CRHP-1.1.4 (Certified Local Government) – Maintain the City’s
           recognition by the State Historic Preservation Office as a Certified Local
           Government.
        Action CRHP-1.1.5 (Financial Assistance Programs) – Pursue grant funding
           sources available to Certified Local Governments to establish and maintain a
           Cultural Resources Management Plan and to expand the City’s Historic
           Preservation Program.
                                                                         Chico General Plan     11-9

                 11. CULTURAL RESOURCES AND
                         HISTORIC PRESERVATION
                  Action CRHP-1.1.6 (Best Management Practices) – Update the City’s Best
                     Management Practices Manual to include environmental review protocol,
                     communication with appropriate agencies, and standard conditions of approval
                     for discretionary projects that protect cultural and paleontological resources.
                  Action CRHP-1.1.7 (Public Resources) – Maintain all City-owned historic and
                     cultural resources in a manner that is consistent with the U.S. Secretary of the
                     Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties.
                  Action CRHP-1.1.8 (Records Search) – Continue to consult and require record
                     searches for discretionary projects with the Northeast Center of the California
                     Historical Resources Information System (CHRIS) located at CSU Chico.
                  Action CRHP-1.1.9 (Native American Consultation) – Continue to consult
                     with and distribute environmental review documents to the Native American
                     Heritage Commission through the State Clearinghouse.
                  Action CRHP-1.1.10 (Architectural Historian Consultations) – Use the
   Cross
 reference           California Historical Resources Information System (CHRIS) Consultants List to
CRHP-3.1.3           identify qualified architectural historians for project consultation. Require
                     consultants for City and private development projects to meet the minimum
                     Professional Qualification Standards adopted by the Secretary of the Interior’s
                     Standards and Guidelines for Archaeology and Historical Preservation.
                  Action CRHP-1.1.11 (Assistance Programs) – Provide assistance to Chico
                     residents who are restoring qualified historic properties by offering development
                     incentives as identified in the City’s Historic Preservation Ordinance or
                     additional federal and state support programs.
            Goal CRHP-2: Reinvest in the archaeological, historical and other cultural
             resources that frame Chico’s character and identity.
                 Policy CRHP-2.1 (Infill and Historic Preservation) – Integrate the values of
                 historic preservation with infill development and adaptive reuse.
                  Action CRHP-2.1.1 (Guidelines for Redevelopment of Historic Resources) –
   Cross             Utilize the City’s Design Guidelines Manual for discretionary design review to
 reference
  DT-8.1             address exterior alterations proposed to historic buildings in accordance with the
                     Historic Preservation Ordinance.
                 Policy CRHP-2.2 (Adaptive Reuse) – Encourage the adaptive reuse of historic
                 buildings when the original use of the structure is no longer feasible.
    11-10    Chico General Plan

   11. CULTURAL RESOURCES AND
            HISTORIC PRESERVATION
 Action CRHP-2.2.1 (Exterior of Historic Structures) – With discretionary                    Cross
    actions or in compliance with the Historic Preservation Ordinance, restore or           reference
                                                                                            CD-5.3.1
    preserve the original exterior of historic structures at the time of a change in use,
    whenever feasible.
Policy CRHP-2.3 (Demolition as Last Resort) – Limit the demolition of historic
resources to an act of last resort, to be permitted only if: 1) rehabilitation of the
resource is not feasible; 2) demolition is necessary to protect the health, safety,
and welfare of its residents; or 3) the public benefits outweigh the loss of the
historic resource.
Policy CRHP-2.4 (Public Awareness of Heritage Resources) – Encourage public
awareness of the heritage resources that helped shape the history of Chico.
 Action CRHP-2.4.1 – (Heritage Tourism) - To both educate the public and                     Cross
    stimulate the economy, work with public agencies, private organizations,                reference
                                                                                             ED-2.3
    property owners, and area businesses to develop and promote Heritage Tourism
    opportunities throughout Chico.
                                                                                              Cross
                                                                                            reference
 Action CRHP-2.4.2 (Ceremonies and Events) – Participate in the promotion of                DT-1.5,
    traditional ceremonies and events from the various cultures, ethnicities and             ED 2.2,
                                                                                          SUS-1.4, and
    nationalities that make up the Chico community.                                        PPFS-7.1.3
                                                                                              Cross
 Action CRHP-2.4.3 (Diversity Action Plan) – Implement the Diversity Action                reference
                                                                                          SUS 1.4 and
    Plan to support the various cultures, ethnicities and nationalities that make up the    SUS1.4.2
    Chico community.
 Action CRHP-2.4.4 (Community Awareness and Education) – Participate in
    the promotion of public tours, viewing, and informational presentations at historic
    buildings and archaeological sites.
Policy CRHP-2.5 (Purchase of Historically Significant Buildings) - Explore
grant funding, partnerships, and other opportunities to purchase historically
significant buildings or sites that are eligible for State or National Registers as
they become available.
 Action CRHP-2.5.1 (Register Listings of City-owned Properties) – Pursue the
    listing of City-owned historic properties on the National Register of Historic
    Places and California Register of Historical Resources.
                                                                      Chico General Plan      11-11

                  11. CULTURAL RESOURCES AND
                          HISTORIC PRESERVATION
             Goal CRHP-3: Engage in and facilitate preservation efforts with local
              preservation and cultural entities.
                  Policy CRHP-3.1 (Partnerships to Preserve Heritage Resources) – Foster
                  partnerships with interested parties to preserve heritage resources.
                   Action CRHP-3.1.1 (Mechoopda Consultation) – Establish a Consultation
                      Protocol and a Cultural Resources Management Plan with the Mechoopda Indian
                      Tribe.
                      Action CRHP-3.1.2 (Northeast Information Center) – Maintain a Project
                      Review Agreement with the Northeast Information Center (NEIC) and consult
                      with the NEIC in preparation of a Cultural Resources Management Plan.
                   Action CRHP-3.1.3 (Archaeologist Consultation) – Use the California
   Cross
 reference            Historical Resources Information System (CHRIS) Consultants List to identify
CRHP-1.1.10           qualified archaeologists for project consultation. Require consultants for City and
                      private development projects to meet the minimum Professional Qualification
                      Standards adopted by the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for
                      Archaeology and Historical Preservation. Consult with the Mechoopda Indian
                      Tribe prior to the selection of archaeologists for City projects.
                   Action CRHP-3.1.4 (Education for City Staff) – Conduct City and Tribal-
                      sponsored training programs that increase City staff awareness and respect for
                      Tribal Ceremonial Places and artifacts on City-owned land.
                   Action CRHP-3.1.5 (Education for the Public) – Conduct City and Tribal-
                      sponsored training programs, in partnership with the Northeast Information
                      Center, to educate property owners, land developers, and construction personnel
                      about the importance of cultural resources and the legal framework for their
                      protection.
                   Action CRHP-3.1.6 (Public/Private Partnerships) – Explore public and private
                      partnerships that support the City’s historic preservation program. Continue to
                      utilize the Chico Heritage Association as a resource for issues and projects.
                   Action CRHP-3.1.7 (Educational Conferences) – In partnership with the Office
                      of State Historic Preservation, CSU, Chico, the Chico Heritage Association, and
                      the Northeast Information Center, continue to support educational conferences on
                      Historic Preservation and Native American Resource Protection.
   11-12      Chico General Plan

                                      12. SAFETY
    VISION
    In 2030, the City of Chico is known and valued as a safe community, supported by
    appropriate development standards and a clear understanding of potential man-made
    and natural hazards. Public safety has been enhanced by improvements to local
    circulation systems including the roadways, well-lit bike and pedestrian trails, railroad
    crossings, and an expanded public transit program. Children are able to safely walk or
    bike to school, and residents, students, and visitors feel safe walking at night in
    neighborhoods and Downtown. The community and the Police Department have a
    strong partnership in law enforcement and deterring crime. Public safety and safe
    aviation operations are maintained at the Chico Municipal Airport and in the vicinity of
    local airports.
INTRODUCTION
The Safety Element focuses on maintaining Chico as a safe place for residents and businesses
by minimizing risk and providing protective services.
Generally, the City of Chico is a safe and healthy City. However, like all cities in California,
Chico is subject to a variety of potential safety hazards. Some are a result of the natural
environment, such as floods or earthquakes, while others, such as hazardous materials spills
or contamination, result from human activities. This Element briefly identifies known safety
threats and hazards, along with the City’s approach to managing these risks and hazards as
outlined in the goals, policies and actions of this element. Topics covered include the
potential risk from fires, floods, earthquakes, and hazardous materials, as well as airport
safety, traffic and pedestrian safety at railroad crossings, and the provision of law
enforcement and emergency services.
                  Safety Services
                                                                           Chico General Plan    12-1

                                          12. SAFETY
     ISSUES AND CONSIDERATIONS
     This section of the element identifies and addresses primary safety issues raised during the
     outreach efforts for the General Plan Update. Policy guidance is found in the goals, policies,
     and actions section of this element. An explanation of specialized terms can be found in the
     General Plan Glossary (Appendix A).
     F IRE H AZARDS
     Chico has the potential for both urban structural fires and wildland fires. Upper Bidwell Park
     and the foothills on the eastern edge of the community are particularly prone to wildland fire.
     The Chico Fire Department, the Butte County Fire Department, and Cal Fire provide fire
     protection in Chico and the unincorporated areas in and immediately surrounding the City.
     The Chico Fire Department currently operates six fire stations and a seventh station is
     planned in the Northwest Chico Specific Plan area. Balancing limited financial resources
     with the desire for a high level of service for public safety is a critical community concern
     that was raised during the public and stakeholder outreach effort undertaken as part of the
     General Plan Update.
                                          This element addresses fire hazards through its support for
                                          continued interagency cooperation and mutual aid
                                          agreements with Butte County and Cal Fire, both of which
                                          are vital to providing high levels of protection. This
                                          element also addresses the issue of maintaining acceptable
                                          urban fire service through policies and targets for initial
                                          incident response times and a commitment to maintaining
                                          high quality fire response service.
     L AW E NFORCEMENT
     Maintaining a safe and secure environment is one of the highest priorities for Chico residents.
     While the police are the primary agency charged with crisis intervention, they cannot be
     solely responsible for controlling and limiting crime and interpersonal conflicts. Community-
     oriented policing and community partnerships are necessary to address law enforcement
     needs. Youth and neighborhood watch programs, as well as planning and design concepts,
     are complimentary programs and actions to support the Police Department’s efforts. A
     critical issue for the future is finding a balance between the community’s desire for a high
     level of public safety service and the City’s limited fiscal resources available to provide a
     range of municipal services.
     The Safety Element addresses this issue through policies that promote continued partnerships
     with other local and regional law enforcement agencies and through policies that support
     strategic planning efforts to identify and prioritize safety needs. The element also works with
     the Community Design Element to address safety through design, and the Circulation
     Element to ensure accessible emergency response routes.
12-2      Chico General Plan

                                       12. SAFETY
R AILROAD -R ELATED S AFETY
The trains on the Union Pacific Railroad line through
Chico present safety hazards, especially in areas with at-
grade street crossings. Illegal pedestrian crossing of the
tracks, particularly near the university, is an ongoing
safety concern. Additionally, emergency vehicle access
to areas west of the railroad tracks when trains are
blocking the crossings remains a significant concern to
the community. This element incorporates policies which
direct that these concerns be investigated and addressed.
This element works with the Circulation Element and
Noise element to further address issues related to the
railroad.
SAFETY CONTEXT
In addition to the key issues identified in the previous section, this section provides relevant
background for other safety topics addressed in the subsequent goals, policies, and actions
section. Also included in this section are maps showing flood hazards, dam inundation
hazards, and other seismic or geologic hazards within the Planning Area.
E MERGENCY M ANAGEMENT
The City of Chico and Butte County have both adopted Emergency Response Plans which
include prearranged emergency response procedures and mutual aid agreements for
emergency assistance within the Planning Area. Emergency routes for evacuation of Chico
are Highway 99 and State Route 32.
The objectives of the emergency plans are to prepare for and coordinate effective responses
to emergencies and to provide adequate assistance to other jurisdictions as needed. The plans
specify actions to coordinate operations, manage
resources, and direct governmental and non-
governmental organization’s responsibilities during
emergency events. The Safety Element addresses the
planning for emergency response through policies
that commit the City to maintaining an emergency
management plan and policies that reaffirm the
City’s commitment to working with other agencies
and emergency response providers.
                                                                             Chico General Plan  12-3

                                         12. SAFETY
     F LOODING AND D AM I NUNDATION
     Flood control in the Chico area is provided by federal, state, and local agencies. The general
     purpose for these agencies is to identify potential flood hazard areas and devise preventive
     programs, policies, and structures to avoid or minimize flood damage. The Federal
     Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) produces Flood Insurance Rate Maps, which
     identify areas of potential flood hazards, and designates 100-year floodplain zones. A 100-
     year floodplain is the area that has a one percent chance of being flooded in any one year.
     FEMA also manages the National Flood Insurance Program, which provides insurance to the
     public based on the predicted 100-year flood event.
     Certain locations within the Chico Sphere of Influence are subject to periodic, localized
     flooding as a result of intense stormwater runoff. Figure S-1 depicts the current FEMA
     floodplain mapping data for a 100-year flood event in the Chico area. Flood hazard and
     delineation information from the State Department of Water Resources (DWR) has not been
     included on Figure S-1 at this time due to the lack of adopted and verified data. Flood
     control projects on Little Chico Creek, Big Chico Creek, and Lindo Channel have helped
     attenuate the amount of runoff that flows through the City, reducing potential flooding
     problems. However, portions of the City adjacent to Little Chico Creek are identified as
     being at risk to flooding during a 100-year event.
     FEMA and DWR are in the process of evaluating whether various flood control infrastructure
     meet 100-year flood protection standards. These agencies have taken the position that
     various levees and flood control structures, for which adequate data is unavailable, cannot be
     certified or accredited as adequate to provide the required 100-year level of flood protection.
     As part of the flood remapping effort for Butte County, FEMA has indicated that areas of the
     City previously mapped as protected from flooding such as Sycamore Creek and Mud Creek
     will be reclassified as subject to a one percent per year chance of flooding unless the levees
     are accredited. The reclassification of these areas would result in the imposition of flood
     insurance requirements on property owners and enhanced building permit requirements for
     areas in a mapped floodplain. The City, along with the County, has entered into a
     Provisionally Accredited Levee (PAL) agreement with FEMA in order to postpone a
     reclassification of flood hazard areas until the levees are accredited.
     In 2006 and 2007, the State legislature produced several pieces of legislation governing
     various aspects of flood planning. The following is a list of legislation included as part of
     that package, which affect the City and the General Plan:
         •    SB 5 – Flood Management. Establishes higher standards of flood protection
              (generally 200-year protection) for urban and urbanizing areas exceeding 10,000
              residents.
12-4      Chico General Plan

                                        12. SAFETY
    •    AB 70 – Flood Liability. Requires a city or county to contribute its fair share cost of
         property damage caused by a flood event where the jurisdictions actions contributed
         to or increased the State’s exposure to liability.
    •    AB 162 – Flood Planning in General Plans. Establishes enhanced requirements for
         cities and counties to address flood-related matters in their General Plans.
In addition, consistent with the requirements of Proposition 1E approved by voters in 2006
and as part of the State’s overall effort to reevaluate flood hazards in the Central Valley, the
State is preparing the State Plan of Flood Control (SPFC) and the Central Valley Flood
Protection Plan (CVFPP) which will serve as comprehensive flood control documents and
will help to define the reevaluated 100- and 200-year flood areas. The City of Chico and
various flood control structures within the Planning Area are within the area covered by the
SPFC and CVFCP documents.
Finally, the California Government Code requires local governments to assess the potential
impact that the unlikely event of a dam failure would have on their jurisdiction. Portions of
the Planning Area lie within the inundation limits of Black Butte, Whiskeytown and Shasta
dams. Flows from the failure of these dams could inundate non-urban portions of the
Planning Area. Figure S-2 shows the flood hazard areas associated with the potential dam
failures.
The Safety Element addresses flood and dam inundation hazards through policies that require
compliance with flood protection building standards and actions to work with federal, state,
and local agencies to identify areas susceptible to flooding and accredit the flood control
levees in the City.
                                                                              Chico General Plan 12-5






                                     12. SAFETY
S EISMIC AND G EOLOGIC H AZARDS
Chico and the surrounding area are relatively free from significant seismic and geologic
hazards. There are no known or inferred active faults, however, faults located outside of the
City could result in strong ground shaking within the City. The City enforces the state
building code which mandates construction techniques that minimize seismic hazards. In
addition to seismically induced ground-shaking, ground movement can also be triggered by
heavy rains or by grading. Landslide potential is influenced by a number of factors,
including geology, water influences, and topography. There is potential for landslides in the
foothill portions of the community. Also, some locations in the Chico area are known to
have expansive soils that swell when they absorb water and shrink when drying (see Figure
S-3). Expansive soils can cause structural damage to foundations and roads if the necessary
construction techniques and materials are not used. The policies of this Element support the
continued use of the state building code to address structural requirements related to safety
from seismic and geologic hazards.
                                                                          Chico General Plan  12-11



                                       12. SAFETY
A IRPORT R ELATED S AFETY
There are two airports located in the Planning Area, the Chico Municipal Airport, owned by
the City and located within the City limits, and the Ranchaero Airport, a private airport
located to the west of the City. The County Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) has
adopted an Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) for both airports. The City’s
efforts to keep development consistent with the ALUCP will help reduce safety concerns
near airports. This element, as well as the Land Use Element, establishes policies and actions
to ensure the continued operation of the airports and continued safety of nearby land uses by
requiring the City to consider and analyze airport compatibility factors. This element works
in conjunction with the Noise Element to address noise issues related to airport operations
and the Circulation Element to address access issues.
M ISCELLANEOUS H AZARDS
Three other hazards should be noted in the Planning Area. These include agricultural
spraying, electric and magnetic fields, and wireless telecommunications facilities.
Agricultural Spraying
Several herbicides and insecticides which are classified by the State Department of Food and
Agriculture as potentially harmful to humans are used in Butte County. Although injuries
from agricultural chemicals are experienced predominantly in occupational situations, some
hazards may occur on neighboring lands during application. For example, if crop-spraying
adjacent to urban uses occurs on a windy day, drift could create a hazard. The hazards that
farming operations present for urban uses can be minimized by using organic farming
practices, switching to crops with natural pest resistance, or by maintaining buffer zones
between urban and agricultural uses. Policy LU-2.6 in the Land Use Element specifies the
agricultural buffering requirements at the community’s edge.
Electric and Magnetic Fields
The sets of high voltage transmission lines that traverse the eastern Planning Area are the
largest electric transmission facilities in Chico. There is some continued debate over the
health effects associated with electric and magnetic fields created by high voltage power
lines. Both electric and magnetic field strengths fall off dramatically with distance. Although
few agency standards address setbacks from electrical transmission lines, the State
Department of Education has established restrictions for locating school sites near high
voltage power transmission lines.
                                                                             Chico General Plan 12-15

                                         12. SAFETY
      Wireless Communication Facilities
      Numerous sites supporting wireless telecommunications (such as cell towers) exist
      throughout the Planning Area. There is some continued debate over the health effects of
      radio frequency energy associated with wireless telecommunications facilities. As with
      electric and magnetic fields created by high voltage power lines, radio frequency energy from
      wireless telecommunications sites drops off dramatically with distance. City regulation of
      the radio frequency energy created by wireless telecommunications is prohibited by the
      Telecommunications Act of 1996, which grants this sole authority to the Federal
      Communications Commission (FCC). Consistent with the Municipal Code, the City requires
      applicants to submit a radio frequency study for each new wireless telecommunications
      facility which verifies compliance with FCC exposure standards, including the cumulative
      radio frequency energy of all nearby facilities, both existing and proposed.
12-16      Chico General Plan
                                  12. SAFETY
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
 Goal S-1:   Minimize the loss of life and property resulting from natural and
             human-caused hazards.
 Goal S-2:   Minimize the threat to life and property from flooding and
             inundation.
 Goal S-3:   Protect lives and property from seismic and geologic hazards.
 Goal S-4:   Continue to provide effective and efficient fire protection and
             prevention services to Chico area residents.
 Goal S-5:   Provide a safe, secure environment with responsive police services
             for the community.
 Goal S-6:   Support safe airport operations and maximize public safety in the
             vicinity of airports.
 Goal S-7:   Enhance the safety of railroad crossings.
 Goal S-8:   Reduce the potential for public exposure to hazardous materials or
             the accidental releases of toxic or hazardous substances.
 Goal S-9:   Protect the community from risks posed by climate change.
 Goal S-1: Minimize the loss of life and property resulting from natural and
 human-caused hazards.
 • Policy S-1.1 (Emergency Preparedness) – Promote public safety from hazards
    that may cause death, injury, or property damage through emergency
    preparedness and awareness.
        Action S-1.1.1 (Emergency Plan Maintenance) – Maintain, and update as
        needed, the City’s Emergency Plan to guide emergency management in the City.
        Action S-1.1.2 (Emergency Response Awareness) - Promote community
        preparedness for hazards and awareness of emergency notification methods.
        Action S-1.1.3 (Incident Training) – Continue to participate in the Federal
        Emergency Management Agency’s National Incident Management System
        program, which provides a standardized approach to emergency incidents.
                                                                    Chico General Plan 12-17

                                              12. SAFETY
             •    Policy S-1.2 (Adaptation to Climate Change) – Support public education,
                  adaptation, and emergency response services in response to the potential long-
                  term impacts of climate change.
             Goal S-2: Minimize the threat to life and property from flooding and inundation.
    Cross
  reference  • Policy S-2.1 (Potential Flood Hazards) - When considering areas for
 PPFS-6.5.4       development, analyze and consider potential impacts of flooding.
and LU-6.2.6
                      Action S-2.1.1 (Flood Hazard Analysis) - As part of project review, analyze
                      potential impacts from flooding and require compliance with appropriate building
                      standards and codes for structures subject to 200-year flood hazards.
    Cross
                      Action S-2.1.2 (Flood Hazard Management) - Continue efforts to work with the
  reference           Federal Emergency Management Agency and state and local agencies to evaluate
 PPFS-6.5.1           the potential for flooding, identify areas susceptible to flooding, accredit the flood
                      control levees in the City, and require appropriate measures to mitigate flood
                      related hazards.
                      Action S-2.1.3 (200-Year Flood Protection) – Cooperate with local, regional,
                      state, and federal agencies to seek funding for the provision of 200-year flood
                      protection.
                      Action S-2.1.4 (Floodplain Hazard Materials) – Provide materials to the
                      community regarding Federal Emergency Management Agency and California
                      Department of Water Resources flood mapping.
             Goal S-3: Protect lives and property from seismic and geologic hazards.
             • Policy S-3.1 (Potential Structural Damage) – Prevent damage to new structures
                  caused by seismic, geologic, or soil conditions.
                      Action S-3.1.1 (California Building Code) – Require all new buildings in the
                      City to be built under the seismic requirements of the California Building Code.
                      Action S-3.1.2 (Potential Soil Hazards) – In areas with highly expansive soils,
                      require appropriate studies and structural precautions through project review.
             Goal S-4 - Continue to provide effective and efficient fire protection and
             prevention services to Chico area residents.
    12-18     Chico General Plan

                                12. SAFETY
• Policy S-4.1 (Fire Safety Staffing) - Maintain adequate fire suppression and
  prevention staffing levels.
      Action S-4.1.1 (Fire Response Time) – Strive to obtain an initial response time
      of five and a half minutes or less for at least 90 percent of fire emergency
      response calls in urbanized areas.
• Policy S-4.2 (Interagency Coordination) - Continue to maintain interagency
  relationships to maximize fire protection services and support programs that
  reduce fire hazards.
      Action S-4.2.1 (Interagency Programs) - Continue to work with CalFire and the
      Butte County Fire Department on programs that will enhance fire protection and
      firefighting capabilities in the Planning Area, including maintaining aid
      agreements.
• Policy S-4.3 (Fire Safety Standards and Programs) – Support the development
  and implementation of standards and programs to reduce fire hazards and
  review development and building applications for opportunities to ensure
  compliance with relevant codes.
      Action S-4.3.1 (Standards to Protect Structures) - Maintain, and update as
      needed, the standards manual for protecting structures in wildland fire areas.
      Action S-4.3.2 (Structural Standards) - Incorporate building construction
      standards for the Local Resource Area (areas which are provided City fire
      suppression services) that are consistent with the requirements for the State
      Responsibility Areas (areas that are provided State and County fire suppression
      services) designated as Very High, High, and Moderate Fire Hazard Severity
      Zones.
      Action S-4.3.3 (Project Design) - As part of the project review process in
      wildland fire areas, require consideration of emergency evacuation routes and
      defensible buffer areas.
      Action S-4.3.4 (Development Standards) - Encourage the County to require            Cross
                                                                                        reference
      development in unincorporated areas within the City’s Sphere of Influence to       LU-1.1.1
      conform to the City’s development standards.
      Action S-4.3.5 (Fire Sprinklers, New Structures) – Consider adoption of an
      ordinance that exceeds state standards requiring automatic fire sprinklers in new
      non-residential construction.
                                                                     Chico General Plan   12-19

                                       12. SAFETY
      • Policy S-4.4 (Vegetation Management) - Support vegetation management and
           weed abatement programs that reduce fire hazards.
      Goal S-5: Provide a safe, secure environment with responsive police services for
      the community.
      • Policy S-5.1 (Police Services) – Continue to provide fundamental police services
           based upon rapid response to emergencies and response, control and
           intervention in conduct that threatens life and property.
               Action S-5.1.1 (Strategic Plan) – Using community input, develop a Police
               Department Strategic Plan to help guide priorities and staffing levels for the
               Department.
               Action S-5.1.2 (Police Staffing) – Maintain adequate staffing to meet the needs
               of the community’s service population.
               Action S-5.1.3 (Response Time) – Analyze and monitor factors affecting police
               response times, and make operational adjustments as necessary in order to
               provide the most expeditious responses.
               Action S-5.1.4 (Specialized Resources) - Train, equip, and maintain specialized
               response teams for extraordinary emergency incidents.
      • Policy S-5.2 (Public Confidence in Police) – Maintain and increase public
           confidence in the ability of the Police Department to provide quality police
           services.
               Action S-5.2.1 (Community Needs Assessments) - Assess community needs,
               expectations, and satisfaction with the police on an ongoing basis.
               Action S-5.2.2 (City Council Reports) – Report periodically to the City Council
               on citizen commendations and citizen complaints received.
      • Policy S-5.3 (Community Policing) - Reduce crime by strengthening
           police/community partnerships and providing community-oriented policing
           services that are responsive to citizens’ needs.
               Action S-5.3.1 (Neighborhood-Based Programs) – Enhance neighborhood-
               based crime prevention activities, such as Neighborhood Watch, Town and Gown
               activities, and community education programs.
12-20  Chico General Plan

                                   12. SAFETY
• Policy S-5.4 (Collaboration and Coordination) – Maintain strong relationships
    with local and state law enforcement agencies, and participate in joint disaster
    preparedness planning.
        Action S-5.4.1 (University Police) – Maintain a memorandum of understanding
        with CSU, Chico University Police to coordinate law enforcement duties and
        services in the neighborhoods near the campus, such as the South Campus
        District.
        Action S-5.4.2 (Butte County Sheriff’s Department) – Strive to maintain the
        mutual aid agreement, and continue cooperative policing in the greater Chico area
        with the Butte County Sheriff’s Department.
        Action S-5.4.3 (Disaster Planning) - Through the Butte County Office of
        Emergency Services, participate with area public safety and health agencies to
        plan and train for disaster preparedness.
                                                                                              Cross
• Policy S-5.5 (Design to Deter Crime) – Support the deterrence of crime through            reference
                                                                                           CD-3.4 and
    site planning and community design.                                                      DT-3.4
        Action S-5.5.1 (Crime Deterring Design) – Consider the incorporation of design        Cross
                                                                                            reference
        features such as strategic window placement, lighting techniques, and               CD-3.4.1
        landscaping into development projects to discourage criminal activity.
Goal S-6: Support safe airport operations and maximize public safety in the
vicinity of airports.
• Policy S-6.1 (Airport Operations) – Promote safe air operations by limiting the             Cross
                                                                                            reference
    height of structures and regulating uses that would have adverse impacts on              LU-7.1
    airport safety.
                                                                                              Cross
                                                                                            reference
• Policy S-6.2 (Safety in Airport Vicinity) – Continue to consider relevant public           LU-7.1,
    safety factors prior to approving development projects in the vicinity of airports.   LU-6.2.5 and
                                                                                           CIRC-6.1.1
Goal S-7: Enhance the safety of railroad crossings.
• Policy S-7.1 (Railroad Crossings) – Enhance the safety of railroad crossings in
    the City.
        Action S-7.1.1 (Coordinate with UPRR) – Request Union Pacific Railroad to             Cross
        verify that relevant safety measures for at-grade crossings are implemented and     reference
                                                                                           CIRC-7.1.2
                                                                                          and N-2.2.1
                                                                      Chico General Plan      12-21

                                           12. SAFETY
                   maintained, and assess the feasibility of improving safety features, including
                   enhanced crossing gate practices and warning devices.
                   Action S-7.1.2 (Education on Railroad Crossings) – Continue working with
                   CSU Chico, UPRR, and student housing providers to develop and disseminate
                   educational materials on the hazards of unauthorized railroad crossings, and
                   regularly monitor and enforce crossing laws.
   Cross
                   Action S-7.1.3 (Grade-Separated Crossings) - For improved emergency
 reference         response and traffic circulation, support interagency studies to identify the best
CIRC-7.1.3         possible locations and feasibility for funding and developing grade-separated
                   (vehicle and pedestrian/bicycle) railroad crossings within the City.
           Goal S-8: Reduce the potential for public exposure to hazardous materials or the
           accidental releases of toxic or hazardous substances.
           • Policy S-8.1 (Hazardous Materials Safety Coordination) - Support efforts to
               reduce the potential for accidental releases of toxic and hazardous substances.
                   Action S-8.1.1 (Planning for Hazardous Materials Safety) - Consult with the
                   State Office of Emergency Services, the State Department of Toxic Substances
                   Control, the California Highway Patrol, Butte County, and other relevant
                   agencies regarding hazardous materials routing and incident response programs.
   Cross   • Policy S-8.2 (Reduce Toxic Materials Use) – Reduce the use of hazardous and
 reference
SUS-3.1.1
               toxic materials in City operations.
           Goal S-9: Protect the community from risks posed by climate change.
           • Policy S-9.1 (Climate Adaptation and Resiliency) - Promote public safety
               through the development of climate adaptation and resiliency strategies to
               reduce risks associated with climate change.
                   Action S-9.1.1 (Climate Change Adaptation) - Update the Safety Element or
                   the City’s Local Hazard Mitigation Plan to include climate adaptation and
                   resiliency strategies consistent with Senate Bill 379, including preparation of: 1) a
                   vulnerability assessment that identifies community risks associated with climate
                   change; 2) a set of adaptation and resilience goals, policies, and objectives for the
                   protection of the community; and 3) implementation measures to avoid or
                   minimize climate change impacts.
   12-22   Chico General Plan

                                       13. NOISE 
    VISION
    The City of Chico is free of excessive noise disturbances in 2030. Residents and
    visitors are able to enjoy indoor and outdoor spaces without the intrusion of harmful
    levels of noise. Industrial uses, traffic corridors, and airports function with minimal
    encroachment from noise-sensitive development. Noise mitigation measures in the
    City emphasize site and project design that incorporates effective and visually
    attractive features.
INTRODUCTION 
This element identifies the major noise sources and noise-related concerns in Chico and
outlines goals, policies, actions, and standards intended to promote safe and comfortable
noise levels throughout the community.
Noise is typically defined as unwanted sound that interferes with an individual’s ability to
perform a task or enjoy an activity. From a planning perspective, noise control focuses on
two primary concerns: (1) preventing the introduction of new noise-producing uses in noise-
sensitive areas; and (2) preventing the encroachment of noise-sensitive uses into existing
noise-producing areas. Some facilities, such as airports and certain industrial operations,
inherently generate noise, and the encroachment of noise-sensitive uses can jeopardize their
continued operation. Therefore, some noise-generating uses need to be protected from the
development of incompatible uses in their vicinity. Working to balance the compatibility of
uses and reduce the impact of significant sources of noise will improve the quality of life for
Chico residents.
The Noise Element is a mandatory element of the General Plan that relates to several other
elements, including the Land Use, Community Design, Circulation, and Safety Elements.
Where appropriate, cross references are provided to alert the reader to applicable policies or
actions in other elements.
 
                     Noise Mitigation
                                                                             Chico General Plan  13‐1 

                                         13. NOISE 
      ISSUES AND CONSIDERATIONS 
      This section of the element identifies primary noise issues raised during the outreach efforts
      for the General Plan Update and explains how they are addressed. Policy guidance can be
      found in the goals, policies, and actions section of this element. An explanation of
      specialized terms used in this element can be found in the General Plan Glossary (Appendix
      A).
      N OISE  C OMPATIBILITY OF  L AND  U SES    
      One factor in determining and managing the compatibility of different land uses is the need
      to separate noise-sensitive uses from uses that generate significant amounts of noise. A
      primary purpose of this element is to establish standards that can be used to equitably manage
      the noise compatibility of land uses. For example, standards may prevent noise generating
      uses such as industrial operations or major roadways from developing near residences or
      outdoor recreation areas. Conversely, new noise-sensitive uses may be prevented from
      locating near existing noise-generating uses to avoid an incompatible situation. Since the
      General Plan promotes a compact urban form and the integration of different land uses, there
      is a need for the Noise Element to establish standards that support a mix of uses in close
      proximity to one another.
      T RANSPORTATION ‐R ELATED  N OISE  C OMPATIBILITY  
                                             Appropriate noise mitigation must be incorporated to
                                             protect residents from exposure to transportation-
                                             related noise. This issue primarily concerns
                                             development near the State Route 99 and 32 corridors
                                             and along larger arterial roadways. Noise standards
                                             along these corridors must be met and maintained over
                                             time without excessive construction of obtrusive and
                                             community-dividing sound walls.           This element
                                             establishes noise standards to attenuate noise to levels
                                             that minimize disruption to noise-sensitive uses, and it
                                             includes policies and actions which address noise
                                             compatibility issues.
      T RAINS  
      Trains traversing the City on the Union Pacific Railroad tracks present issues related to both
      noise and public safety. Development near the railroad tracks must be compatible with the
      noise environment. This element addresses train generated noise by establishing standards for
      noise attenuation and by providing policy guidance for the use of land adjacent to the railroad
      tracks.
13‐2       Chico General Plan 

                                      13. NOISE 
A IRPORTS  
The primary noise issue associated with airports is the noise generated by aircraft take off
and approach for landing. The Chico area has two airports: the City-owned Chico Municipal
Airport and the small, private Ranchaero Airport located west of the City. Airports can
become vulnerable to pressure to curtail operations and expansion plans when residential or
other noise-sensitive development occurs nearby. The Butte County Airport Land Use
Commission (ALUC) has adopted an Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) for
both airports. The City’s efforts to ensure that development is consistent with the ALUCP
will help reduce noise-related conflicts near airports. This element establishes standards that
apply to new development near airports.
T HE  C HANGING  N OISE  E NVIRONMENT  
Because Chico is becoming increasingly urban in size and density, it is important to
recognize that exterior noise levels will tend to increase in some areas. While the community
has high expectations for a quiet environment, the acceptance of increased exterior noise
levels must be considered as a tolerable and practical aspect of living in an urban
environment. Setting noise standards too low in areas, such as along highways, will not
necessarily make the environment quieter, and can result in missed opportunities for
appropriate development. This element establishes noise standards that recognize the
changing noise environment and policies that guide noise attenuation methods used to
address urban noise issues.
NOISE CHARACTERISTICS AND MEASUREMENTS 
This section of the element explains noise characteristics and measurements used for the
noise standards in the Goals, Policies, and Actions section of this element.
N OISE  C HARACTERISTICS  
Noise in a community is generated by a number of sources
including transportation-related sources such as automobiles,
trucks, trains and airplanes, and stationary sources such as
construction sites, machinery, and industrial operations. The
human response to environmental noise is subjective and
varies considerably from one individual to another. Noise in a
community has often been cited as a health concern, not
necessarily in terms of actual physiological damage, such as
hearing impairment, but in terms of its impact on general
well-being and contribution to excessive stress, annoyance
and sleep disturbance.
                                                                             Chico General Plan  13‐3 

                                           13. NOISE 
      Noise-sensitive land uses are those for which noise exposure could cause health-related risks
      to individuals or quiet is essential to the use. Land uses identified in Chico as being “noise-
      sensitive” include most types of residences, nursing homes, day care centers, hospitals,
      schools, parks, and places of assembly, such as theaters, churches and meeting halls.
      Residential dwellings are of primary concern because of the impacts associated with
      exposure of individuals to potentially high interior and exterior noise levels.
      Outdoor activity areas are the portions of parcels where outdoor activities generally occur,
      such as residential patios and yards, or outdoor instructional areas. These exterior activity
      areas are exposed to noise with fewer structural elements such as walls and windows for
      noise attenuation. Public land uses such as historic sites, cemeteries, and recreation areas may
      also be sensitive to high exterior noise levels.
      The characterization and quantification of noise levels and their effects on people typically
      includes the use of technical terminology. While an in-depth explanation of noise
      terminology is not included in this element, a summary of industry standards and terms used
      in this chapter is provided below.
      N OISE  M EASUREMENT  
      To approximate the sensitivity of the human ear to changes in frequency, sound is usually
      measured in what is referred to as “A-weighted decibels” (dBA). On this scale, the normal
      range of human hearing extends from about 10 dBA to about 140 dBA.
      The intensity of noise fluctuates over time, and several measurements of time-averaged noise
      levels are used to describe noise characteristics for different circumstances. The following
      acoustical measurements are commonly used:
           •   dB – Decibel. A measure, on a logarithmic scale, of the amplitude of sound. On the
               decibel scale, the smallest audible sound (near total silence) is 0 db. A sound 10
               times more powerful is 10dB. A sound 100 times more powerful is 20dB. The “A”
               weighted decibel, commonly abbreviated as dBA, relates the measurement of sound
               to the sensitivity of the human ear.
           •   Leq – Energy Equivalent Noise Level. A single measure, in dBA, of average acoustic
               energy level used to represent fluctuating sound levels over a specific period of time.
           •   Lmin – Minimum Noise Level. This represents the minimum instantaneous noise level
               during a specific period of time.
           •   Lmax – Maximum Noise Level. This represents the maximum instantaneous noise
               level during a specific period of time.
13‐4       Chico General Plan 

                                       13. NOISE 
    •   SEL – Single Event Level. This measures the total acoustic energy of a single noise
        event, such as an aircraft overflight, compressed into a period of one second. Because
        the SEL is normalized to a one second period, it will almost always be larger in
        magnitude than the Lmax for the event.
    •   DNL or Ldn – Day-Night Average Noise Level. A 24-hour Leq with a 10 dBA
        “penalty” for noise events that occur during the noise-sensitive hours between 10:00
        p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
    •   CNEL – Community Noise Equivalent Level. The CNEL is similar to the Ldn
        described above, but with an additional 5 dBA “penalty” for noise events that occur
        between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. The calculated CNEL is typically
        approximately 0.5 dBA higher than the calculated Ldn.
    •   Hourly L2 – This is the dBA level which is exceeded during 2 percent, or
        approximately one minute, of a given hour. The noise level descriptor L50 may also
        be used, which is the noise level exceeded during 50 percent (or 30 minutes) of a one-
        hour period.
    •   Ln - The dBA level exceeded for n percent of a given time period. For instance, L2 is
        the level exceeded for 2% of the time and L50 is the level exceeded 50% of the time.
        The commonly used values of n are 2, 10, 50, and 90.
    •   Noise Sensitive Land Uses - Land uses for which noise exposure could cause health-
        related risks to individuals or where quiet is essential to the use. Land uses identified
        in Chico as being “noise-sensitive” include residences, nursing homes, day care
        centers, hospitals, schools, parks, and places of assembly, such as theaters, churches
        and meeting halls.
NOISE SOURCES 
This section of the element identifies both stationary and transportation noise sources. Figure
N-1, Noise Sources Map, depicts the primary noise sources in the Chico area. Figure N-2,
Noise Contour Map, depicts the noise contours from primary noise sources in the Chico area.
S TATIONARY  N OISE  S OURCES  
Stationary noise sources in Chico include industrial and commercial activities. Many
industrial processes produce noise even when the best available noise controls are applied.
Noise exposure within industrial facilities is controlled by federal and state employee health
and safety regulations. Exterior noise levels that affect neighboring parcels are typically
subject to local regulations. Commercial, recreational, and public service activities can also
produce noise. These noise sources can be continuous or intermittent and may contain tonal
components that are annoying to individuals who live nearby. For instance, emergency sirens
                                                                              Chico General Plan  13‐5 

                                          13. NOISE 
      and backup alarms are often considered nuisance noise sources but may not occur frequently
      enough to be considered incompatible with noise-sensitive land uses. In addition, noise
      generation from fixed noise sources may vary based upon climate conditions, time of day,
      and existing ambient noise levels.
         •    Commercial and Industrial Noise. Noise levels from commercial and industrial
              uses can vary substantially, depending on the activity. For instance, noise associated
              with neighborhood commercial activities may be indiscernible from the ambient
              noise level, whereas noise levels associated with the use of heavy equipment can
              generate much higher intermittent noise levels. For this reason, noise impacts
              generated by commercial and industrial uses need to be evaluated on a project and
              site-specific basis. Within Chico, commercial and industrial land uses are located
              primarily along major roadway corridors and at the edges of the community.
              Industrial land uses are largely located in the northern portion of the City along the
              Esplanade, Nord Avenue, and in the Airport Industrial Park, as well as in the
              southwest portion of the City along 20th Street, Park Avenue and Hegan Lane. Noise
              sources commonly associated with these land uses include on-site truck traffic,
              loading dock activities, heavy-equipment operation, banging of metal on metal,
              conveyor belts, air handling systems, and large HVAC (heating, ventilating, and air
              conditioning) systems.
         •    Silver Dollar Speedway. The Silver Dollar Speedway is an open-air raceway within
              the Silver Dollar Fairgrounds which is owned by the state and surrounded by the
              City. The Speedway conducts stock and sprint car races from March through
              October. Racing typically begins at approximately 6:30 p.m. and ends by 10:00 p.m.
              Maximum noise levels associated with racing activities range between 55 and 70 dB
              at approximately 3,000 feet from the track, with noise from the races often heard at
              much greater distances throughout the City.
         •    Parks and School Playing Fields. The noise generated at parks and schools in Chico
              varies by the type of activity and the number of people using the facility. School
              playing field activities tend to generate more noise than those of neighborhood parks
              because of the intensity of the activities.
              At a distance of 100 feet from an
              elementary school playground being used
              by 100 students, average and maximum
              noise levels of 60 and 75 dB, respectively,
              can be expected. At organized events such
              as high school football games with large
              crowds and public address systems, the
              noise generated is often significantly
              higher.
13‐6      Chico General Plan 

                                       13. NOISE 
    •   California State University, Chico. The California State University, Chico campus
        generates a range of noise events and noise types ranging from normal and customary
        noise associated with student activities on campus to periodic noise events from
        special activities at campus facilities (e.g. Nettleton Stadium and athletic field use).
        The majority of the noise associated with normal campus activities occurs during
        day-time hours and falls within the permitted range of normal day-time ambient noise
        levels. Periodically, noisy activities occur outside of the normal day-time hours and
        result in short-term noise levels approaching the maximum permitted standards.
        These events are most commonly associated with the nighttime use of outdoor
        stadiums and facilities and most commonly occur during the summer and fall
        seasons. The noise concerns associated with these events include discomfort and
        interference with personal activities such as sleeping and relaxing.
T RANSPORTATION  N OISE  S OURCES  
Sources of transportation noise in Chico include vehicle traffic, and railroad and aircraft
operations. The City of Chico is concerned with protecting people from unacceptable levels
of transportation noise while balancing the need to provide an effective and well-connected
transportation system. Below are four primary sources of transportation noise in Chico.
    •   Traffic Noise. Ambient noise levels in many portions of the City are defined
        primarily by traffic on major roadways such as State Routes 99 and 32 and major
        arterials. Existing and future traffic noise contours for roadway segments within the
        City are summarized in the General Plan Environmental Impact Report (EIR). Future
        noise contours assume no natural or human-made shielding, such as intervening
        terrain, vegetation, walls, or buildings. The contours represent bands of similar
        estimated noise exposure along roadway segments, but not absolute demarcation
        lines. Although these predicted noise contours are not considered site-specific, they
        are useful for predicting potential land use conflicts.
    •   Airport Noise. The Chico Municipal Airport
        (CMA) is used for general aviation, commercial
        aviation, fire fighting, air cargo operations, and
        maintenance. It currently handles nearly 70,000
        aircraft take-offs and landings annually. Noise
        concerns associated with airport operations
        include discomfort and interference with
        personal activities such as sleeping and relaxing.
        While individual responses to noise can vary,
        standardized noise measurements and descriptors
        are used to quantify human responses to aircraft noise levels. Additional detail
        concerning existing and projected noise contours for the airports are depicted in the
        General Plan EIR, including the higher average and maximum day noise contours for
        fire suppression operations. Except for periods of intense fire suppression operations,
                                                                             Chico General Plan  13‐7 

                                      13. NOISE 
          the 65 and greater CNEL contours lie mostly over the airport and surrounding
          publicly owned property.
          Ranchaero Airport is a privately owned general aviation facility located west of the
          City. This airport serves a combination of recreational, flight training, agricultural,
          and limited business functions with an estimated 5,000 annual aircraft take-offs and
          landings. Portions of the City are beneath this airport’s over flight area and may be
          subject to noise impacts.
      •   Enloe Medical Center Heliport. The existing Enloe Medical Center, located at the
          northwest corner of the Esplanade and West 5th Avenue, has a rooftop helipad used
          by the Center’s Flight Care helicopter to transport patients. Take-offs and landings
          are considered “emergency” activities not subject to the noise criteria used for
          airports. Air space above the Esplanade is used as the primary approach and
          departure route for helicopters at this facility. Aircraft typically approach from the
          north and then west between 6th and 7th Avenues, while normal departures travel
          directly north over the Esplanade. Under abnormal wind conditions, however,
          helicopters can arrive and depart from the north or south. To reduce noise impacts on
          local residents, pilots are asked to maintain an altitude of approximately 500 feet
          above ground level. Predicted noise contours (CNEL and SEL) for the north and
          south approaches are depicted in the General Plan EIR.
      •   Union Pacific Railroad. The Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) tracks are located west
          of and generally parallel to State Route 99, bisecting the City of Chico in a south-
          northwest direction. The UPRR is used for both freight transport and Amtrak
          passenger service. Approximately 17 freight trains (at speeds of up to 70 mph) and
          two Amtrak passenger trains travel along this rail line on a daily basis. Noise levels
          generated by trains can vary depending on speed, number of engines, track
          conditions, condition of train wheels, and shielding provided by intervening terrain.
          Additional factors, such as the sounding of the train horns and the operation of
          roadside signaling devices can also contribute to overall noise levels. Noise levels
          associated with train passages can
          reach levels ranging from 96 to
          110 dBA Lmax at 50 feet from the
          track centerline. Noise contours
          for the railroad line are depicted in
          the General Plan EIR.
13‐8  Chico General Plan 

 

 

                                     13. NOISE 
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS 
  Goal N-1:    To benefit public health, welfare and the local economy, protect noise-
               sensitive uses from uses that generate significant amounts of noise.
  Goal N-2:    Encourage noise attenuation methods that support the goals of the
               General Plan.
  Goal N-3:    Promote and enforce the City’s noise standards.
  Goal N-1: To benefit public health, welfare and the local economy, protect noise-
   sensitive uses from uses that generate significant amounts of noise.
   • Policy N-1.1 (New Development and Transportation Noise) - New development
                                                                                              Cross
       of noise-sensitive land uses will not be permitted in areas exposed to existing or   reference
       planned transportation noise sources that exceed the levels specified in Table N-     LU-7.1.1
       1, unless the project design includes measures to reduce exterior and interior
       noise levels to those specified in Table N-1.
   • Policy N-1.2 (New Development and Non-Transportation Noise) - New
       development of noise-sensitive land uses will not be permitted in areas exposed
       to existing non-transportation noise sources that exceed the levels specified in
       Table N-2, unless the project design includes measures to reduce exterior noise
       levels to the unadjusted levels specified in Table N-2.
   • Policy N-1.3 (Acoustical Analysis) - Where proposed projects are likely to expose
       noise-sensitive land uses to noise levels exceeding the City’s standards, require
       an acoustical analysis as part of environmental review so that noise mitigation
       measures may be identified and included in the project design. The
       requirements for the content of an acoustical analysis are outlined in Table N-3.
   • Policy N-1.4 (Roadway Improvement Projects) - Where proposed roadway
       improvement projects are likely to expose noise-sensitive land uses to noise levels
       exceeding the standards in Table N-1 or an increase of 10 dB Ldn or more in
       ambient noise levels, conduct an acoustical analysis to determine the level of
       impacts and to identify feasible noise mitigation measures that could be included
       in the project design to minimize impacts.
       c Action N-1.4.1 (Roadway Project Significance Criteria) – For roadway
           improvement projects where an acoustical analysis demonstrates that it is not
           practical to reduce traffic noise levels to be consistent with Table N-1, the
           following criteria will be used as a test of significance for the environmental
           review:
                                               
                                                                        Chico General Plan    13‐13 

                                               13. NOISE 
                      •    Where existing traffic noise levels are less than 65 dB Ldn in the outdoor
                           activity areas of noise-sensitive uses, a +8 dB Ldn increase in noise levels due
                           to a roadway improvement project will be considered significant.
                      •    Where existing traffic noise levels range between 65 and 70 dB Ldn in the
                           outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive uses, a +5 dB Ldn increase in noise
                           levels due to a roadway improvement project will be considered significant.
                      •    Where existing traffic noise levels are greater than 70 dB Ldn in the outdoor
                           activity areas of noise-sensitive uses, a +3 dB Ldn increase in noise levels due to
                           a roadway improvement project will be considered significant.
   Cross      • Policy N-1.5 (Proposed Projects Near Railroads) - Require site-specific noise
 reference        studies for noise-sensitive projects which may be affected by railroad noise, and
 CIRC-1.2
                  incorporate noise attenuation measures into the project design to reduce any
                  impacts to the levels specified in Table N-1.
              • Policy N-1.6 (Construction Activity) - Maintain special standards in the
                  Municipal Code to allow temporary construction activity to exceed the noise
                  standards established in this element, with limits on the time of disturbance to
                  nearby noise-sensitive uses.
             Goal N-2: Encourage noise attenuation methods that support the goals of the
              General Plan.
              • Policy N-2.1 (Well-Designed Noise Mitigation) - Utilize effective noise
                  attenuation measures that complement the Community Design Element’s Goals.
                  c Action N-2.1.1 (Noise Control Measures) - Limit noise exposure through the
                      use of insulation, building design and orientation, staggered operating hours, and
                      other techniques. Utilize physical barriers such as landscaped sound walls only
                      when other solutions are unable to achieve the desired level of mitigation.
              • Policy N-2.2 (Partners in Noise Reduction) – Consult with public and private
                  organizations to encourage reduction of the noise levels of activities that impact
                  large portions of the community.
   Cross          c Action N-2.2.1 (Railroad Warning Systems) – Consult with Union Pacific
 reference
S-7.1.1 and
                      Railroad (and Amtrak as applicable) to investigate the cost, safety, and feasibility
CIRC-7.1.2            of implementing alternative railroad warning systems and safety measures that
                      reduce the use of train horns near residential areas while still meeting public
                      safety objectives.
                                                              
   13‐14      Chico General Plan 

                                   13. NOISE 
    c Action N-2.2.2 (Silver Dollar Speedway) - Seek support of the State and the              Cross
                                                                                             reference
        Silver Dollar Fair Board to reduce the noise levels associated with events at the    ED-1.8.2
        Silver Dollar Speedway.
    c Action N-2.2.3 (Noise from State Highways) - Request that Caltrans provide
        freeway sound walls with aesthetic design features, noise-reducing pavement, and
        speed reductions along state highways adjacent to residential areas where existing
        noise levels exceed 67 dBA.
 Goal N-3: Promote and enforce the City’s noise standards.
  • Policy N-3.1 (City Noise Control Program) - Maintain a noise enforcement
    program to identify and resolve problems concerning noise in the community.
    c Action N-3.1.1 (Noise Program Duties) - Enforce the City’s Noise Ordinance by
        processing complaints, conducting on-site testing of noise sources, and sharing
        information on the effects of noise issues in the community.
    c Action N-3.1.2 (Street Noise Environment) - Periodically assess the noise
        levels associated with city streets by reviewing traffic count data as an indication
        of increasing traffic noise.
                                              
                                              
                                                                        Chico General Plan     13‐15 

                                                   13. NOISE 
                                                          T ABLE  N‐1 
                             M AXIMUM  A LLOWABLE  N OISE  L EVELS FROM   
                                      T RANSPORTATION  N OISE  S OURCES  
                                                               Outdoor Activity                      Interior Spaces
                          Land Use                                    Areas1
                                                                                             Ldn/CNEL,
                                                                Ldn/CNEL, dB                                        Leq, dB2
                                                                                                   dB
        Residential                                                      65 3                      45                   --
        Transient Lodging                                                 --                       45                   --
        Hospitals, Nursing Homes                                         65 3                      45                   --
        Theaters, Auditoriums, Music Halls                                --                        --                  35
        Churches, Meeting Halls                                          65 3                       --                  40
        Office Buildings                                                  --                        --                  45
                                                                             3
        Schools, Libraries, Museums                                      65                         --                  45
        Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                                   70                        --                  --
       Notes:
           1.   Noise standards are to be applied at outdoor activity areas with the greatest exposure to the noise source.
                When it is not practical to mitigate exterior noise levels at the patios or balconies of multi-family dwellings, a
                common area or onsite park may be designated as the outdoor activity area. For noise-sensitive land uses that
                do not include outdoor activity areas, only the interior noise standard shall apply.
           2.   As determined for a typical worst-case hour during periods of use.
           3.   Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity areas to 65 dB Ldn/CNEL or less using all feasible
                noise reduction measures, an exterior noise level of up to 70 dB Ldn/CNEL may be allowed provided that
                interior noise levels are in compliance with this table.
                                                                     
13‐16       Chico General Plan 

                                                  13. NOISE 
                                                     T ABLE  N‐2 
        M AXIMUM  A LLOWABLE  E XTERIOR  N OISE  L EVELS FROM  N ON ‐
                                      T RANSPORTATION  S OURCES  
                                                                        Exterior Noise Level (dBA)
       Noise Level Descriptor (dBA)
                                                                   Daytime                          Nighttime
                                                            (7 a.m. to 10 p.m.)                (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)
 Average-Hourly Noise Level (Leq)                                      55                                50
 Intermittent Noise Level (L2 or Lmax)                                 75                                65
Notes:
1. Noise levels are for planning purposes and may vary from the standards of the City’s Noise Ordinance, which are
     for enforcement purposes.
2. Noise levels shall be lowered by five dB for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or
     for recurring impulsive noises. Noise level standards do not apply to mixed-use residential units established in
     conjunction with industrial or commercial uses provided interior noise levels remain below 45 dB Ldn/CNEL.
3. In areas where the existing ambient noise level exceeds the established daytime or nighttime standard, the existing
     level shall become the respective noise standard and an increase of 3 dBA or more shall be significant. Noise
     levels shall be reduced 5 dBA if the existing ambient hourly Leq is at least 10 dBA lower than the standards.
4. Noise standards are to be applied at outdoor activity areas with the greatest exposure to the noise source. When it
     is not practical to mitigate exterior noise levels at patio or balconies of multi-family dwellings, a common area or
     onsite park may be designated as the outdoor activity area.
                                                                
                                                                                                  Chico General Plan      13‐17 

                                              13. NOISE 
                                                    T ABLE  N‐3 
                       R EQUIREMENTS FOR AN  A COUSTICAL  A NALYSIS  
         An acoustical analysis prepared pursuant to the Noise Element shall:
         A. Be the financial responsibility of the applicant.
         B. Be prepared by a qualified person experienced in the fields of environmental noise assessment and
            architectural acoustics.
         C. Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods and locations to
            adequately describe local conditions and the predominant noise sources.
         D. Estimate existing and projected cumulative (20 years) noise levels in terms of Ldn, CNEL, and the
            standards of Table N-1 or Table N-2, as applicable, and compare those levels to the adopted
            policies of the Noise Element. Where the noise source consists of intermittent single events,
            address the impact on sleep disturbance.
         E. Recommend appropriate mitigation to achieve compliance with the adopted policies and standards
            of the Noise Element, giving preference to site planning and design over mitigation measures
            which require the construction of noise barriers or structural modifications to buildings which
            contain noise-sensitive land uses.
         F. Estimate noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have been implemented.
         G. Describe a post-project assessment program which could be used to evaluate the effectiveness of
            the proposed mitigation measures.
        
                                                               
13‐18      Chico General Plan 

                             2 . SUSTAINABILITY
    VISION
    In 2030, Chico is a sustainable community that maintains a balanced environment and
    economy, and an equitable society. Chico’s compact land use pattern, transportation
    and energy choices, green building practices, technological advancements, and
    sustainability policies have reduced environmental impacts and greenhouse gas
    emissions. Chico’s economy is thriving with an ample supply of jobs, including those
    in green businesses. Citizens of Chico enjoy healthy lifestyles and strong social bonds
    through community food systems, support of local businesses, open and responsive
    government, and a network of local activities, gathering places, and community
    organizations. The City is a recognized sustainability leader through partnerships and
    innovation.
INTRODUCTION
The Sustainability Element explains the City’s commitment to sustainability through goals,
policies, and actions that support the General Plan’s Strategy of Sustainability.
Sustainability in Chico means maintaining a culture of stewardship to enhance our natural
environment, economic interests, and quality of life for present and future generations. Chico
is well poised to be a leader as a sustainable community. Members of the community
actively support a healthy environment, participate in local government, and work to
strengthen the local economy. Existing infrastructure fosters walking and bicycling, and there
are organizations actively promoting social equity. Chico is performing well on its journey
towards sustainability, but there is more to do in order to meet the City’s vision of being “The
Green City of the North State.”
The General Plan’s guiding strategy is to create
and sustain a community that is environmentally
responsible, economically robust, and socially
equitable. Policies and actions in every element
of the General Plan support this overarching
theme. The Sustainability Element addresses
aspects of sustainability that are not covered in
other elements and describes how the City
defines and incorporates sustainability at the
local level.
                                                     Examples of Sustainable Design
                                                                             Chico General Plan  2-1

                            2 . SUSTAINABILITY
    SUSTAINABILITY COMPONENTS
    B ALANCING E NVIRONMENTAL , E CONOMIC , AND S OCIAL E QUITY
    C OMPONENTS
                              Sustainability entails aligning the built environment and
                              socioeconomic activities with nature’s constraints and
                              opportunities. Central to this concept is meeting both present and
                              future needs through a balance of three components: maintenance
                              of a healthy and equitable society, protection of the environment,
                              and ongoing prosperity of the local economy. These components
                              are interrelated and equally important in achieving a sustainable
                              community. Ultimately, one component should not succeed at the
                              expense of another, so a key issue is how to balance these
                              components over the life of the General Plan. The three
                              components of sustainability, and how they are addressed in this
                              General Plan, are defined below:
       •   Environment. Environmental sustainability is accomplished by reducing the impact
           of human activities on the natural systems that support the community. A major
           component of protecting the environment is the wise utilization of land. Focusing
           Chico’s growth within the Sphere of Influence will reduce pressure to develop at the
           community’s edges where it would impact agricultural lands and foothills. Growth
           consistent with the Land Use Diagram and policies in the General Plan will result in
           reduced impacts on the environment, reduced contributions to global climate change,
           reduced reliance on oil and other fossil-fuel sources, and decreased consumption of
           natural resources. Strategies in this General Plan for protecting the environment
           include promoting compact, walkable,
           infill and mixed-use development;
           focusing redevelopment along transit
           corridors and at other central locations;
           protecting sensitive habitat, open space
           and agricultural lands; promoting the
           efficient use of energy and resources;
           improving local air and water quality;
           directing waste diversion and reduction;
           and establishing energy and water
           conservation measures in building,
           landscaping, and municipal operations.
       •   Economy.       A sustainable economy is strong and resilient, environmentally
           conscientious, and accessible to the entire community. To be sustainable, Chico’s
           economy must be diverse in order to provide stability through economic cycles.
           There must be jobs for a skilled local workforce in traditional, as well as green,
2-2    Chico General Plan

                              2 . SUSTAINABILITY
        business sectors. It must generate tax revenue to fund quality public services for the
        community and must continue to grow base-level businesses that export products and
        import revenue. Strategies in the General Plan that promote a sustainable economy
        reside primarily in the Economic Development Element and include fostering a
        positive climate for economic development, providing an adequate supply of land,
        ensuring the readiness of physical conditions to support development, targeting
        public investment to help attract investment and support local prosperity, promoting
        local goods and services; creating partnerships within the region to generate jobs, and
        ensuring a quality of life that makes Chico a desirable place to invest.
    •   Social Equity. For the purposes of this General Plan, social equity means fair access
        to housing, transportation, jobs, education, and recreation, and access for all residents
        to fully participate in the political and cultural life of the community. Social equity is
        closely connected to the other two sustainability components of economic vitality and
        environmental protection. It both depends on and
        supports a local, diverse economy that provides a
        wide range of work and volunteer opportunities for
        people of all ages and skills and a healthy
        environment with clean air and water, open spaces to
        recreate, and protection from potential hazards.
        Strategies in this General Plan that promote social
        equity include ensuring adequate housing for all age
        and income levels; providing an open government
        that values public participation; celebrating arts and
        cultures; assisting the more vulnerable members of the community; supporting the
        development and preservation of complete neighborhoods, promoting public health
        through protection from hazards and the provision of a safe multimodal circulation
        system; and providing parks and quality public services to all members of the
        community.
To gauge progress toward reaching its sustainability goals, the City will develop and annually
evaluate sustainability indicators. The indicators will be selected for their ability to be both
easily understood and quantifiable. Maintenance of the indicators will be adaptive, so
adjustments can be made if their monitoring reveals the need.
S USTAINABILITY IN D ECISION -M AKING
Creating and maintaining a sustainable community will require incorporating sustainable
principles into the City's everyday actions and decisions, monitoring progress, and adapting
to changing conditions and new information. The General Plan has incorporated sustainable
principles into every element; therefore, decisions that are consistent with the goals and
policies of the Plan will advance the overarching goal of sustainability. Individual decisions
and actions that the City takes are not expected to equally balance the three components of
sustainability. Instead, the combination of decision-making consistent with the General Plan
                                                                              Chico General Plan   2-3

                               2 . SUSTAINABILITY
    and implementing actions identified in the General Plan will, through time, result in a
    balanced and sustainable Chico.
    RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS
    All of the General Plan’s elements address sustainability in varying ways, several of which
    are listed below.
        •    The Land Use Element includes policies that promote compact, walkable, mixed-use
             development, infill development and redevelopment, protect open space and
             agricultural lands, encourage a jobs and housing balance, and ensure a fair and
             predictable land use planning process.
        •    The Circulation Element calls for improved connectivity between neighborhoods,
             jobs, and services; street design that accommodates all modes of transportation and
             reduces idling time; reduced parking requirements; and promotes sustainable
             transportation modes.
        •    The Community Design Element considers Chico’s unique characteristics and
             history, and seeks to create design compatibility for new and infill development and
             redevelopment.
                                  •   The Downtown Element encourages higher density and
                                      intensity of development in the City’s core to enhance
                                      economic development and social interaction, and to solidify
                                      Downtown as the heart of the community. The Downtown
                                      Element supports all modes of transportation with an
                                      emphasis on a quality pedestrian environment, promotes
                                      civic engagement and community events, and encourages
                                      mixed-use buildings.
                                  •   The Economic Development Element includes policies to
                                      strengthen the local and regional economy, promote
                                      employment opportunities for all segments of the
                                      community, and encourage a balanced jobs-to-housing ratio.
        •    The Housing Element supports social equity through the promotion of adequate
             housing for all income levels and age groups, including those with special needs.
        •    The Parks, Public Facilities, and Services Element includes goals and policies to
             make parks and recreation areas accessible to the whole community, to reduce water
             and energy use on public lands and in municipal facilities, and to protect the
             environment while providing City services equitably to the community.
2-4      Chico General Plan

                             2 . SUSTAINABILITY
    •   The Open Space and Environment Element contains goals and policies to protect
        and enhance natural resources, sensitive habitat, and agricultural land, as well as
        policies to protect air and water quality.
    •   The Cultural Resources and Historic Preservation Element guides the
        preservation of archaeological, historical and cultural resources that define Chico’s
        history, reinforce our community and provide economic opportunities through
        tourism.
    •   The Safety Element directs the equal protection for all members of the community
        from fire, crime and other threats or emergencies.
    •   The Noise Element sets noise level standards to protect members of the community
        from excessive noise.
ISSUES AND CONSIDERATIONS
This section of the element identifies and addresses primary sustainability issues raised
during the outreach efforts for the General Plan Update. Policy guidance is found in the
goals, policies, and actions section of this element. An explanation of specialized terms can
be found in the General Plan Glossary (Appendix A).
G REENHOUSE G AS E MISSIONS AND C LIMATE C HANGE
The concept of sustainability is associated with state laws that
focus on the need to reduce California’s contribution to
greenhouse gas emissions and, therefore, to global climate
change. Executive Order S-3-05, signed in 2005, proclaims
that California is vulnerable to the impacts of climate change
and sets greenhouse gas emission reduction targets. Assembly
Bill 32, also known as the California Climate Solutions Act of
2006, requires that statewide greenhouse gas emissions be
reduced to 1990 levels by the year 2020 and reduced 80
percent further by the year 2050. Senate Bill 97, enacted in
2007, amended the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) statute to establish that greenhouse gas emissions and
their effects are appropriate subjects for CEQA analysis.
Senate Bill 375, signed in 2008, is intended to link regional
transportation plans with state greenhouse gas reduction goals. Under Bill
375, state agencies and local metropolitan planning organizations (such
as the Butte County Association of Governments) are required to develop
Sustainable Community Strategies (SCS) to cut greenhouse gas emissions. These state
actions are intended to build upon each other with a shared focus on reducing greenhouse gas
emissions.
                                                                           Chico General Plan 2-5

                              2 . SUSTAINABILITY
    The City of Chico has not been waiting for State directives or programs to address
    greenhouse gas emissions and climate change. Below are early steps the City has undertaken
    on its own accord:
        •    Mayor’s Climate Protection Agreement (2006) - In 2006, Chico’s Mayor signed
             the U.S. Conference of Mayor’s Climate Protection Agreement, adding Chico to a
             group of over 600 cities united in pledging to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. This
             milestone led to the creation of the Sustainability Task Force, a committee that
             provides input to the City Council on sustainability issues. An early effort of the Task
             Force was to conduct an inventory of greenhouse gases.
        •    Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory (2008) - The Greenhouse Gas Emissions
             Inventory measured the amount of heat-trapping gases that the community released to
             the atmosphere in the baseline year 2005. By quantifying emissions, this inventory
             established a benchmark against which emissions reductions can be measured. The
             inventory will be updated to measure emission changes over time, which helps guide
             the management of reduction strategies and policies. Also in 2008, the City Council
             approved a specific greenhouse gas emissions reduction target of 25 percent below
             2005 levels by the year 2020.
        •    Chico Climate Action Plan (2011) - The City will maintain a Climate Action Plan
             (CAP) that identifies programs and actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to
             meet the Council’s greenhouse gas reduction goal. Specifically, the CAP identifies
             the sources of greenhouse gas emissions and the sectors such as transportation,
             energy, and waste to be targeted for emissions reductions, and it provides emission
             reduction goals and strategies with an associated timeline and budget.
    The Sustainability Element provides goals, policies, and actions that address the City’s role
    in statewide climate change mitigation efforts and that confirm the City’s ongoing
    commitment to reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
2-6      Chico General Plan

                              2 . SUSTAINABILITY
E NERGY S AVINGS
The City of Chico supports energy conservation, and this
element calls for additional programs to further reduce the
energy needed for municipal operations. A successful
municipal energy reduction program will help serve as an
example to encourage community-wide action. Municipal
operations, however, represent only a small percentage of
the total electricity and natural gas used throughout the City.
Therefore, community-wide efforts are essential to
achieving overall reductions in energy use and greenhouse
gas emissions. Although the City has less direct control over
behavior than municipal operations, it does have regulatory
authority in important areas like land use, building and transportation policy. Also, it has the
ability to provide incentives and facilitate initiatives that promote energy conservation.
The City’s ability to influence energy efficiency in existing buildings will be critical to
achieving its sustainability goals. This element identifies several actions for increasing
energy efficiency, including increased coordination with PG&E to provide education about
energy consumption and methods for reducing energy use, and consideration of a City-
sponsored low-interest loan program for property owners interested in installing energy
efficiency improvements and renewable energy devices.
C ITIZEN P ARTICIPATION
Local government performs best with informed citizen participation. A high level of citizen
participation is a distinctive characteristic of Chico, where residents serve on boards and
commissions and regularly attend meetings and hearings to provide input on decisions. Chico
also has many active neighborhood associations, business groups, and advocacy groups that
participate in local issues. The General Plan supports continued neighborhood outreach
programs that seek to increase participation in neighborhood issues. To ensure that residents
are well-represented, Council, committee and commission meetings will continue to be
structured to recognize citizens’ input. In addition to timely and clear notification of
meetings, the City will seek new opportunities to increase public involvement in local
government. Advances in communication technology offer new ways for residents to
participate in local government, and the City will explore using these options as they become
available.
                                                      Many issues relevant to Chico residents
                                                      such as transit, parks, schools, and air
                                                      quality are regulated by agencies other than
                                                      the City of Chico. Public agencies such as
                                                      California State University Chico, Chico
                                                      Unified School District, Butte County
                                                      Association of Governments, Butte County
                                                                               Chico General Plan  2-7

                             2 . SUSTAINABILITY
    Air Quality Management District, and Chico Area Recreation District also make important
    decisions affecting Chico residents. The General Plan seeks to increase participation in all
    local decision-making processes.
    F OSTERING P ARTNERSHIPS FOR A M ORE S USTAINABLE C HICO
    Partnerships and ongoing communication are critical tools for achieving a sustainable Chico.
    Residents, businesses, community groups, schools, and other organizations all need to be
    engaged and actively participating in the effort to create a socially, environmentally, and
    economically healthy community. The City must be an effective leader and partner in
    sustainability efforts. Participation in larger scale sustainability efforts is critical because
    local environmental, economic, and social issues are a part of a broader regional, national,
    and global context. The General Plan promotes the development of strong working
    relationships between the City and other entities, such as Butte County, CSU Chico, Butte
    College, local businesses, non-profit organizations, and other government agencies to
    accomplish Chico’s sustainability goals.
2-8      Chico General Plan

                           2 . SUSTAINABILITY
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
Goal SUS-1: Balance the environment, economy and social equity, as defined in
              the General Plan, to create a sustainable Chico.
Goal SUS-2: Increase effective citizen participation in local government.
Goal SUS-3: Lead the way to a sustainable Chico by reducing the environmental
              impacts of City operations.
Goal SUS-4: Promote green development.
Goal SUS-5: Increase energy efficiency and reduce non-renewable energy and
              resource consumption Citywide.
Goal SUS-6: Reduce the level of greenhouse gas emissions Citywide.
Goal SUS-7: Support local food systems in Chico.
  Goal SUS-1: Balance the environment, economy and social equity, as defined in
  the General Plan, to create a sustainable Chico.
                                                                                             Cross
                                                                                           reference
  • Policy SUS-1.1 (General Plan Consistency) – Ensure proposed development                 ED-1.1,
      projects, policies, and programs are consistent with the General Plan.             LU-2.7.1, and
                                                                                            CD-6.2
  • Policy SUS-1.2 (Sustainability Assessment) – Assess the City’s progress toward
      meeting its sustainability goals.
         Action SUS-1.2.1 (Sustainability Indicators Report) – Update and report on          Cross
                                                                                           reference
         the City’s adopted sustainability indicators for the economy, environment, and   PPFS-5.1.5
         social equity as part of the General Plan Annual Reports and Five Year Reviews       and
         as a measure of the City’s progress toward sustainability.                         OS-4.1
  • Policy SUS-1.3 (Sustainable City) – Coordinate the City’s sustainability efforts.
         Action SUS-1.3.1 (Sustainability Programs) – Identify and develop programs
         and initiatives that advance Chico’s sustainability goals.
         Action SUS-1.3.2 (Sustainability Materials) – Develop sustainability training
         materials to educate City staff and the community on the City’s sustainability
         goals and efforts.
                                                                      Chico General Plan       2-9

                                 2 . SUSTAINABILITY
   Cross   • Policy SUS-1.4 (Support Diversity) – Strengthen ethnic, cultural, and socio-
 reference
CRPH-2.4.2     economic diversity by supporting programs that celebrate cultural differences
    and        and similarities and promote tolerance.
CRPH-2.4.3
   Cross           Action SUS-1.4.1 (Community Building Programs) – Continue to support and
 reference         promote special community events and programs at City and public facilities that
  DT-1.5
                   foster community pride, celebrate local culture and history, and promote social
                   equity and tolerance.
   Cross
 reference         Action SUS-1.4.2 (Diversity Action Plan) – Maintain the City’s Diversity
CRPH-2.4.3         Action Plan as necessary.
   Cross   • Policy SUS-1.5 (Sustainability Partnerships) – Participate in local, regional, and
 reference
CIRC-1.8.2     statewide sustainability efforts.
                   Action SUS-1.5.1 (Sustainability Webpage) – Maintain the City’s Sustainability
                   webpage that describes the City’s sustainability efforts, identifies partnerships,
                   and provides educational resources and opportunities for community members.
                   Action SUS-1.5.2 (Sustainable Partnerships) – Participate in conferences and
                   meetings that promote sustainability.
                   Action SUS-1.5.3 (Green Business Program) – Support local partners to
                   develop a Chico Green Business certification program to recognize local
                   businesses that implement measures to conserve energy and water, minimize
                   waste, and prevent pollution.
   Cross
 reference • Policy SUS-1.6 (Public Health) - Emphasize the importance of public health in
 CD-2.1.1,     land use planning, infrastructure planning, and implementing City policies and
DT-6.1 and
CIRC-2.2.1
               programs.
           Goal SUS-2: Increase effective citizen participation in local government.
           • Policy SUS-2.1 (Public Participation) – Continue to encourage public
               participation in municipal decision-making.
                   Action SUS-2.1.1 (Communication Technology) – Utilize new technology, as
                   available, to improve communication with residents, including alternative ways to
                   share information, notice hearings, and solicit or receive public input on local
                   issues.
                   Action SUS-2.1.2 (Neighborhoods and Planning) – Facilitate participation by
                   neighborhood organizations in local decision-making.
    2-10   Chico General Plan

                       2 . SUSTAINABILITY
• Policy SUS-2.2 (Outside Agencies) – Increase awareness and encourage                        Cross
   community participation in local decisions made by entities other than the City,         reference
   such as Butte County, Butte County Association of Governments, Chico Area                 LU-1.1.2
   Recreation District, and CSU Chico.
       Action SUS-2.2.1 (Agency Website Links) – Maintain links from the City
       website to other agencies that make decisions about local matters.
Goal SUS-3: Lead the way to a sustainable Chico by reducing the environmental
impacts of City operations.
• Policy SUS-3.1 (Sustainable Products and Services) – Promote the use of
   environmentally-friendly and local products and services.
       Action SUS-3.1.1 (Environmentally Preferable Purchasing Program) –                     Cross
       Develop and implement an Environmentally Preferable Purchasing Program that          reference
       directs the purchase of products and services for municipal operations that are     PPFS-8.1.3
                                                                                            and S-8.2
       environmentally preferable (e.g., renewable, recyclable, non-toxic) and sold
       locally to the maximum extent economically and legally feasible.
• Policy SUS-3.2 (Municipal Energy Use) – Reduce energy and water use in
   municipal operations.
       Action SUS-3.2.1 (Municipal Operations) – Perform energy audits of existing
       City operations and maintenance practices to identify and implement energy
       savings measures.
       Action SUS-3.2.2 (Energy Generation) – Continue to explore opportunities to
       generate energy on City properties.
• Policy SUS-3.3 (Municipal Waste Reduction) – Reduce consumption and                         Cross
                                                                                            reference
   increase recycling and reuse of materials in City operations.                           PPFS-8.1.2
       Action SUS-3.3.1 (Municipal Recycling) – Promote the use of recycling bins at
       municipal facilities, public parks, and recreational spaces, and as necessary,
       increase the size, durability, and number of recycling bins as well as the range of
       materials accepted.
       Action SUS-3.3.2 (Materials Reduction and Reuse) - Explore opportunities to
       reduce consumption and increase reuse of materials, vehicles and equipment in
       City operations.
                                                                      Chico General Plan       2-11

                                 2 . SUSTAINABILITY
   Cross   • Policy SUS-3.4 (Sustainable Fleet) – Support sustainable City vehicles and
 reference
CIRC-9.1.1     equipment.
                   Action SUS-3.4.1 (Fuel-Efficient Fleet) – As needed, purchase new municipal
   Cross
 reference         fleet vehicles and equipment that are highly fuel-efficient, use alternative-fuel, or
 OS-4.1.4          electricity, allowing flexibility for maintenance, safety, and other special use
                   vehicles.
           Goal SUS-4: Promote green development.
           • Policy SUS-4.1 (Green Public Facilities) – Incorporate green building techniques
               in the site design, construction, and renovation of public projects.
                   Action SUS-4.1.1 (Green Facilities) – Construct new significant municipal
                   facilities to at least the baseline certification level of Leadership in Energy and
                   Environmental Design (LEED), or its equivalent.
                   Action SUS-4.1.2 (City-Funded Green Projects) – Incorporate green building
                   materials and techniques in projects financed by the City, allowing flexibility for
                   costs including long-term operating costs.
           • Policy SUS-4.2 (Water Efficient Landscaping) – Promote drought tolerant
               landscaping.
   Cross           Action SUS-4.2.1 (Public Landscaping) – Install drought tolerant landscaping
 reference
 OS-3.3.2          and water conserving irrigation systems at City facilities, medians, and parkway
                   strips to reduce water use and maintenance costs.
           • Policy SUS-4.3 (Green Development Practices) – Promote green development
               practices in private projects.
   Cross           Action SUS-4.3.1 (Green Development Checklist) – Include a Green
 reference         Development Checklist and supporting materials with City planning and building
PPFS-8.1.5
                   applications and permits highlighting ways to incorporate green development
                   principles into project design.
                   Action SUS-4.3.2 (Green Staff Training) – Provide regular training to ensure
                   that City employees are able to implement the State’s Green Building Code,
                   conduct energy audits, and review or rate green building projects.
                   Action SUS-4.3.3 (Reduce Heat Gain) – Establish standards for new non-
                   residential structures, such as reflective roofing or light colored pavement to
                   reduce the heat gain associated with traditional urban development.
    2-12   Chico General Plan

                        2 . SUSTAINABILITY
Goal SUS-5: Increase energy efficiency and reduce non-renewable energy
resource consumption citywide.
• Policy SUS-5.1 (Energy Efficient Retrofits) – Promote energy efficient retrofit
   improvements in existing buildings.
       Action SUS-5.1.1 (Clean Energy Loan Program) – Continue the City’s
       Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) programs that provide low-interest
       loans to property owners for the installation of energy efficiency improvements or
       renewable energy devices.
       Action SUS-5.1.2 (PG&E and Education) – Coordinate with PG&E to promote
       public education about energy efficiency and conservation methods, and
       encourage them to continue providing more energy from renewable sources.
       Action SUS-5.1.3 (Energy Efficiency Upgrades) – Continue to require energy
       conservation upgrades upon resale of homes and improve public awareness of
       City requirements.
• Policy SUS-5.2 (Energy Efficient Design) – Support the inclusion of energy
   efficient design and renewable energy technologies in public and private
   projects.
       Action SUS-5.2.1 (Integration of Energy Efficiency Technology) – Utilize City
       incentives identified in Action LU-2.3.1 to encourage the integration of energy
       efficiency measures and renewable energy devices, in addition to those required
       by the state, during early project review.
       Action SUS-5.2.2 (Educational Material) – Provide builders and homeowners
       with resources and information about energy efficiency and renewable energy
       technologies at the Municipal Hall Planning and Building counters and on the
       City’s Sustainability website.
       Action SUS-5.2.3 (Passive Solar) – Incorporate passive solar design principles
       (e.g., building materials, high-albedo roofs, eaves, window placement,
       landscaping, and building orientation) into the Design Guidelines Manual.
• Policy SUS-5.3 (Facilities for Emerging Technologies) – Support the
   construction of facilities for emerging transportation technologies such as
   alternative fueling stations.
Goal SUS-6: Reduce the level of greenhouse gas emissions Citywide.
                                                                        Chico General Plan 2-13

                                   2 . SUSTAINABILITY
   Cross     • Policy SUS-6.1 (Greenhouse Gas Reduction Efforts) – Support local, regional,
 reference
OS-4.3 and       and statewide efforts to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases linked to climate
 CIRC-9.1        change.
   Cross     • Policy SUS-6.2 (Greenhouse Gas Inventory and Climate Action Plan) – Maintain
 reference
   OS-4.3        a Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory and implement the Climate Action Plan
                 to make progress toward meeting the City’s greenhouse gas emissions reduction
                 goal.
                      Action SUS-6.2.1 (Emission Reduction Actions) – Use the Climate Action Plan
                      to guide the City’s actions to meet the City’s greenhouse gas emissions reduction
                      goal.
                      Action SUS-6.2.2 (Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory) – Update the
                      Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory, and compare the results with previous
                      inventories to evaluate progress towards the City’s greenhouse gas emissions
                      reduction goal.
                      Action SUS-6.2.3 (Climate Action Plan) – Review and revise as necessary the
                      Climate Action Plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions consistent with the
                      City’s 2020 emission reduction goal, and revisit the need for new goals beyond
                      2020.
   Cross     • Policy SUS-6.3 (Greenhouse Gas Emissions and CEQA) – Analyze and mitigate
 reference
 OS-4.1.2        potentially significant increases in greenhouse gas emissions during project
                 review, pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act.
   Cross
 reference   • Policy SUS-6.4 (Community Trees) – Continue to support the planting and
OS-6.1 and       maintenance of trees in the community to increase carbon sequestration.
 CD-4.1.2
             Goal SUS-7: Support local food systems in Chico.
    Cross    • Policy SUS-7.1 (Community Food System) – Support a community food system
 reference       that bolsters the economy, supports local agriculture, promotes healthy
   OS-5.3
                 lifestyles, and connects Chico residents to local food sources.
    Cross
  reference           Action SUS-7.1.1 (Farmers Markets) – Allow farmers markets to operate on
DT 1.5.2 and          City-owned properties, where consistent with other municipal uses.
  ED 2.3.1
             • Policy SUS-7.2 (Support Community Gardens) – Support community gardens in
                 appropriate locations in the City.
     2-14    Chico General Plan

               2 . SUSTAINABILITY
Action SUS-7.2.1 (Gardening as Recreation) – Support the Chico Area
Recreation and Parks District and other local gardening or agricultural
organizations that promote community gardens by offering classes such as
gardening and composting and by allowing community gardens at their facilities.
                                                         Chico General Plan     2-15

                      5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
    VISION
    Chico retains its distinct small-town charm in the year 2030, attractive to longtime and
    new residents as well as the dynamic student population at California State University
    Chico, all of who continue to replenish Chico’s multi-generational vitality and culture.
    Rich agricultural lands, west to the Sacramento River, and scenic foothills of the Sierra
    Nevada have been preserved. The City’s historic Downtown and adjacent
    neighborhoods continue to serve as model neighborhoods that convey a unique
    pedestrian-oriented character. Eclectic architectural styles, both old and new, continue
    to define the built environment. Visitors easily recognize the community’s cultural
    pride exhibited by timeless architecture, the beauty of the natural environment, public
    art, gathering places, and neighborhood landmarks that establish Chico’s identifiable
    sense of place.
INTRODUCTION
The Community Design Element focuses on the visual quality of the physical elements and
spaces that shape Chico.
The City’s natural attributes such as agriculture, foothills, trees, and creeks have contributed
to the shape and urban form of the City. These physical elements, as well as the City’s
development patterns, landmark buildings, and streets, contribute to Chico’s overall character
and identity.
Quality, compatible design is highly valued by the community. The differences between
development patterns in newer and older areas of the City are obvious. The original grid
pattern of the City streets and the architectural identity in the Downtown core and
surrounding older neighborhoods provide a sharp
contrast to the post-World War II development
with arterial streets, curvilinear street patterns,
and diverse architectural styles and forms.
In terms of the built community, the distinctive
qualities of Chico are best reflected in the older
areas of the City, which are generally located to
the west of State Route 99. Downtown Chico and
its surrounding neighborhoods, including the
South of Campus Neighborhood, the Avenues
Neighborhood, and the Southwest Chico Urban Design Concepts and Elements
Neighborhood, are characterized by a grid street
pattern, well-defined borders, tree-lined streets, a diversity of lot sizes and housing types, and
a clear neighborhood identity that sets them apart from other parts of the City.
                                                                               Chico General Plan  5-1

                         5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
    The Community Design Element is an optional element of the General Plan that is related to
    several other General Plan elements. Specifically, this element prioritizes the importance of a
    compact urban form and of creating, preserving and enhancing the distinct neighborhoods of
    Chico. In addition to the community design policies established by this element, the City of
    Chico Design Guidelines Manual provides more specific architectural design guidance and
    solutions for a wide spectrum of project types. The Manual is intended to guide the aesthetic
    qualities of development in Chico and maintain its dignified visual character by integrating
    timeless architectural and landscape design with the natural beauty of its surrounding
    environment. References to the Manual are made in this element where appropriate.
    ISSUES AND CONSIDERATIONS
    This section of the element identifies and addresses primary community design issues raised
    during the outreach efforts for the General Plan Update. Policy guidance is found in the
    goals, policies, and actions section of this element. An explanation of specialized terms can
    be found in the General Plan Glossary (Appendix A).
    I NFILL D ESIGN C OMPATIBILITY
    Chico is committed to a more sustainable development pattern by focusing new growth into
    infill areas. Creating a more compact urban form strengthens communities by placing
                                             residences, jobs, services and facilities in close
                                             proximity to one another. While the goal of compact
                                             urban form and encouraging infill is not new, infill
                                             projects remain some of the most controversial
                                             projects in Chico. Directing new development into
                                             already developed areas raises the critical issues of
                                             how new infill will relate to the existing context of an
                                             area in terms of design and density. The Community
                                             Design Element establishes policies and actions to
                                             guide the design of infill development to be
                                             compatible with its neighborhood.
    N EIGHBORHOOD C HARACTER
    As described in the Land Use Element, this General Plan focuses on establishing a balanced
    plan for the mix and distribution of land uses. In terms of land use components, many Chico
    residents identify most with their local neighborhoods and want to be involved in setting
    priorities for their neighborhoods. In recent years, the City created the Housing and
    Neighborhood Services Department which supports community efforts to develop and adopt
    neighborhood plans. The Community Design Element recognizes the character of Chico’s
    diverse neighborhoods and supports the development of neighborhood plans. This element
    also establishes policies that guide the creation, maintenance, and enhancement of Chico’s
    neighborhoods.
5-2      Chico General Plan

                      5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
S ENSE OF P LACE
Chico residents place a high value on maintaining the community’s sense of place. However,
this requires a common understanding of the characteristics which define that sense. This
element explains the defining qualities of existing development in Chico that are essential to
maintaining its sense of place in both developed and growing areas of the City. Emulating
desirable features of Chico’s older neighborhoods and commercial districts in new
development can lend continuity that reinforces the City’s sense of place and unique identity.
The Community Design Element includes goals, policies, and actions to (1) address
community-wide investment for improved urban
design, (2) ensure appropriate design continuity
between existing and future development and (3)
celebrate cultural and historic resources in Chico.
New development and redevelopment guided by this
element will exhibit quality design that is context
sensitive and contributes positively to the character
of the community. The City of Chico Design
Guidelines Manual relies on the sense of place
concept in its implementation.
C OMPLETE S TREETS AND S CENIC R OADS
The intent of the complete streets concept is to ensure that streets accommodate vehicle,
transit, bicycle, and pedestrian travel. The 2030 Vision Book, explained in the Introduction
chapter, states that in 2030, the City’s bicycle-friendly streets will continue to thrive, tree-
lined streets and boulevards will be a defining characteristic, and streets will be safe, friendly,
and multimodal with dedicated bike lanes. The Community Design Element strives for more
than complete streets; it also calls for enhancing the City’s unique scenic corridors that are
celebrated by Chico residents and visitors as vibrant and attractive public spaces.
W AYFINDING AS D ESIGN O PPORTUNITY
Wayfinding is the ability of a person to navigate his or her way to a given
destination by various means including historic landmarks, public art, unique
architectural or design elements, signage, natural features, roads or paths.
Chico has many natural and manmade landmarks to help residents and visitors
orient themselves in the community, such as creeks and open space, foothills,
and major transportation corridors. However, over the past 20 years as the
community grew, it became more difficult to find one’s way around Chico.
There are significant opportunities to improve wayfinding throughout the
community and to improve the sense of arrival to Chico and its neighborhoods.
This element establishes policies and actions to create a comprehensive
wayfinding system in the community.
                                                                             Chico General Plan     5-3

                         5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
    D ESIGN R EVIEW – P RINCIPLE AND P ROCESS
    Chico has an established process for design review of development projects. This element
    builds on that foundation by introducing policies and actions that clarify design expectations
    with a focus on quality design and development of projects that reinforce a sense of place
    within the community. The 1994 General Plan Community Design Element was the unifying
    element of the 1994 General Plan, and for that reason community design took a key position
    in the community planning process. The City adopted a Design Guidelines Manual in 2009
    that consolidated the language and themes from the 1994 Community Design Element, as
                                           well as other policy, code, and guidelines from
                                           different City documents. The Design Guidelines
                                           Manual refines the City’s design review process by
                                           lending greater predictability to the public and City
                                           decision-makers in the architectural review of
                                           development projects.        The Design Guidelines
                                           Manual is intended to be an evolving document which
                                           is updated to meet the City’s needs. For example, this
                                           Element directs an addition to the Manual of context
                                           sensitive design solutions for residential infill projects
                                           to help address the ongoing issue of community
                                           disagreement associated with infill projects.
    COMMUNITY DESIGN CONCEPTS
    This section of the element describes several specialized terms and important concepts that
    relate to community design issues facing Chico and the goals, policies, and actions in this
    element.
    M AJOR L AND U SE C OMPONENTS
    Chico’s primary land use components include neighborhoods, corridors, and centers. The
    following graphic illustrates the conceptual relationship between these land use components
    in the City’s core area. In general, neighborhoods are where people live, corridors are the
    channels for mobility and connectivity, and centers are concentrations of activity which serve
    as a focus for commerce and other non-residential activities. This section describes important
    design considerations for Chico’s neighborhoods, corridors, and centers, as well as the
    community edges.
5-4      Chico General Plan

                      5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
                    Conceptual Illustration of Neighborhoods, Corridors, and Centers
Neighborhood Design
From a community design perspective, the diverse neighborhoods that form the fabric of Chico
are among the community’s greatest assets. Neighborhoods are places where people live and
share a sense of identity. Neighborhoods vary widely in size, composition and configuration,
but they share certain common traits. Neighborhoods are predominantly residential, generally
include community gathering places, and share supporting service areas with other surrounding
neighborhoods. Consistent with the policies in the Land Use Element, new neighborhoods
will be designed and developed as complete neighborhoods. Additionally, infill and
redevelopment within existing neighborhoods should enhance developed areas consistent
with the complete neighborhood concept explained in the Land Use Element.
Key neighborhood design considerations include:
    •   Mix of Uses and Housing. Neighborhoods provide a variety of housing types, and
        include non-residential uses that address the daily needs of residents.
    •   Transitions. Neighborhoods have transitions in scale, form and character between
        different land uses such as between residential and non-residential or between the
        natural and built environment.
    •   Walkability. Neighborhoods are pedestrian-friendly with design features such as
        short block lengths, buildings of human scale and orientation, traffic calming
        features, safe roadway crossings, and wide, well-lit sidewalks that are separated from
        roadways by landscaped parkways.
                                                                                   Chico General Plan 5-5

                        5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
        •   Linkages. Neighborhoods include convenient connections for all modes of travel to
            key destinations such as schools, neighborhood centers, and adjoining
            neighborhoods.
                                            •   Public Gathering Places. Neighborhoods have
                                                desirable places for residents, customers, and
                                                employees to socialize, such as plazas, community
                                                centers, and parks.
                                            •   Connections to Open Space. Neighborhoods are
                                                well-integrated with their natural surroundings and
                                                are connected to open space and recreational
                                                amenities by trails and bikeways.
        •   Urban Forest. Neighborhoods have street trees and landscaped parkways to enhance
            neighborhood character and identity.
    Corridor Design
    Corridors, both natural and man-made, form boundaries, but also provide connections
    between neighborhoods and centers. They are prominent places that reflect community
    identity and character. Corridors in Chico include transportation corridors, commercial
    corridors, and open space corridors.
        •   Transportation Corridors. Transportation corridors are roadways within the
            community that primarily serve to move people from one area of the City to another.
            They are typically multimodal arterial roadways connecting residents and employees
            to destinations, such as shopping, jobs, recreation, and schools. Examples of
            transportation corridors are Manzanita Avenue, Eaton Road, and East Avenue.
                                          •   Commercial Corridors. Commercial corridors are
                                              significant roadways that are lined with businesses.
                                              Traffic speeds are generally slower due to the
                                              volume and frequency of turning movements.
                                              Examples of commercial corridors include
                                              Mangrove Avenue and 20th Street.
                                          •   Open Space Corridors. Open space corridors are
                                              natural areas providing visual and physical linkages
                                              and habitat along creeks and designated open spaces
                                              and parks. Open space corridors include creekside
                                              greenways such as Lindo Channel and linear parks
                                              such as Bidwell Park.
5-6     Chico General Plan

                       5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
Key corridor design considerations include:
    •   Creekside Considerations. Creeks are a benefit to the built environment and the
        community. Development and infrastructure improvements need to consider public
        access, views, and the protection of biological resources as fundamental design
        elements.
    •   Streetscape Design. Well-designed streets accommodate multiple modes of
        transportation and exhibit identifiable design elements that complement the character
        of adjoining properties.
    •   Wayfinding System. Corridors guide movement and as such they are ideal locations
        for incorporating wayfinding elements that help with orientation and direction.
Center Design
Centers are destinations with a wide variety of form and function. Centers can be areas
where residents and visitors shop, work, dine, and seek services and entertainment. There are
four distinct types of centers in Chico:
    •   Neighborhood Centers. Neighborhood centers meet the daily shopping and service
        needs of residents in the surrounding neighborhoods. They include smaller
        commercial buildings and mixed-use neighborhood cores. Examples include the
        Longfellow Center on E. 1st Avenue and the 5th and Ivy center in the South Campus
        Neighborhood.
           Illustration of a Neighborhood Center
                                                                           Chico General Plan 5-7

                       5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
                                             •   Community Centers. Community centers provide
                                                 a broad range of services for residents Citywide.
                                                 Community centers include commercial clusters,
                                                 specialty retailers, civic uses and community
                                                 services. Examples include Downtown and the
                                                 Safeway Center on East Avenue.
                                             •   Regional Centers. Regional centers include a
                                                 wide range of uses that serve both the City and the
                                                 greater region. Typical uses include large retailers,
                                                 regional shopping centers, theaters and
                                                 entertainment centers. Examples include the Chico
                                                 Mall and North Valley Plaza.
       •   Special Purpose Centers. Special purpose centers are unique destinations that serve
           local and regional needs. Typical uses include job centers, schools, and hospitals.
           Examples include Hegan Lane Business Park, CSU Chico, and Enloe Medical
           Center.
    Key center design considerations include:
       •   Sense of Place. Centers reflect their relationship to the community as focal points for
           gathering. Design elements emphasize functional, cultural or historical references,
           distinct architectural styling, the natural setting, public art, and landmarks.
       •   Pedestrian Design. Centers have architectural form and massing designed at a
           pedestrian-level scale; facilities that accommodate pedestrian access and circulation;
           and plazas, parks, and courtyards for social gathering.
       •   Site Landscaping and Art. Centers have appropriate landscaping and integrate art that
           enhances architectural concepts, creates pedestrian scale, and reinforces a sense of
           place.
5-8    Chico General Plan

                      5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
Edges
Chico is defined by its edges. The edge of a city can be “hard,” where there is an abrupt or
clearly defined transition between urban and rural or undeveloped uses, or “soft,” where the
transition between urban and rural is more gradual. Chico seeks to transition the density and
intensity of uses from an urban to rural character while maintaining a clear City edge and
establishing a sense of entry and arrival to the City.
                                                                          Chico General Plan  5-9

                       5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
     GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
      Goal CD-1: Strengthen Chico’s image and sense of place by reinforcing the
                     desired form and character of the community.
      Goal CD-2: Enhance edges and corridors that represent physical boundaries,
                     transitions and connections throughout the community.
      Goal CD-3: Ensure project design that reinforces a sense of place with context
                     sensitive elements and a human scale.
      Goal CD-4: Maintain and             enhance   the    character     of  Chico’s  diverse
                     neighborhoods.
      Goal CD-5: Support infill and redevelopment compatible with the surrounding
                     neighborhood.
      Goal CD-6: Enhance gateways and wayfinding systems for an improved sense of
                     arrival and orientation for residents and visitors throughout Chico.
      Goal CD-7: Celebrate public art and expand the significant role the arts play in
                     the quality of life and economic vitality of Chico.
       Goal CD-1: Strengthen Chico’s image and sense of place by reinforcing the
       desired form and character of the community.
       • Policy CD-1.1 (Natural Features and Cultural Resources) – Reinforce the City’s
           positive and distinctive image by recognizing and enhancing the natural features
           of the City and protecting cultural and historic resources.
                 Action CD-1.1.1 (Highlight Features and Resources) – Incorporate and
                 highlight natural features such as scenic vistas, creeks, and trees, as well as
                 cultural resources such as rock walls, into project design.
                 Action CD-1.1.2 (Landscape Improvement) – Emphasize landscaping as a
                 fundamental design component, retaining mature landscaping when
                 appropriate, to reinforce a sense of the natural environment and to maintain an
                 established appearance.
       • Policy CD-1.2 (Reinforce Attributes) – Strengthen the positive qualities of the
           City’s neighborhoods, corridors, and centers.
                 Action CD-1.2.1 (Design Considerations) – Review the Community Design
                 Concepts for neighborhoods, corridors, and centers from this element during
                 project review.
5-10   Chico General Plan

                  5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
          Action CD 1.2.2 (Pride of Ownership) – Create a program to recognize              Cross
          property owners for exemplary property care and maintenance along key           reference
                                                                                          LU-3.4.2
          streets, gateways, and neighborhoods such as the Eastwood Park Subdivision
          along E. 8th and 9th Streets, the south Esplanade, Mansion Park, and along
          Woodland Avenue.
Goal CD-2: Enhance edges and corridors that represent physical boundaries,
transitions and connections throughout the community.
                                                                                            Cross
                                                                                          reference
• Policy CD-2.1 (Walkable Grid and Creek Access) – Reinforce a walkable grid              CIRC-4.2
   street layout and provide linkages to creeks and other open spaces.                   and OS 2.1
                                                                                            Cross-
        Action CD-2.1.1 (Circulation and Access) – As part of project review, integrate   reference
        a predominately grid-based street pattern into new development to enhance          DT-6.1,
        walkability and public health.                                                   CIRC-2.2.1
                                                                                        and SUS 1.6
        Action CD-2.1.2 (Bike Trails, Paths and Medians) – Establish linkages and an        Cross
                                                                                          reference
        improved sense of place through enhanced bike trails, pedestrian paths,           CIRC-3.3
        landscaped medians and parkways.
                                                                                            Cross
        Action CD-2.1.3 (Greenways) – Continue the City’s existing program to expand      reference
        creekside corridors by acquiring properties along creek edges for creekside     OS-2.2.1 and
                                                                                         PPFS-2.1.1
        greenways.
                                                                                            Cross
        Action CD-2.1.4 (Creek Views and Access) – As part of the design review of        reference
        development and capital projects, improve visual and recreational public access DT-6.2.4 and
        to creeks.                                                                       PPFS 2.1.2
                                                                                            Cross
• Policy CD-2.2 (City Edge) – Maintain a clear City edge and establish a sense of         reference
   entry and arrival to the City.                                                          LU-1.2
• Policy CD-2.3 (Corridor Improvements) – Improve corridors traversing the City
   to enhance their aesthetics and accessibility.
          Action CD-2.3.1 (Screen State Route 99) – Minimize the visual impact of
          State Route 99 to new adjacent development through screening and buffering.
                                                                    Chico General Plan       5-11

                             5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
                       Action CD-2.3.2 (Specialized Treatment for Scenic Roads) – Incorporate
    Cross
  reference
                       context sensitive roadway improvements on Chico’s scenic roads, including
 CIRC-2.3.1            Vallombrosa Avenue, E. 8th Street, the Esplanade, Chico Canyon Road,
                       Centennial Avenue, Manzanita Avenue, Humboldt Road, and Bidwell Avenue.
    Cross              Action CD-2.3.3 (Commercial Corridor Improvements) – Update the
 reference             Design Guidelines Manual to incorporate concepts from the Park Avenue
  LU-5.1.4
                       Visioning Study to apply to future roadway improvements along the City’s
                       commercial corridors.
    Cross
  reference
             • Policy CD-2.4 (Context Sensitive Foothill Development) – Protect viewsheds
 OS-2.4 and      from foothill development, through the careful location and design of roads,
  LU-1.2.2       buildings, lighting, landscaping, and other infrastructure.
    Cross              Action CD-2.4.1 (Protection of Foothill Viewshed) – Design and blend
 reference             foothill development with the surrounding landscape and topography to
OS-2.4.1 and
  LU 6.2.4             diminish its visual prominence from the valley floor.
                       Action CD-2.4.2 (Foothill Light Levels) – Design low light levels in foothill
                       settings to optimize views of dark skies and minimize light pollution.
                       Action CD-2.4.3 (Foothill Streets) – In order to minimize cut and fill grading
                       operations in foothill areas, design new streets at the minimum dimension
                       necessary for access and parking.
                       Action CD-2.4.4 (Block Lengths) – Minimize the length of street blocks in
                       foothill development.
                       Action CD-2.4.5 (Contours of Natural Slope) – Limit the extent and amount
                       of grading in foothill areas, and where grading occurs, emulate the contours of
                       the natural slope.
             Goal CD-3: Ensure project design that reinforces a sense of place with context
             sensitive elements and a human scale.
             • Policy CD-3.1 (Lasting Design and Materials) – Promote architectural design
                 that exhibits timeless character and is constructed with high quality materials.
    Cross              Action CD-3.1.1 (Design Guidelines) – Utilize the City Design Guidelines
 reference
LU-2.4.4 and           Manual for architectural review of discretionary projects.
  DT-3.1.1
                       Action CD-3.1.2 (Update Design Guidelines) – Update the City Design
                       Guidelines Manual as necessary to maintain consistency with the General Plan,
     5-12    Chico General Plan

                 5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
         the City’s Land Use and Development Regulations, and current architectural
         solutions.
                                                                                             Cross
• Policy CD-3.2 (Bicycles and Pedestrians) – Maintain and enhance the                      reference
   pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly environment of Chico.                                  CIRC-4.3
                                                                                          and DT-3.1
       Action CD-3.2.1 (Pedestrian-Scale Site Planning) – Utilize design techniques          Cross
                                                                                           reference
       provided in the City’s Design Guidelines Manual that support pedestrian- and
                                                                                           CIRC-9.3
       bicycle-friendly site planning.
• Policy CD-3.3 (Pedestrian Environment and Amenities) – Locate parking areas
   and design public spaces within commercial and mixed-use projects in a manner
   that promotes pedestrian activity.
                                                                                             Cross
         Action CD-3.3.1 (Public Spaces) – Amend the Municipal Code to establish a         reference
         required minimum outdoor area dedicated to public (employee and customer)         DT-3.1.2
         gathering as part of new non-residential development.
                                                                                             Cross
• Policy CD-3.4 (Public Safety) – Include public safety considerations in                  reference
                                                                                           S-5.5 and
   community design.                                                                        DT-3.4
         Action CD-3.4.1 (Crime Prevention Design) – Incorporate appropriate crime           Cross
         prevention principles in new development projects to enhance community            reference
                                                                                            S-5.5.1
         safety. Consider Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
         principles when amending development standards.
         Action CD-3.4.2 (Public Safety Project Review) – During design review,
         consult with the Police Department to avoid physical conditions such as dark
         parking lots or alleys, enclosed stairwells, and dark entrances that are
         susceptible to criminal activity.
         Action CD-3.4.3 (Safe Parking Lot Design) – Require that commercial
         parking lots be designed with adequate opportunities for surveillance by police.
Goal CD-4: Maintain and enhance the character of Chico’s diverse
neighborhoods.
• Policy CD-4.1 (Distinctive Character) – Reinforce the distinctive character of             Cross
                                                                                           reference
   neighborhoods with design elements reflected in the streetscape, landmarks,              LU-3.4
   public art, and natural amenities.
                                                                      Chico General Plan      5-13

                             5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
    Cross              Action CD-4.1.1 (Neighborhood Design Details) – Develop and implement
  reference            neighborhood plans that identify neighborhood design qualities and
   LU-3.3.1
                       characteristics.
    Cross              Action CD-4.1.2 (Urban Forest) – Protect and enhance the urban forest that
  reference
 OS-6.1 and            characterizes the community and particularly its older neighborhoods.
   SUS-6.4
                       Action CD-4.1.3 (Sense of Place) – As part of the design review of
                       development and capital projects, encourage the integration of civic, cultural,
                       natural, art, and other themes that create a sense of place for each neighborhood
                       and contribute to the overall character of the community.
             Goal CD-5: Support infill and redevelopment compatible with the surrounding
             neighborhood.
    Cross    • Policy CD-5.1 (Compatible Infill Development) – Ensure that new development
  reference      and redevelopment reinforces the desirable elements of its neighborhood
LU-4.2 and
   LU-5.1.1      including architectural scale, style, and setback patterns.
    Cross            Action CD-5.1.1 (Residential Infill Design Guidelines) – Update the City’s
  reference          Design Guidelines Manual to specifically address residential infill design in terms
LU-4.2.1 and
   DT-4.2.1          of building scale, height and setbacks, parking and access, transitions, and
                     landscaping.
    Cross    • Policy CD-5.2 (Context Sensitive Transitions) – Encourage context sensitive
  reference
   DT-4.2.1      transitions in architectural scale and character between new and existing
                 residential development.
             • Policy CD-5.3 (Context Sensitive Design) – For infill development, incorporate
                 context sensitive design elements that maintain compatibility and raise the
                 quality of the area’s architectural character.
    Cross            Action CD-5.3.1 (Adaptive Reuse) – Continue the City’s Façade Improvement
  reference
CRHP-2.2.1           Program to support redevelopment and adaptive reuse of transitioning or aging
 and DT-8.1          commercial developments.
             Goal CD-6: Enhance gateways and wayfinding elements for an improved sense
             of arrival and orientation for residents and visitors throughout Chico.
    Cross    • Policy CD-6.1 (Gateways at Landmarks) – Create a sense of arrival to Chico and
  reference
  LU-6.2.6       develop prominent community focal points at key locations within the City.
     5-14    Chico General Plan

                  5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
          Action CD-6.1.1 (Gateway Integration) – As part of roadway improvement                  Cross
                                                                                                reference
          projects, integrate artistic gateway features at the following locations:              DT-6.2
          •   State Route 99 near Southgate and Entler Avenues
          •   Park Avenue near 20th Street
          •   East 8th and 9th Streets between State Route 99 and Main Street
          •   State Route 99 near Garner Lane
          •   Highway 32 between E. East Avenue and Lindo Channel
          •   Highway 32 near Yosemite Drive.
                                                                                                  Cross
          Action CD-6.1.2 (Landmarks) – Construct landmarks to support wayfinding               reference
          at key locations throughout the City such as entries to historic neighborhoods,     DT-6.2.1 and
                                                                                                DT-6.3.1
          points of interest, significant buildings, and natural features.
• Policy CD-6.2 (No Gated Subdivisions) – Do not allow new gated subdivisions                     Cross
                                                                                                reference
    because they isolate parts of the community from others, create an unfriendly                SUS-1.1
    appearance, and do not support social equity.
Goal CD-7: Celebrate public art and expand the significant role the arts play in
the quality of life and economic vitality of Chico.
• Policy CD-7.1 (Public Art) – Include art in public projects.
          Action CD-7.1.1 (Art in Public Places) – Include art in public projects and in
          all private development projects that use public funding by continuing
          implementation of the City’s Art in Public Places Program Policy and
          Procedures Manual.
          Action CD-7.1.2 (Funding for Public Art) – Continue the City’s program of               Cross
                                                                                                reference
          allocating a percentage of capital improvement project budgets to fund the           PPFS-7.1.2
          development and installation of public art projects.
• Policy CD-7.2 (Community and Art) – Foster civic pride with the use of public                   Cross
                                                                                                reference
    art that highlights Chico’s natural resources, cultural heritage, and community             PPFS-7.1
    character.
       Action CD-7.2.1 (Public Art Plan) – Develop and maintain a Public Art Strategic            Cross
                                                                                                reference
       Plan to guide comprehensive integration of public art throughout the community.          DT-1.5.3
• Policy CD-7.3 (City Art Programs) – Provide City programs that foster the arts
    in Chico.
                                                                           Chico General Plan      5-15

                     5. COMMUNITY DESIGN
             Action CD-7.3.1 (Update Arts Master Plan) – Update, as necessary, the Arts
             Master Plan which guides the design and development of the City's cultural and
             arts programs.
5-16 Chico General Plan

                                  6. DOWNTOWN
    VISION
    In 2030, Downtown Chico is the heart of the community and the center of cultural
    activity. Engaging and active at the street level, it is a multi-story, mixed-use hub, with
    specialty retail, restaurants, residences, services, entertainment, and civic and cultural
    uses. Downtown Chico serves as both a visitor destination and a community center
    with activities that attract heavy pedestrian traffic. Downtown is walkable with
    supportive parking facilities, and new development is designed with the pedestrian and
    bicyclist in mind. North and South Downtown each has its own distinct but
    complementary character.
INTRODUCTION
The Downtown Element focuses on supporting and expanding the vitality and enhancement
of Downtown Chico as the City’s central core.
Established in 1860, Downtown Chico represents the historic foundation of the community.
Located on the original town grid, Downtown is a vibrant, compact, urban district with a
diverse mixture of historic and modern structures. The area is approximately ten blocks long
and five blocks wide, bordered on the east and west by residential neighborhoods, to the
south by Little Chico Creek, and to the north by Big Chico Creek and the CSU Chico
campus. The character of North Downtown is distinct from that in South Downtown, and
they are each considered sub-districts of Downtown. Figure DT-1 delineates the boundaries
of Downtown Chico.
Downtown is the social, cultural, and entertainment core of the City with a mix of retail,
service, civic, office, and residential uses. Buildings include multi-story, mixed-use structures
that contribute to a lively pedestrian environment. Downtown is cherished by local residents
and visitors for its public art, unique shops, public open spaces, local farmers markets, and
events such as parades and festivals.
Historically, policies associated with Downtown Chico
have been integrated into several different elements of the
General Plan. Because of Downtown’s important role in
making Chico a successful and sustainable community, the
City has created a separate element to address key issues
associated with Downtown. Since this element is for a
specific subarea of the City, it addresses many of the major
issues of the General Plan such as land use, circulation, and
open space, as found in other elements, but with a specific
focus on Downtown. Where appropriate, cross-references
are provided to alert the reader to the applicable policies or
actions in other elements.
                                                                               Chico General Plan 6-1

                       6. DOWNTOWN
6-2 Chico General Plan
                                6. DOWNTOWN
ISSUES AND CONSIDERATIONS
This Element addresses key issues related to Downtown that were identified and evaluated by
the Downtown Ad Hoc Committee and the larger community as part of the General Plan
Update, including: mixed-use development, the character of South Downtown, circulation
and traffic calming, placemaking, wayfinding, and Downtown’s relationship with CSU
Chico. Policy guidance is found in the goals, policies, and actions section of this element.
An explanation of specialized terms can be found in the General Plan Glossary (Appendix
A).
DOWNTOWN VISION ILLUSTRATION AND
CONCEPTS
The Downtown Element addresses key issues through its goals, policies and actions. In
addition, the key issues informed development of the Downtown Vision Illustration (Figure
DT-2) and corresponding Vision Concepts that, when considered together, represent Chico’s
future vision for Downtown as an evolving, vibrant, mixed-use, urban neighborhood.
D OWNTOWN V ISION I LLUSTRATION
The Downtown Vision Illustration (Figure DT-2) is meant to inspire development that
advances the community’s vision for Downtown through images and conceptual
development patterns which are based on the Vision Concepts, Land Use Diagram, and
General Plan policies. The Downtown Vision Illustration is not a master plan or a specific
blueprint for future development, nor does the illustration mandate any parcel or site specific
development solution. Rather, the Vision Illustration is intended to help the reader visualize
the development types, patterns, and overall intensity anticipated for the future of Downtown.
D OWNTOWN V ISION C ONCEPTS
Concept #1: Downtown Intensification
The City’s plan to accommodate future jobs and housing growth in a compact and sustainable
development pattern relies on infill and redevelopment. Downtown is a key opportunity for
higher density and intensity of development given its
central location, development patterns, and proximity to
employment, services, transit, education, and other
amenities.
Concept #2: South Downtown District
South Downtown (south of 6th Street) has significant
redevelopment potential due to existing parcel and building
sizes. The district could benefit from developing a stronger
                                                                             Chico General Plan 6-3

                                  6. DOWNTOWN
    sense of place and from an extension of the pedestrian-oriented character of North
    Downtown. Future development in South Downtown will include higher density, multi-story,
    and mixed-use buildings with public open spaces and parking on the interior of lots to create
    a pedestrian-friendly environment. South Downtown will transition smoothly to North
    Downtown by way of architectural design, development standards, streetscape
    improvements, and permitted uses for a more unified and vibrant Downtown. Commercial
    service and auto-oriented uses in South Downtown will be managed to limit uses that could
    detract from the pedestrian-oriented character of Downtown.
    Concept #3: Mixed-Use Development
    Chico residents desire a more livable and mixed-use Downtown where residents can walk to
    shopping, commercial services, and recreational amenities. The addition of more residential
    and office uses in Downtown will provide a 24-hour market for commercial success. Methods,
    such as incentives for new mixed-use development and public/private partnerships, are
    intended to promote a greater mix of uses in Downtown.
                           Concept #4: Pedestrian Activity
                           Pedestrian activity and connectivity is essential to the success of
                           Downtown Chico. The existing street grid pattern, colored crosswalks,
                           bulbouts, and street furniture will be preserved, expanded and further
                           enhanced with additional amenities such as sidewalk dining, art, shade,
                           and seating. Additional open space areas that are clean and well-
                           maintained will provide small refuges and gathering places on corners
                           and block interiors. Public parking in the Downtown will be easy to find
                           and will facilitate pedestrian access to the central core.
    Concept #5: Development Transition at Neighborhood Edges
    While Downtown is envisioned to continue growing as an intensive mixed-use center, it is
    important to protect adjacent residential neighborhoods from potential negative influences
    caused by increased density and land use intensity. The Downtown Vision Illustration
    (Figure DT-2) and the Downtown Land Use Diagram (Figure DT-3) call for a transition in
                           development intensity in areas adjacent to existing residential
                           neighborhoods.
                           Concept #6: Preservation of Historic Buildings
                           Engaging the public in the identification, preservation, and celebration
                           of cultural and historic resources in Downtown helps maintain the
                           community’s shared value for the unique character and historical
                           integrity of the area. The City supports the preservation and adaptive
                           reuse of historic buildings in order to develop these unique structural
                           assets of Downtown to their highest and best use.
6-4     Chico General Plan

                                6. DOWNTOWN
Concept #7: Integrated Parking Structures
A stand-alone parking structure is not conducive to a quality pedestrian environment;
therefore, new parking structures will be ringed primarily with ground-floor commercial
suites or otherwise integrated into larger mixed-use development projects.
Concept #8: Parking Access and Management
Maintaining an adequate parking supply is integral to supporting a vibrant downtown. Future
parking options will include modern, safe, convenient, and identifiable street, surface,
underground, and structured parking throughout Downtown.
Concept #9: Traffic Calming
While Downtown relies on adequate traffic volume and flow to maintain its vitality, traffic
should not disturb the pedestrian experience. Downtown streets will be designed and
improved with consideration for slowing the speed of vehicles, supporting non-vehicular
modes of travel, accommodating parking, and providing a safe pedestrian environment.
Concept #10: Relationship with California State University, Chico
CSU Chico blends into the commercial and residential fabric of
Downtown due to its proximity. The vitality of Downtown is closely
tied to the University’s population of students, faculty, and staff.
Collaboration between the University and the City on projects, such as
improving pedestrian and bicycle connections to the University, is
critical to achieving the Downtown Vision.
Concept #11: Open Space Protection and Enhancement
As Downtown matures and urbanizes, it is important to enhance and
maintain public access to open spaces, creeks, parks, and plazas.
Concept #12: Downtown as a Key Transportation Hub
Chico’s Downtown is served by public transit, with multiple routes
converging on the Downtown Transit Center. Downtown is and will continue to be an
important link in Citywide and regional circulation for all modes of transportation.
Concept #13: Downtown as the Cultural and
Civic Community Core
As Chico has grown, the role of Downtown has
diversified. In addition to its traditional role as a
commercial center, Downtown is also the focal point for
local governmental affairs and cultural events for the
community. While striving to enhance the economic
viability of Downtown, it is important to maintain its
                                                                           Chico General Plan 6-5

                                  6. DOWNTOWN
    central role in cultural and civic activities such as music, art, public meetings, parades,
    outdoor markets, and festivals.
    Concept #14: Enhance Downtown Gateways, Landmarks, and Wayfinding
    The network of high-volume streets, some one-way, combined with aging and incomplete
    signage can make navigating and finding key destinations and parking in Downtown
    difficult. As a solution, a new wayfinding system with creative signage and landmarks unique
    to Downtown will be developed to help residents and visitors navigate the area, find
    destinations and convenient parking, accentuate Downtown gateways, and to strengthen the
    sense of place and identity of Downtown.
6-6      Chico General Plan


                                 6. DOWNTOWN
DOWNTOWN LAND USE DIAGRAM
As identified in the Land Use Element, Downtown Chico is a designated Opportunity Site,
which means that the area is optimal for infill, redevelopment, and revitalization in keeping
with the City’s desire for a compact growth footprint and sustainable development pattern.
The Land Use Diagram for Downtown shown in Figure DT-3 (and in Land Use Element
Figure LU-1) establishes land use designations that will guide future development and
redevelopment. Downtown includes several mixed-use land use designations to encourage
more vertical and horizontal integration of uses and higher density and intensity of
development. A transition in land use designations is identified for the areas flanking the
Downtown core to provide a thoughtful interface with surrounding residential
neighborhoods.
    Vertical Integration of Uses
                                                                          Chico General Plan  6-9


                               6. DOWNTOWN
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
 Goal DT-1: Emphasize the role of Downtown as the civic, commercial, and cultural
              core of the community.
 Goal DT-2: Strengthen Downtown with a variety of land uses, mixed-use
              developments, and redevelopment throughout Downtown.
 Goal DT-3: Enhance the pedestrian environment in Downtown.
 Goal DT-4: Achieve new development and redevelopment in Downtown that
              promotes the Downtown Vision Illustration and Concepts.
 Goal DT-5: Support all modes of transportation in and around Downtown.
 Goal DT-6: Reinforce the identity of Downtown, and distinguish it from adjacent
              neighborhoods.
 Goal DT-7: Establish a “Park Once and Walk” environment by improving
              Downtown parking.
 Goal DT-8: Preserve and enhance landmarks or buildings of special historic or
              architectural interest.
  Goal DT-1: Emphasize the role of Downtown as the civic, commercial, and
  cultural core of the community.
  • Policy DT-1.1 (Support Vitality of Downtown) – Maintain and enhance the
      vitality and economic well-being of Downtown to support its status as the City’s
      center.
          Action DT-1.1.1 (Support Downtown Business) – Support Downtown business              Cross
          and property owners by helping to develop and fund public/private partnerships,    reference
          such as business improvement districts, to provide for increased maintenance,      ED-1.5.2
          cleanliness, security, marketing, business retention and recruitment.
                                                                                               Cross
  • Policy DT-1.2 (Businesses Variety) – Encourage a variety of Downtown business            reference
      types to provide a unique shopping experience.                                         ED-2.1.2
  • Policy DT-1.3 (City as Liaison for Downtown Issues) – Enhance the City’s role
      as a Downtown liaison with merchants, property owners, CSU Chico, and the
      community at large.
          Action DT-1.3.1 (City Attention to Downtown Issues) – Continue to allocate
          staff resources to address current and future Downtown issues.
                                                                          Chico General Plan    6-11

                                       6. DOWNTOWN
                      Action DT-1.3.2 (Downtown Working Group) - Meet with Downtown property
                      owners, businesses, residents, CSU Chico, and others interested in Downtown to
                      discuss solutions to key Downtown policy issues and support implementation of
                      the Downtown Element.
                      Action DT-1.3.3 (CSU Chico and CUSD) – Consult with CSU Chico and Chico
                      Unified School District to address mutual interests in Downtown.
             • Policy DT-1.4 (Civic Center) – Preserve and enhance the civic focus of
                 Downtown by maintaining existing civic structures and uses, such as City Hall,
                 the Plaza, and the Post Office, and by encouraging other civic uses to locate
                 Downtown.
    Cross    • Policy DT-1.5 (Culture and Arts) – Encourage the development of cultural and
  reference
CRHP-2.4.2       arts facilities and activities in public spaces throughout Downtown to reinforce
and PPFS-7.1     its role as the cultural core of the City and region.
                      Action DT-1.5.1 (Plaza Park) – Reinforce the role of the Plaza as the cultural
    Cross
  reference           heart of Downtown by continuing to sponsor and allow cultural activities, and
   ED-2.2             events that bring residents and visitors to Downtown such as concerts, and
                      cycling, art and seasonal events.
    Cross
  reference
                      Action DT-1.5.2 (Farmers Markets) – Support the operation and enhancement
  SUS-7.1.1           of farmers markets within Downtown.
    Cross
  reference           Action DT-1.5.3 (Art in Downtown) – Continue to provide locations and
 PPFS-7.1.2,
  CD-7.2.1
                      funding to support the installation of art in public places Downtown.
             • Policy DT-1.6 (Downtown Theaters) – Support the continued use, rehabilitation,
                 and preservation of Downtown theaters.
             Goal DT-2: Strengthen Downtown with a variety of land uses, mixed-use
             developments, and redevelopment throughout Downtown.
             • Policy DT-2.1 (Mixed Land Uses) – Promote development of Downtown as a
                 mixed-use activity center with particular priority to projects including
                 residential uses to help create an economically healthy and vibrant Downtown
                 throughout the day and night.
                      Action DT-2.1.1 (Incentives for Vertical Mixed Use) – Utilize City incentives
                      identified in Action LU-2.3.1 to support developers who construct vertical mixed-
                      use projects within Downtown.
     6-12    Chico General Plan

                           6. DOWNTOWN
      Action DT-2.1.2 (Incentives for Housing above Non-Residential Uses) –                Cross
      Utilize City incentives identified in Action LU-2.3.1 to support developers who    reference
                                                                                         CIRC-8.3
      build housing above non-residential ground-floor uses in Downtown.
• Policy DT-2.3 (Resident Serving Uses) – Encourage resident-serving land uses,
  such as pharmacies and small grocery stores, in Downtown.
      Action DT-2.3.1 (Allowed Uses) – Maintain the Municipal Code to allow
      frequently visited, resident-serving uses by right in Downtown.
      Action DT-2.3.2 (Residential Parking) – Consider the inclusion of dedicated
      residential parking spaces in new parking facilities.
• Policy DT-2.4 (Existing Building Code) – Encourage the reuse of existing
  buildings in Downtown by utilizing the International Existing Building Code
  which provides flexibility in the retrofitting of buildings.
      Action DT-2.4.1 (Reuse Upstairs) – Promote intensified use and reuse of
      existing suites above ground floors.
                                                                                           Cross
• Policy DT-2.5 (Revitalization and Redevelopment) – Promote revitalization of           reference
  underutilized, deteriorated areas and buildings through development incentives,       ED-1.3 and
                                                                                          ED-3.1
  public/private partnerships, and public investment.
      Action DT-2.5.1 (Downtown Utilities) – Work with local utility providers to
      assess and improve infrastructure to meet the needs of the development projected
      for Downtown.
      Action DT-2.5.2 (Public/Private Development Partnerships) – Investigate the          Cross
      use of City-owned properties and underutilized private parking lots in             reference
                                                                                         ED-1.4.3
      public/private partnerships as an incentive for new development Downtown.
      Action DT-2.5.3 (Incentive for Land Assembly) – Utilize City incentives              Cross
                                                                                         reference
      identified in Action LU-2.3.1 to support assemblage of multiple properties         ED-1.4.4
      Downtown for larger integrated development projects.
Goal DT-3: Enhance the pedestrian environment in Downtown.
• Policy DT-3.1 (Design for the Pedestrian Environment) – Enhance the high-                Cross
                                                                                         reference
  quality pedestrian environment within Downtown through the design and                CIRC 4.3 and
  maintenance of buildings, sidewalks, open spaces, and other pedestrian                  CD 3.2
  amenities.
                                                                    Chico General Plan      6-13

                                       6. DOWNTOWN
    Cross            Action DT-3.1.1 (Downtown Design Guidelines) – Maintain and apply the
  reference          Design Guidelines Manual for Downtown building rehabilitation, new
  CD-3.1.1
                     construction, parking, signs, streetscape, pedestrian pathways, and sidewalks.
    Cross            Action DT-3.1.2 (Common Spaces) – Modify standards and building fees to
  reference          allow and encourage the incorporation of architectural features that create
  CD-3.3.1
                     welcoming outdoor places for residents, employees and visitors.
             • Policy DT-3.2 (Streetscape Environment) – Ensure a lively streetscape
                 environment.
                     Action DT-3.2.1 (Ground-floor Uses) – Maintain the Municipal Code to ensure
                     the North Downtown zoning district requires development to incorporate retail or
                     other uses that contribute to increased pedestrian activity on the ground-floor and
                     requires use permit approval for other ground-floor uses.
    Cross            Action DT-3.2.2 (Mixed-use Parking Structures) – Ensure that new parking
  reference
  CIRC-8.2
                     structures in Downtown are ringed primarily with ground-floor retail suites, other
                     pedestrian-oriented uses, or will be otherwise integrated into larger mixed-use
                     development projects.
             • Policy DT-3.3 (Public Realm) – Develop public areas in Downtown that are
                 comfortable, welcoming, and available for use by the whole community.
                     Action DT-3.3.1 (Sidewalk Uses) – Encourage the active use of sidewalks by
                     expanding their allowed uses to include outdoor seating and dining, streetscape
                     and landscape furnishings, and other pedestrian features, while maintaining space
                     for a path of travel.
                     Action DT-3.3.2 (Enhance Downtown Open Space) – Increase the use of public
                     open space by providing well-maintained and well-lit pedestrian pathways,
                     landscaping, street furniture, courtyards, shade, and other amenities.
    Cross    • Policy DT-3.4 (Public Safety Design) – Design Downtown streets and public
  reference
 CD-3.4 and      spaces that enhance public safety and discourage crime by providing street-
    S-5.5        fronting uses (“eyes on the street”), adequate lighting and sight lines, and
                 features that cultivate a sense of community ownership.
             • Policy DT-3.5 (Pedestrian Priorities) – Prioritize facilities for pedestrian travel
                 within Downtown.
    Cross            Action DT-3.5.1 (Enhance Sidewalks) – Enhance pedestrian facilities with
  reference
 CIRC-4.3.1          features such as wide sidewalks, bulb-out corners, and street furniture, placing an
and LU-5.1.4         emphasis on extending sidewalk features to South Downtown.
     6-14    Chico General Plan

                            6. DOWNTOWN
       Action DT-3.5.2 (Bicycling and Skateboarding on Sidewalks) – Enforce
       regulations prohibiting bicycling and skateboarding on sidewalks to maintain
       pedestrian safety, and promote alternate routes for bicyclists.
       Action DT-3.5.3 (Highway 32) – Consult with Caltrans to identify ways to
       improve pedestrian access and safety where Highway 32 crosses Downtown.
• Policy DT-3.6 (Location of Parking) – Reduce the visual prominence of parking                 Cross
                                                                                              reference
   by locating off-street parking safely behind or within structures, or otherwise           CIRC-8.2.1
   screening it from the public right-of-way.
• Policy DT-3.7 (Scale of Downtown Streets) – Design Downtown streets to
   encourage more sidewalk pedestrian activity.
       Action DT-3.7.1 (Number of Travel Lanes) – Giving special consideration for
       north-south circulation patterns and the delivery needs of Downtown businesses,
       identify options to reduce the number of travel lanes on Downtown streets to
       accommodate additional diagonal parking or an enhanced pedestrian
       environment.
       Action DT-3.7.2 (Truck Deliveries) – Facilitate an effort among Downtown                 Cross
       businesses and delivery companies to develop Downtown loading and unloading           reference
                                                                                             CIRC-9.2
       guidelines with the objective of reducing vehicle congestion that can discourage
       pedestrian and bicycling activity.
Goal DT-4: Achieve new development and redevelopment in Downtown that
promotes the Downtown Vision Illustration and Concepts.
• Policy DT-4.1 (Urban Development) – Ensure that new development in
   Downtown is urban in character.
       Action DT-4.1.1 (Coordinate Development Design Features) – Work with
       property owners who desire to coordinate development activities over multiple
       sites to create projects with complementary design features and shared facilities.
• Policy DT-4.2 (Building Context) – Ensure that new construction in Downtown
   matches or increases the development intensity of its block.
       Action DT 4.2.1 (New Construction) – New construction in Downtown North                  Cross
       will have a minimum building height of two-stories, or no less than the average       reference
                                                                                            CD-5.1.1 and
       height of the existing buildings on both sides of the block in which the building is    CD-5.2
       located, whichever is greater.
                                                                       Chico General Plan        6-15

                                    6. DOWNTOWN
                   Action DT-4.2.2 (Downtown Edges) – Require new development at the edges of
                   Downtown to be designed with transitions in building height and mass, where
                   appropriate, to complement the physical character of the adjoining development.
           • Policy DT-4.3 (South Downtown) – Support redevelopment in South Downtown
               that contributes to a more unified and vibrant Downtown.
                   Action DT-4.3.1 (South Downtown Zoning) – Maintain the Municipal Code to
                   allow uses that attract pedestrian activity and limit uses that could detract from
                   the pedestrian-oriented character of South Downtown.
           Goal DT-5: Support all modes of transportation in and around Downtown.
   Cross   • Policy DT-5.1 (Multimodal Circulation) – Promote a balanced multimodal
 reference
CIRC-1.1.1     circulation system to and throughout Downtown that includes pedestrians,
               bicycles, vehicles, and public transit.
   Cross
 reference         Action DT-5.1.1 (Downtown as Transportation Hub) – Promote Downtown as
CIRC-5.1.3         a key transportation hub, emphasizing the Downtown Transit Center.
                   Action DT-5.1.2 (Expand Bicycle Amenities) – Create additional bicycle lanes
                   and safe, convenient, and attractive bicycle parking, including covered spaces.
                   Action DT-5.1.3 (Bicycle and Pedestrian Safety) – Identify and address hazards
                   for pedestrians and bicyclists.
                   Action DT-5.1.4 (Transit Passes) – Coordinate and distribute subsidized transit
                   passes for Downtown residents and employees to encourage increased transit use.
           Goal DT-6: Reinforce the identity of Downtown, and distinguish it from
           adjacent neighborhoods.
   Cross
 reference
  SUS 1.6, • Policy DT-6.1 (Street Pattern) – Maintain the historic street grid as a
 CD-2.1.1,     recognizable part of Downtown, avoiding the permanent removal of grid
    and
CIRC-2.2.1     segments.
   Cross
 reference • Policy DT-6.2 (Creeks and Neighborhood Context) – Enhance Downtown’s
 CD-6.1.1      integration with bordering creeks and adjacent residential neighborhoods.
   Cross           Action DT-6.2.1 (Downtown Gateways) – Establish gateway landmarks that
 reference         create a sense of entry and a welcoming first impression for residents and visitors
 CD-6.1.2
                   at major entry points to Downtown from the south, east and west.
    6-16   Chico General Plan

                           6. DOWNTOWN
      Action DT-6.2.2 (Creek Path) – Create a pedestrian/bicycle path along Big
      Chico Creek to improve circulation through Downtown and provide public access
      to the creek.
      Action DT-6.2.3 (Creek Access) – Maintain public access to Big and Little
      Chico Creeks through adjacent development.
      Action DT-6.2.4 (Creekside Development) – Require development and                         Cross
                                                                                              reference
      redevelopment along Downtown creeks to incorporate design features fronting            PPFS-2.1.2
      the creek such as outdoor seating or dining, public open spaces, and creekside        and CD 2.1.4
      façade improvements.
                                                                                                Cross
• Policy DT-6.3 (Directional Signage) – Provide unique signage throughout                     reference
  Downtown to strengthen its identity.                                                         ED-1.5.2
      Action DT-6.3.1 (Design of Signs) – Install signs and landmarks throughout                Cross
      Downtown with graphics that reflect the character and history of Downtown to            reference
                                                                                              CD-6.1.2
      reinforce a uniform, recognizable Downtown “brand” and to help residents and
      visitors navigate and find key destinations and parking.
Goal DT-7: Establish a “Park Once and Walk” environment by improving
Downtown parking.
                                                                                                Cross
• Policy DT-7.1 (Downtown Parking) – Provide parking in convenient locations                  reference
  throughout Downtown.                                                                       CIRC-8.2.1
      Action DT-7.1.1 (Parking Strategy) – Implement a comprehensive Downtown                   Cross
                                                                                              reference
      parking strategy that addresses the needs of customers, visitors, employees, and        CIRC-8.3
      residents.
      Action DT-7.1.2 (Parking Facilities) – Develop and charge for publicly-owned,
      well-lit, and safe parking facilities that allow 24-hour access to Downtown.
• Policy DT-7.2 (Parking Supply) – Increase the use of the existing Downtown
  parking supply.
      Action DT-7.2.1 (Downtown Parking Requirements) – Maintain the Municipal                  Cross
      Code to eliminate minimum parking requirements in North Downtown, and                   reference
                                                                                              LU-5.1.3
      reduce or eliminate minimum parking requirements in South Downtown.
      Action DT-7.2.2 (On-Street Parking) – Preserve existing on-street parking
      along main traffic corridors to support street-level activities, and convert parallel
      parking to diagonal parking where possible to increase parking supply.
                                                                        Chico General Plan       6-17

                                       6. DOWNTOWN
             • Policy DT-7.3 (Parking Facilities) – Design parking facilities with limited vehicle
                 access points to minimize pedestrian/auto conflicts.
             Goal DT-8: Preserve and enhance landmarks and buildings of special historic or
             architectural interest.
    Cross
  reference  • Policy DT-8.1 (Building Preservation) – Encourage the preservation,
 CRHP-1.1,       enhancement, and adaptive reuse of buildings of special historic or architectural
CRHP-2.1.1,
and CD-5.3.1     interest.
                     Action DT-8.1.1 (Facade Improvements) – Provide incentives for façade
                     improvement projects in Downtown.
    Cross            Action DT-8.1.2 (Historic Building Preservation) – Apply the Landmark
  reference          Overlay zoning district to preserve and protect buildings of special historic or
 CRHP-1.1.1
                     architectural interest within Downtown.
             • Policy DT-8.2 (Historic Building Code) – Encourage the preservation of
    Cross        significant historic buildings in Downtown by utilizing the California State
  reference
   LU-3.4.1      Historic Building Code, which makes provisions for the special treatment of
                 qualified historic buildings.
     6-18    Chico General Plan

                                                                                                                                                   Chapter
                              8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                                     Icon
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction................................................................................................................... 1
Purpose of the Housing Element.................................................................................. 1
Regulatory Framework..................................................................................................2
  New State Legislation ...................................................................................................................... 2
Housing Needs Summary .............................................................................................4
Community Participation............................................................................................ 10
  Stakeholder Meeting #1 (May 20, 2008)..................................................................................... 10
  Stakeholder Meeting #2 (December 4, 2008)............................................................................ 14
  Housing Survey............................................................................................................................... 15
  Housing Symposiums .................................................................................................................... 12
Review of Previous Housing Element ........................................................................ 17
  Additional Efforts the City is Undertaking ................................................................................ 18
Goals, Policies, and Actions ........................................................................................ 21
Quantified Objectives Summary ................................................................................. 37
APPENDICES
  Appendix A Housing Needs Assessment
  Appendix B Housing Program Review
  Appendix C Land Inventory Maps
  Appendix D SB 520 Constraints on Persons with Disabilities Analysis
  Appendix E General Application Processing Procedures
Appendices are available on the City's Website at http://www.ci.chico.ca.us/
                                                                                                                              Chico General Plan     8-i
Chapter
 Icon                         8 HOUSING ELEMENT
        TABLES
        Table 1 Affordable Housing Need and Production January 2007–June 2014 .............. 7
        Table 2 Summary of Quantified Objectives ............................................................... 38
  8-ii     Chico General Plan

                                                                                                        Chapter
                           8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Icon
    VISION STATEMENT
    Chico’s neighborhoods and housing choices in 2030 will be diverse and
    reflective of the City’s identity and needs. Newer neighborhoods will echo the
    historic character and design of Chico’s existing neighborhoods with local
    services and amenities for improved walkability and reduction of vehicle trips.
    Older neighborhoods will be revitalized and enhanced. Throughout the
    community, there will be a wide range of housing options to accommodate a
    variety of household sizes, incomes, and stages of life. Implementation of this
    Housing Element will result in increased housing choice, a rise in
    homeownership, revitalization of existing housing and neighborhoods, and more
    energy efficient housing in Chico.
INTRODUCTION
In planning for the provision of housing for all present and future Chico residents, the City’s primary
goal is to provide for a variety of housing types in an atmosphere conducive to the well-being of City
residents. More specifically, the City’s primary objective is to provide an adequate supply of housing
in a range of costs to meet the demand of all income groups and a variety of types for the special
needs of the elderly and disabled, as well as providing an opportunity for first-time homebuyers.
The City’s objective must be pursued within the constraints of today’s housing market. Factors such
as building costs, mortgage interest rates, preservation and conservation of natural resources,
provision of sanitary sewers, storm drainage and streets, provision of other public services such as
police and fire protection, school facilities and parks, concerns about design and division,
preservation of neighborhoods, historical structures and districts, as well as concern for energy
conservation within housing units, all combine to make planning for future housing needs a complex
and difficult task. These factors must all be considered in concert with one another.
PURPOSE OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
The State of California has declared that “the availability of housing is of vital statewide importance
and the early attainment of decent housing and a suitable living environment for every California
family is a priority of the highest order.” In addition, government and the private sector should
make an effort to provide a diversity of housing opportunity and accommodate regional housing
needs through a cooperative effort, while maintaining a responsibility toward economic,
environmental and fiscal factors, and community goals within the general plan.
The purpose of the Housing Element is to identify housing solutions that address Chico’s local
housing needs. The Housing Element must also direct Chico’s resources to meet or exceed the
                                                                                    Chico General Plan    8-1

Chapter
 Icon                            8 HOUSING ELEMENT
        regional housing needs allocation. This Element establishes the local goals, policies, and actions
        (programs) the City will implement and/or facilitate to solve identified housing issues.
        REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
        The Housing Element is a mandatory element of the General Plan with unique requirements for
        review by the State Department of Housing and Community Development. State Housing Element
        law requires “An assessment of housing needs and an inventory of resources and constraints relevant
        to the meeting of these needs.” The law requires an analysis of the following:
             •   Population and employment trends,
             •   The City’s fair share of the regional housing needs,
             •   Household characteristics,
             •   Land suitable for residential development,
             •   Governmental and non-governmental constraints on the improvement, maintenance and
                 development of housing,
             •   Special housing needs,
             •   Opportunities for energy conservation, and
             •   Publicly assisted housing developments that may convert to non-assisted housing
                 developments.
        The purpose of these requirements is to develop an understanding of the existing and projected
        housing needs within the community and to set forth actions and schedules promoting the
        preservation, improvement and development of diverse housing types available.
        NEW STATE LEGISLATION
        Since the City’s last Housing Element was updated there have been a series of new laws passed that
        the City will need to comply with regarding the placement of emergency shelters, planning for
        extremely low-income households and providing a more detailed vacant land inventory. Below is a
        detailed listing of the new laws passed since the last Housing Element was updated.
        SB 2 (Cedillo, 2007): Requires local jurisdictions to strengthen provisions for addressing the
        housing needs of the homeless, including the identification of a zone or zones where emergency
        shelters are allowed as a permitted use without a conditional use permit and allowing transitional and
  8-2        Chico General Plan

                                                                                                       Chapter
                           8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                            Icon
supportive housing types as residential uses. This legislation took effect January 1, 2008, and will
apply to jurisdictions with Housing Elements due June 30, 2008, and after.
SB 520 (Chesbro, 2002): Requires that in addition to the needs analysis for persons with disabilities,
the Housing Element must analyze potential governmental constraints to the development,
improvement and maintenance of housing for persons with disabilities and include a program to
remove constraints to, or provide reasonable accommodations for housing designed for occupancy
by, or with supportive services for persons with disabilities.
AB 2348 (Mullin, 2004): Requires a more detailed inventory of sites to accommodate projected
housing needs and provide greater development certainty.
AB 2634 (Lieber, 2006): Requires quantification and analysis of existing and projected housing
needs of extremely low-income households. Elements must also identify zoning to encourage and
facilitate supportive housing and single-room occupancy units.
AB 1233 (Jones, 2005): If prior Element failed to identify or implement adequate sites, the local
government must zone or rezone to address this need within one year of update. This is in addition
to new projected need.
SB 1087 (Florez, 2005): Requires local governments to immediately forward adopted Housing
Elements to water and sewer providers.
GENERAL PLAN CONSISTENCY
State law requires that “…the general plan elements and parts thereof comprise an integrated,
internally consistent, and compatible statement of policies….” The purpose of requiring internal
consistency is to avoid policy conflict and provide a clear policy guide for the future maintenance,
improvement, and development of housing within the City.
The Housing Element spans a five-year time period and focuses on the City limits, while the overall
Chico General Plan includes goals, policies and actions that will direct the City, Sphere of Influence
and General Plan Planning Area over a 20-year period. For jurisdictions that are part of the Butte
County Association of Governments (BCAG), the State Department of Housing and Urban
Development requires that Housing Elements are adopted and certified by August 2009. Therefore,
adoption of the Housing Element must occur in advance of the current General Plan Update, which
is scheduled for adoption in early 2010. To conform with this schedule, the analysis of City’s ability
to meet projected needs is based on the current 1994 General Plan and is consistent with all elements
of the General Plan including the land plan, land use designations, and densities, as amended, and
current zoning
                                                                                  Chico General Plan     8-3

Chapter
 Icon                            8 HOUSING ELEMENT
        HOUSING NEEDS SUMMARY
        The findings listed below resulted from the information collected as part of the Housing Needs
        Assessment Report located in Appendix A. These findings provide a direct relationship between
        community conditions in Chico and the recommended Goals, Policies and Actions in this document.
        Demographic Profile
        The population of Chico was estimated to be approximately 87,000 residents in 2008, which
        represents approximately 40 percent of the total population of Butte County. Within the county,
        Chico’s population is unique, with 20 percent (17,034) of the population comprising students
        attending California State University, Chico. The large student population is a significant factor in
        the City’s median age of 29.1, which is 5 years younger than that of both Butte County (34.7) and the
        state (34.4).
        A shift has occurred over the past decade in terms of the demographics within the City. The median
        age is rising and is close to 5 years older than it was in 2000 (24.6), with the largest shift in population
        occurring in persons aged 18–24 (4 percent decline of the total population) and those aged 55–64 (3
        percent increase of the total population). The minority population has also begun to increase in the
        City. The white population has declined by 4 percent since 2000. Though the City and the County
        are predominantly white communities, the diversity of the City is expected to increase with the
        growing minority population.
        Household Profile
        The average household size in the City has changed little since 2000. There was a slight decline (less
        than 1 percent) in the household size, which is mainly due to the fact that there has been a slight
        increase of single households. Of the 26,520 households in the City, 11,000 reportedly earn 0–80
        percent ($0–$31,447) of the area median income (AMI), which was $39,309 in 2008. Those earning
        80 percent or below the AMI are considered to be low-income and of those that are low-income,
        1,755 households are considered to be in poverty. The national poverty threshold is the minimum
        amount of income that is necessary to obtain the necessities of life, as established by the U.S. Census.
        For example, the 2000 U.S. poverty threshold for a family of four was $17,463. The number of
        Chico households in poverty reported above does not include “Non-family Households,” which the
        U.S. Census defines as unrelated individuals sharing a housing unit. Non-family Households includes
        students living in dormitories or students sharing off-campus housing.
        Special Needs
        Eight percent of Chico’s households contain five or more persons, of which 50 percent are
        considered to live in overcrowded conditions, the majority of which are students. Students present a
        unique challenge in meeting the housing needs of the City’s population. The campus is equipped to
  8-4        Chico General Plan

                                                                                                         Chapter
                            8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Icon
house 1,731 students in on-campus dormitories, while the remainder of the student’s housing needs
must currently be met by the City’s housing stock. The CSU Master Plan accommodates a campus
building plan that includes construction of five new major academic buildings, two recreational
facilities, a natural history museum, a childcare center, approximately 1,300 bed-spaces of student
housing and two parking structures.
In 2000 there were a total of 8,844 residents reporting a disability. The majority of the disabled
between the ages of 5 and 64 reported a physical, mental and/or employment disability. Of those
with disabilities, 65 percent were ages 5 through 64 and 35 percent were over the age of 65.
Of the 2,732 households headed by a single parent, 22 percent are headed by males and 78 percent
are headed by females. Agricultural workers make up a small percentage of the households in the
City and mostly comprise seasonal workers. Fifty-five units of farm labor housing are provided at La
Vista Verde and Turning Point Commons.
A County Continuum of Care (CoC) has been established by local service providers to address the
needs of the homeless population. Within the City, there are a number of organizations that provide
emergency shelter, transitional housing and supportive housing. The largest emergency shelter, the
Torres Community Shelter, is operated by the Chico Community Shelter Partnership and has 140
available bed spaces. The Esplanade House, operated by the Community Action Agency (CAA), is
the largest transitional housing complex with 60 units, and offers families the social services needed
to transition from being homeless to becoming permanently housed. Caminar, Inc. operates a 15-
unit housing project with supportive services for homeless persons with mental disabilities. Northern
Valley Catholic Social Services operates a 22-unit supportive housing project for persons with
developmental disabilities. Catalyst runs a 12-bed shelter for victims of domestic violence. ARC of
Butte County owns and operates a 24-unit apartment building with 11 units reserved for persons
with mental disabilities. The Housing Authority of the County of Butte provides housing at the
Locust Street complex, aimed at providing supportive services that help maintain independent living
of special needs residents.
Housing Stock Characteristics
Chico’s large student population also affects the tenure of the City’s 36,484 units that comprise the
City’s housing stock. In 2008, nearly 60 percent of the housing units in the City were rented, which
is much higher than the 42 percent of housing units that are rented in the state. Recently the City’s
housing stock has grown quickly due to the increase in new homes built during the boom in the
housing market and the annexation of surrounding unincorporated communities. The monitoring of
the condition of the City’s housing stock is done by the City’s Code Enforcement Unit. In 2010, 35
percent of the City’s housing stock will be 30 years or older, the typical age at which a home will need
some level of rehabilitation.
                                                                                    Chico General Plan     8-5

Chapter
 Icon                           8 HOUSING ELEMENT
        As of August 2008, the monthly median rent in the City is $1,300 for a single-family home and $825
        for an apartment in a multi-family project. The U.S. Census Bureau defines a household as all
        persons sharing the same housing unit, which does not include group quarters (dormitories, group
        homes and nursing homes). In 2000, 7,658 households paid more than 30 percent of their income
        (considered to be overpaying for shelter) for rental housing, of which 6,501 paid more than 35
        percent (severely cost burdened) of their income. In order for residents to become homeowners in
        the City, those earning less than the moderate-income level of $65,400 will overpay for housing cost.
        According to Chicohomesearch.net, the median price for a home in the City of Chico in June 2008
        was $272,000, which was a decline of 12 percent from 2007 to 2008, increasing a small portion of the
        available housing market to potential buyers. In addition, with the current foreclosure crisis many
        more moderate- income households and possibly low-income households may have the opportunity
        to purchase homes. According to Realty Trac, as of February 2009, there were 148 repossessed bank-
        owned properties in the City of Chico. This represents one foreclosed property for every 247
        housing units in the City. By comparison, the County with the highest foreclosure rate in the state,
        Merced County, has one foreclosure for every 59 housing units. The average foreclosure sales price
        was $238,600.
        Assisted Housing and At-Risk Units
        Assisted housing units are those that are subsidized by the public sector to ensure that housing for
        lower-income households is affordable. Affordable monthly rent is established by Housing and
        Urban Development (HUD) as monthly rent that does not exceed 30 percent of a household’s
        income. There are a total of 1,695 assisted rental housing units in the City of Chico, which are
        provided by a number of organizations and funding sources. The Chico Redevelopment Agency
        (RDA) and the City work closely with developers to ensure affordable housing projects are
        developed within the City to meet the housing needs of low-income households. Recent affordable
        housing developments in the City include 1200 Park Avenue, VECTORS, Avenida Apartments,
        Chico Courtyards, Murphy Commons and Jarvis Gardens.
        Three affordable housing projects, totaling 295 units, are considered to be at risk of converting to
        market rate within the City’s 5-year planning period. The projects include Villa Rita (2011 expiration
        date), Trans Pacific Gardens II (2011 expiration date) and Cinnamon Village (2014 expiration date).
        The City has a history of working with owners of at-risk properties to preserve affordability and will
        continue to do so when notified of the intent to convert. RDA funds are likely sources of
        preservation or replacement funds.
        Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
        The first step in addressing state housing needs is the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA),
        which is mandated by the State of California (Government Code, Section 65584) and requires regions
        to address housing issues and needs based on future growth projections for the area. The California
  8-6        Chico General Plan

                                                                                                                                             Chapter
                                      8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                       Icon
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) allocates regional housing needs
numbers to regional councils of governments throughout the state. The Regional Housing
Allocation Plan (RHNP) for Chico is developed by the Butte County Association of Governments
(BCAG) and allocates to cities and the unincorporated county their “fair share” of the region’s
projected housing needs, also known as the Regional Housing Needs Allocation or “RHNA”. The
RHNP allocates the RHNA based on household income groupings over the 5-year planning period
for each specific jurisdiction’s Housing Element.
Chico’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation for the 2007-2014 planning period is 5,716 units for all
income categories. These allocations are less than the allocation for the previous period. The City is
required to develop the necessary policies and programs to ensure the RHNA is met. Table 1
provides the RHNA target for the planning period 2007 to 2014 for each of the four household
income groups for the City of Chico. See Table A-30 in the Housing Needs Assessment for specific
sites that could potentially fulfill the regional housing need allocations for very low-, low-, moderate-,
and above moderate-income households in the City of Chico.
                                                               TABLE 1
               AFFORDABLE HOUSING NEED AND PRODUCTION
                                        JANUARY 2007–JUNE 2014
                                                                         Chico Progress                     Remaining Housing
           Income Level                  Chico RHNA
                                                                            (since 2007)                               Need
      Extremely Low                              780                              631                                   717
      Very Low                                   780                             1431                                   637
      Low                                      1,007                              172                                   990
      Moderate                                   960                                0                                   960
      Above Moderate                           2,189                             3103                                  1,879
      Total                                    5,716                              533                                  5,183
     Source: Butte County Association of Governments, May 2008; City of Chico, July 2008
     1 58 units in Chico Courtyards, 14 in Avenida, 85 in Murphy Commons, 49 in Jarvis Gardens (not incl. manager’s unit)
     2 17 units in Chico Courtyards
     3 A total of 368 building permits were issued in 2007and it is assumed that the difference between the total building permits and the
     total units affordable to low- or very low-income households equals the total number of market-rate units built. A total of 165 permits
     were issued through July 2008.
     (HCD Revised as of 6/24/08)
Based on the state allocation needs, the City of Chico will need to demonstrate the capacity, based on
appropriately zoned land, to accommodate 1,560 housing units affordable to extremely low- and very
low-income households, and 1,007 housing units affordable to low-income households during the
current RHNA period. In addition, the City will have to demonstrate the capacity to accommodate
959 housing units available to moderate-income households.
                                                                                                                     Chico General Plan        8-7

Chapter
 Icon                            8 HOUSING ELEMENT
        Since January 2007, the City has produced 63 housing units affordable to extremely low-income
        households, 143 housing units affordable to very low-income households, 17 housing units
        affordable to low-income households and 310 market-rate housing units. As a result of building to
        date for the RHNA period, the City will need an additional 1,879 above moderate-income units and
        will still need an additional 3,285 extremely low, very low-, low-, and moderate-income housing units
        by 2014 to meet their RHNA.
        In order to determine which current land is available to meet the RHNA for the City, HCD
        considers existing land “zoned” for residential single- and multi-family development.
        The City of Chico has the ability to facilitate development of many High Density Residential (R3 and
        R4) sites. The Medium-High Density Residential (R-3) zone allows up to 22 units per acre and the
        High Density Residential (R-4) zone allows up to 35 units per acre. Table A-30 in the Housing
        Needs Assessment lists vacant sites suitable to meet the City’s RHNA. The acreage and unit
        capacities described in the Housing Needs Assessment demonstrate that the City is able to meet its
        2007-2014 RHNA. Chico currently has 126.40 acres of vacant land available for multi-family
        residential development with a capacity of 1,994 units, 251.31 acres of land appropriate for the
        development of medium density residential development with a capacity of 2,638 units, and 805.27
        acres zoned appropriate for low density residential with a capacity of 3,623 units. The City also has
        two special planning areas that incorporate high density residential requirements which will provide
        for an additional 924 units. Realistic capacity was determined by multiplying the number of acres by
        the maximum density for the site, and then 75 percent of that result was used as the final realistic unit
        number. The 75 percent assumption was derived from recent developments in the City described in
        Appendix A, the Housing Needs Assessment and maps of these sites can be found in Appendix C,
        Adequate Sites Inventory Maps.
        Resources Available for the Provision of Affordable Housing
        Currently there are several projects proposed or in the development pipeline that will assist the City
        in planning to meet its Regional Housing Needs Allocation. The policies that will be implemented
        will allow local housing development agencies to utilize funding sources to construct projects that
        will meet the RHNA for low-income households.
        The City has available resources of funding that will support developers and agencies in assisting the
        City to meet the RHNA allocations for low-income households. Those resources include Article 34,
        Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds, HOME Program funds, Revenue Bond
        Financing, a Mortgage Subsidy Program, a Home Rehabilitation Program and the Chico
        Redevelopment Agency Low and Moderate Income Housing Fund. Other funding sources that the
        City will consider pursuing, though they are extremely competitive, in order to meet the RHNA
        allocations are the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program, California Housing Finance Agency,
        State Department of Housing and Community Development (Multifamily Housing Program) and the
        U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (Section 202 and 811).
  8-8        Chico General Plan

                                                                                                          Chapter
                            8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Icon
Along with the various funding options available to the City, there are a number of organizations
active in the City that secure funding to ensure the housing needs of low-income households are met.
In cooperation with the City, the Housing Authority of the County of Butte, the Community
Housing Improvement Program (CHIP), the Community Action Agency of Butte County, Inc.
(CAABC), Northern Valley Catholic Social Services (NVCSS), Habitat for Humanity of Chico and
ARC of Butte County, Inc. work to provide and manage affordable housing for the general
population, seniors and the disabled.
Governmental Constraints
Within the City’s Municipal Code for residential construction, the City permits or conditionally
permits a variety of housing types to meet the various needs of the diverse population. The housing
types include emergency shelters, transitional and supportive housing, housing for extremely low-
income households, second dwelling units and housing for persons with disabilities.
In addition to facilitating a variety of housing types within the City’s Municipal Code, the City is also
responsible for processing development applications and collecting development fees related to
residential construction. The amount of time that it takes for a permit request to be approved
impacts the total cost of housing. To increase the speed at which the City approves projects, the City
approved code amendments which, among other things, delegate more authority to staff and
eliminate multiple hearings for appeals of project decisions. Also, the Development Review
Committee (DRC) meets prior to application submittal to assist proposed projects, reducing the
amount of time spent revising proposals. The DRC is offered to applicants at no cost, and has been
successful identifying issues early in the review process.
The current development fees established by the City are similar to the fees charged by other
jurisdictions located in the northern section of the Sacramento Valley and do not limit the abilities of
developers in constructing new housing for low-income households. The typical fees for a single-
family development are estimated at $24,077. This includes the development impact fees, school fees
and assumes the building permit fee for a single-family structure of 1,500 square feet ($2,203). The
estimated typical fee for a multi-family unit is $25,468, which assumes the unit price for an 800
square foot unit in a total 20,000 square foot building ($1,019/unit). Due to varying construction
types, the average of the three types was used in this estimation.
Non-Governmental Constraints
Through responsive programs and policies, the City can offset the market constraints experienced by
developers. The major components of the market that have an effect on developers being able to
provide housing that meets the needs of residents are land cost, construction cost and the availability
of financing.
                                                                                   Chico General Plan       8-9

Chapter
 Icon                           8 HOUSING ELEMENT
        The City was successful in lowering the overhead for the development of Murphy Commons by
        opting to lease the land to CHIP. In order to help first-time homebuyers obtain mortgages since
        1989, the City has offered a first-time homebuyers assistance program. Households within the City
        have also participated in the urban self-help program, which is a program that is executed by the City
        in conjunction with a partnership with the local Habitat for Humanity chapter as well as CHIP.
        During the previous planning period, the RDA executive director acquired five parcels of land,
        totaling 2.4 acres, on which will be built: 38 units of low-income affordable family housing; 10 units
        of supportive housing for persons with disabilities; and 6 homes for low to moderate income first-
        time home buyers. The Chico Redevelopment Agency has also assisted with offsetting financing
        constraints to building by allowing developers to use funding for construction cost, thus reducing the
        amount of private sector funding needed.
        COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
        City staff developed a Housing Element Stakeholder mailing list that included a wide variety of
        interest groups concerned with housing issues in the City of Chico. The mailing list consisted of 225
        individuals that were invited to the meetings described below. It included the following groups:
        major employers; non profit service providers; non profit developers; for profit developers; real
        estate brokers, lenders and managers; neighborhood activists and concerned citizens; and public
        entities.
        STAKEHOLDER MEETING #1 (MAY 20, 2008)
        On May 20, 2008 the City hosted a Stakeholders’ Meeting at City Hall to introduce the Housing
        Element update to selected groups and persons who represent significant local stakeholders in the
        development of housing.
        The groups that attended included those representing:
             •    Healthcare (Butte County, Enloe Healthcare)
             •    Education (local schools, CSU Chico, CSU Associated Students)
             •    Native American tribal groups (Mechoopda)
             •    Building industry associations (BIA)
             •    Property Management (RSC, Sheraton)
             •    For-profit builders and land developers
             •    Real Estate Agents
 8-10        Chico General Plan

                                                                                                          Chapter
                            8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Icon
     •   Neighborhood Associations
     •   Legal Services (LSNC)
     •   Non-profit developers of affordable housing (Community Action Agency, Caminar, CHIP,
         Housing Authority County of Butte, NVCSS)
     •   Special needs housing providers and housing services providers (Esplanade House,
         VECTORS, Christian Church Homes, Catalyst, Torres Shelter, Avenida Apartments)
     •   Chico General Plan Advisory Committee
The meeting included an introduction to the Housing Element update process and the content of the
housing element, a discussion of priority housing needs; and desired locations for housing
development.
The group was provided with a summary of the requirements of the Housing Element with specific
mention of the need to meet the community’s needs for affordable housing and to meet the housing
needs of special needs groups. The discussion included the Regional Housing Needs Allocation, the
available land inventory and the current housing challenges of the City.
The attendees were then broken up into smaller groups of 8 to 9 people to perform two exercises
and provide guidance to City staff. The first exercise resulted in an identification of housing needs
and the relative priority of those needs. Each group created a list of the City’s greatest housing needs.
Then each participant had five votes that they could place on the housing needs identified by the
group. They had the option of putting more than one vote on one need to give it higher priority.
Below is a summary of the housing needs identified.
 Number of Votes                      Housing Need
 10+ votes                                •   Buildable land
                                          •   Counseling for economic stability
 6-10 votes                               •   One-bedroom apartments w/ supportive services (8
                                              votes, identified by 2 groups)
                                          •   Quality design (accessible, visual appeal, integration
                                              with neighborhood, green, 7 votes)
                                          •   Diversity of housing types and sizes, identified by 3
                                              groups)
                                          •   Housing for the homeless
                                          •   Special needs housing for seniors, mentally ill, veterans
                                              and homeless
                                          •   Development assistance
                                          •   Housing close to downtown, rental and for-sale
                                                                                    Chico General Plan     8-11

Chapter
 Icon                           8 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                 •    Mixed income developments
                                                 •    More low-income affordable housing overall
                                                 •    Basic needs housing for seniors
                                                 •    Housing for individuals with credit challenges
         Identified by 3 or more groups          •    Credit counseling
                                                 •    Downpayment assistance
                                                 •    Increased homeless shelter capacity
                                                 •    Inclusionary zoning for all developments
                                                 •    Infill opportunity site development stimulated with
                                                      regulatory relief
                                                 •    More on-campus student housing
                                                 •    More land for single-family residential
        The second exercise had participants provide guidance on the location of new housing and
        preference for areas for redevelopment including the intensification of housing. Each group was
        given stickers representing 1,000 affordable units at different densities, which they were required to
        place on a map of Chico showing vacant land and potential redevelopment areas. The participants
        identified the following areas as housing development opportunity areas, ranked by area with most
        units placed.
            1. Park Avenue from 8th Street to Meyers Street south of 20th Street
            2. Fair Street from 20th Street to East Park Avenue
            3. West of downtown from Walnut Street to Broadway between 5th and 11th Streets
            4. Esplanade between Cohasset Road and 1st Avenue
            5. Nord Avenue between West Lindo and West 8th Avenues
            6. North of East Eaton Road just east of Highway 99
            7. Highway 32 near the intersection with Bruce Road
        Two different groups identified the following as new growth areas for affordable housing:
            •    Northwest section just east of Highway 32 between Mud Creek and Bell Road
            •    Esplanade intersection with Nord Highway
        FOCUS         GROUPS         (JULY-AUGUST, 2008)
        The City conducted two focus groups to identify housing needs and solutions— one with the
        Greater Chico Homeless Task Force and one with tenants of affordable housing. Following is a list
        of some of the highest priority needs identified:
 8-12        Chico General Plan

                                                                                                       Chapter
                           8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                            Icon
     •  Supply of affordable housing, particularly for the extremely low income, such as Single
        Room Occupancy buildings.
     •  Funds to assist the homeless, such as help with paying deposits, job training, child care and
        other supportive services.
     •  Lack of transitional housing with supportive services for homeless and people discharged
        from the hospital.
Following is a list of some of the highest priority solutions identified:
     •  Develop a clearinghouse to disseminate information about affordable housing programs.
     •  Zoning code flexibility and entitlement streamlining for affordable projects.
     •   Improve the design and amenities of affordable housing (improve ventilation, location near
        retail and public transit, additional storage space, additional supportive services).
HOUSING SYMPOSIA (AUGUST-NOVEMBER, 2008)
The City sponsored a series of four housing symposia in order to explore potential new housing
programs. These are programs that other cities have successfully implemented, but had not been
implemented by the City of Chico. For each symposium, a one-hour guest speaker presentation was
followed by a question and answer session. A brief description of each symposium topic follows.
Housing Trust Fund— A Housing Trust Fund is a distinct fund comprised of local dedicated,
recurring revenue sources to support production of affordable homes. It provides a flexible source of
funding that can be targeted to locally-identified needs. It is usually operated by a non profit or
government agency.
Community Land Trust (CLT)— A CLT, a non profit organization, is formed to hold title to land
in order to preserve its long–term affordability. The CLT enters into a long-term land lease with a
home buyer. The land lease requires a form of shared appreciation that provides limited equity to the
buyer while preserving affordability for subsequent buyers. The CLT board of directors is typically
composed of public officials, homeowners who lease land from the CLT, and at-large community
members.
Employer Assisted Housing— A public-private partnership in which employers assist in reducing
housing costs for residents. The program may be targeted to employees of a particular employer or
may be a pool of funds with multiple contributing employers. Funds may be used for: homebuyer
down payments; rental subsidies; or project financing.
                                                                                    Chico General Plan  8-13

Chapter
 Icon                            8 HOUSING ELEMENT
        Inclusionary Zoning or Mixed Income Housing— A policy that requires developers to set aside
        a certain percentage of newly developed homes as affordable to various income levels. Inclusionary
        Zoning can include alternatives to building the units, such as land dedication or payment of in-lieu
        fees. It can also offer incentives to developers, such as density bonuses, use permit variances, public
        subsidy, and impact fee deferrals or waivers.
        STAKEHOLDER MEETING #2 (DECEMBER 4, 2008)
        The second stakeholder meeting was held on December 4, 2008 in the Council Chambers with
        invitations sent to the Housing Element Stakeholder mailing list. The purpose of this meeting was to
        receive input on Housing Element goals and policies. The meeting was attended by 18 people,
        consisting of 6 for profit developers, 5 non profit developers, 2 non profit service providers, 2
        concerned citizens a representative from Enloe Hospital, a real estate broker, and representative of
        the Housing Authority of the County of Butte.
        The first part of the meeting was an interactive large group discussion regarding the pros and cons of
        the potential programs, and what programs would be the best fit for Chico. Regarding the Housing
        Trust Fund, some participants raised reservations about charging impact fees or transfer taxes that
        would deter community investment or make housing more expensive overall. Other participants
        believed impact fees would be an appropriate means to raise affordable housing funds. Still others
        advised linking impact fees with the level of housing production so that larger projects that could
        afford the fee would be assessed. One participant suggested exploring other sources, such as casino
        development agreements. Regarding the Community Land Trust, some participants saw challenges in
        acquiring enough land to make a significant impact and dedicating adequate resources to
        administration. Others saw opportunities to use the program to redevelop brownfield sites and buy
        foreclosed homes. For Employer Assisted Housing, two participants recommended that the program
        is voluntary for employers, and not mandatory. Some saw opportunities for the City to work with
        Enloe Hospital to provide housing assistance to employees. The Enloe Hospital representative stated
        that the hospital would be willing to explore such a program, but would want to “own” the program,
        analyze the costs and benefits, and understand the impact on labor union negotiations before
        committing to it. In the Inclusionary Zoning discussion, participants identified benefits of the
        program, such as: a good way to mix housing types within a neighborhood; a method to help meet
        other federal and state housing production requirements; and a means to help integrate races and
        limit segregation. Participants also commented that Inclusionary Zoning may encourage development
        of more expensive luxury homes at expense of middle income homes. Others advised that the
        program must have a defendable nexus between the requirement and the benefit, and that the
        inclusionary requirement should be an impact fee instead of a construction requirement. One
        participant commented that making more land available to increase production would more
        effectively reduce prices. At the conclusion of the discussion, participants were asked to select their
        preferred new program. The Housing Trust Fund received 6 votes. No new programs also received 6
        votes. Employer Assisted Housing and Inclusionary Zoning received 2 votes each. The Community
        Land Trust did not receive any votes.
 8-14        Chico General Plan

                                                                                                      Chapter
                            8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                          Icon
The second part of the meeting was a small group break-out to discuss the effectiveness of the City’s
current programs and ways to improve them. The groups were asked to respond to three questions.
Below are the questions and their responses.
What are the top three most effective existing programs? Why?
All groups identified the Mortgage Subsidy Program and the Housing Rehabilitation Program as the
most effective. Two groups identified rental housing construction. Others mentioned were the
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program, Tenant Based Rental Assistance (TBRA),
and the Rental Accessibility Program.
What suggestions do you have to improve existing programs?
     •   Fund with attention to what is happening relative to the home building cycle.
     •   Provide more public information about existing programs.
     •   TBRA participants may need more time in the program so they can increase income.
         (Currently participants receive assistance for a one-year period.)
     •   Research best practices, with a focus on results.
     •   Expand the Rental Accessibility Program to meet the need, and add incentives to increase
         more accessible and affordable units.
     •   Expand all programs.
     •   Integrate rental units into the surrounding neighborhood in location and design.
     •   Expand the Housing Rehabilitation Program, when possible.
Are there other programs we have not discussed that you would like to
recommend? What housing needs are not being met by current programs?
     •   More starter homes with smaller square footage.
     •   Put more money into rehabilitation.
     •   Waive fees for second units when they are built to accommodate the elderly or disabled.
     •   Help the University to build student housing.
     •   Initiate a rental housing inspection program.
     •   Need housing and services for youth aging out of foster care.
     •   Encourage small scale infill by offering incentives, including leverage of RDA funds to
         subsidize infrastructure improvements.
     •   Explore ways to encourage development on alleys and flag lots.
     •   Flexible inclusionary zoning that is site specific and offers incentives.
     •   More funding for the Mortgage Subsidy Program.
     •   Programs for moderate incomes.
HOUSING SURVEY (DECEMBER, 2008)
In order to solicit broader input on potential new programs, City staff conducted an online survey
after the second Stakeholder Meeting. The survey was emailed to the Housing Element Stakeholder
                                                                                   Chico General Plan  8-15

Chapter
 Icon                            8 HOUSING ELEMENT
        mailing list. It consisted of two questions: 1) What best describes you? developer; non profit
        representative; concerned citizen; real estate lender, broker or manager; major employer; public
        representative or employee; or other.; and 2) Please rank the following in order of preference as a
        Chico Housing Program (1=greatest preference)— Trust Fund, Community Land Trust, Employer
        Assisted Housing, Inclusionary Zoning, and None of those listed. The survey was completed by 29
        people, identifying themselves as the following: non profit representative (12); concerned citizen (7);
        public representative or employee (4); real estate lender, broker, or manager (2); developer (1); non
        profit developer (1); architect (1); pastor (1). The following is how the programs ranked, starting with
        the highest preference:
             1. Housing Trust Fund
             2. Community Land Trust
             3. Inclusionary Zoning
             4. Employer Assisted Housing
             5. None of the above
        It is interesting to note that Inclusionary Zoning received the most first place votes, with 10, but also
        received the most fourth-place votes, with 5. The “none of the above” category received the most
        last place votes.
        GENERAL PLAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE (JANUARY 28,
        2009)
        On January 28, 2009, the General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC) discussed Inclusionary Zoning
        and infill development. There were eight members of the GPAC in attendance and 14 members of
        the public. For each topic, the committee broke into two smaller groups for discussion, and then
        presented a summary of ideas to the larger group.
        Regarding Inclusionary Zoning, the GPAC addressed questions as to how an Inclusionary Zoning
        ordinance should be drafted if one is adopted by the City Council. Several GPAC members felt it
        was a significant leap to assume that the City would adopt an inclusionary ordinance, and had
        reservations that such an ordinance was either necessary or workable. As to whether such a program
        should be mandatory, optional or incentivized, Group #1 did not believe that it would be a good
        program overall. If the City were to establish such a program, they recommended that it be
        mandatory with incentives. Group #2 agreed that incentives are needed for the program to work. No
        specific incentives were identified by either group. On the question of a reasonable percentage of
        affordable housing to be required, Group #1 did not make any specific recommendations. Group #2
        suggested that 10% would be reasonable, split between affordability to moderate and low income
        groups based on City demographics. As to whether Inclusionary Zoning should apply to all
        residential development types, including mixed use, both groups recommended that it be applied to
 8-16         Chico General Plan

                                                                                                        Chapter
                           8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Icon
all. When asked whether the program should allow the obligation to be met through in-lieu fees,
integration of homes into the development, or provision of land, both groups agreed that
requirements should not result in concentrations of low-income housing in one area, and that
affordable housing must be integrated with non-income targeted units. In the discussion that
followed, several committee members stated that the cost burden for producing affordable housing
should be spread over the largest possible group of citizens in an equitable way. They believed that if
the community wants inclusionary housing, then the entire community should share in the cost.
Some examples offered by committee members included transfer taxes prorated by the home selling
price, or a sales tax. Two committee members suggested that an affordable housing program should
not be a unit construction program, but rather a fee-based program. Two members of the public
commented on the topic, one stating that Inclusionary Zoning does not work and is not consistent
with Chico’s character, and the other stating that Inclusionary Zoning should be considered as a tool
to help people that work in the community to live there.
In the same meeting, the GPAC was asked to respond to questions regarding infill development. The
following input had relevance as to the development of affordable housing:
     •   There was a general consensus that the City should do neighborhood planning to build
         consensus among neighbors for the shared vision of that neighborhood. Related comments
         emphasized the importance of neighborhood meetings that provide opportunities for
         meaningful input, and stressing the compatibility of a new development with the existing
         neighborhood. This could lead to better design and acceptance of infill development.
     •   The costs of redevelopment are too high. The City needs to incentivize it so it’s not more
         costly than Greenfield development. The City needs to consider the costs and types of
         public improvements required to develop infill projects. These can make infill cost
         prohibitive.
In public comments on this issue, one participant urged the City to focus on the production of
student housing in partnership with Chico State University to relieve housing demand and reduce
costs. Another participant stressed the importance of improving bike routes and public transit to
compliment higher density housing.
REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
State law requires the City of Chico to review its current Housing Element in order to evaluate:
     •   “The appropriateness of the housing goals, objectives and policies in contributing to the
         attainment of the state housing goal.”
     •   “The effectiveness of the Housing Element in attainment of the community’s housing goals
         and objectives.”
                                                                                  Chico General Plan     8-17

Chapter
 Icon                           8 HOUSING ELEMENT
             •    “The progress of the city, county, or city and county in implementation of the Housing
                  Element.”
        The appropriateness of the Housing Element can be determined by evaluating the effectiveness of its
        housing program (i.e., housing goals, policies and actions) in meeting the City’s share of the state’s
        housing goal. This is ascertained by analyzing the effectiveness of the Housing Element in assisting
        in the development of housing for all income groups in the City. Goals, policies and actions
        identified as effective will be continued. Inappropriate or ineffective goals, policies and actions will
        be discontinued or rewritten in order to bring about a successful conclusion.
        The effectiveness of Chico’s Housing Element, in regard to meeting regional housing needs and the
        City’s quantified objectives, can be measured by the level of achievement in the development of new
        and rehabilitated housing and the success of the programs. The level of achievement is simply the
        actual construction divided by the RHNA goal. However, many uncontrollable factors in reaching
        the RHNA goal influence the City’s effectiveness (such as market recessions, available funding
        programs, available lenders, available developers and the political climate). For a complete review of
        the goals, policies and actions in the previous Housing Element, see Appendix B.
        ADDITIONAL             EFFORTS THE                CITY      IS UNDERTAKING
        In addition to meeting the requirements of state law, the City is planning to establish a Housing Trust
        Fund, explore a Mixed-Income or Inclusionary Zoning program, pursue an Employer Assisted
        Housing program to meet the current housing needs in Chico, and produce an Affordable Housing
        Resource Guide. The following is a description of the efforts the City plans to undertake during this
        Housing Element period.
        Housing Trust Fund (Action H.2.5.1)
        The City will set up a Housing Trust Fund within the next 5-year Housing Element period. Staff
        received significant input throughout the Housing Element meetings emphasizing housing needs for
        the “workforce” (those earning near median income), and for the homeless and persons with
        disabilities. Housing that could assist these groups include first time home buyer opportunities,
        homeless shelters, and transitional housing with supportive services. However, federal and state
        funding sources restrict the City’s ability to create this type of housing. Redevelopment agency funds
        and federal HOME funds must be spent on “permanent” housing, affordable to persons earning less
        than 120% of area median income and to persons earning less than 80% of area median income,
        respectively. This excludes workforce housing affordable to households earning more than 120% of
        area median income, shelters and transitional housing. Federal CDBG funds can be used for shelters,
        but eligible costs for transitional and permanent housing are limited, and the allocation is small in
        relation to the need. The trust fund can address these needs by generating local funds that have the
        flexibility to meet local priorities, unrestricted by federal and state regulations. The trust fund could
        potential be used to expand housing and supportive services for homeless families, enhance the
 8-18        Chico General Plan

                                                                                                         Chapter
                           8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Icon
continuum of care network that assists the homeless in becoming self-sufficient, and build workforce
housing that strengthens the economy.
The Housing Trust Fund will be a certified Community Development Financial Institution capable
of providing donors with tax credits. City staff will provide technical assistance to organize the trust
fund as a 501c3 nonprofit, with board membership representing the City and other government
bodies, nonprofits, and the private sector. The board will establish funding criteria responsive to
local housing needs and will raise funds. A small staff will manage the fund and market the program.
The City will establish the trust fund with the capacity to solicit and manage donations, set funding
criteria, and disburse funds, by 2012. Staff will also research the fund generation capacity and
economic impact of various permanent funding sources, such as real estate transfer fees and impact
fees. After the trust fund is established, these options will be presented to the City Council for
consideration.
Mixed-Income Program (Action H.2.5.2)
The City will implement a Mixed-Income or Inclusionary Zoning program that is responsive to the
local political and economic environment. Many participants in the Housing Element meetings
expressed the desire to integrate communities economically. Mixed-income housing is a possible
means to reach that goal. At the same time, participants were wary of programs that place unfair
burdens to produce affordable housing on certain segments of the community. Many emphasized the
importance of offering incentives to building affordable housing.
Employer Assisted Housing (Action H.2.5.3)
The City plans to explore Employer Assisted Housing in the form of a first-time homebuyer
assistance program for participating employers. This would be a match program in which the City
contributes a match for each dollar of employer contribution toward an employee’s home purchase,
by means of a deferred-payment second loan.
Infill Incentive Program (Action H.2.3.2)
The City will develop an Infill Incentive Program in partnership with the Planning and Building
Departments. Staff has received strong direction from the public and the City Council to direct a
significant portion of future growth to infill areas within the city boundaries. In order to accomplish
this, and produce affordable housing, a comprehensive and coordinated infill incentive program is
necessary. Current general plan policies and the zoning code need to change if the City is to achieve
its Updated General Plan vision. Deterrents to affordable infill housing include: costs to ugrade
infrastructure; impact fees; parking restrictions; limitations on density; and a lengthy and costly
entitlement process. Many of these changes will become part of the Updated General Plan, scheduled
to be adopted in the summer of 2010. New mixed use zoning designations with higher residential
                                                                                   Chico General Plan     8-19

Chapter
 Icon                           8 HOUSING ELEMENT
        densities are part of the Preferred Land Use Alternative that the City Council selected in November
        2008. They include densities of up to 60 units per acre in the Downtown. Over the next year, City
        staff will develop more specific zoning code elements that will encourage infill development.
        Affordable Housing Resource Guide (Action H.2.3.2)
        The City will create an Affordable Housing Resource Guide that efficiently connects people in need
        of affordable housing with available resources. The guide will provide key information about current
        programs and affordable units, such as overall descriptions, qualification requirements, amenities and
        services, disabled accessibility, neighborhood information, deposit and rent amounts, and contact
        information. The guide will be distributed in two mediums: 1) a booklet to be distributed to housing
        providers, service providers, and the general public; and 2) an interactive website on which
        availability     of     vacant     units    and    waiting       list    information     is    posted.
 8-20        Chico General Plan
                                                                                                      Chapter
                            8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                          Icon
Goals, Policies, and Actions
     Goal H.1: Increase equal housing opportunities for all persons and households in
                  Chico.
     Goal H.2: Provide housing that is affordable for residents with low-incomes and low
                  paying jobs, fixed incomes and pensions.
     Goal H.3: Promote the construction of a range of high-quality housing choices that
                 serve all households, ranging from the workforce to seniors.
     Goal H.4: Encourage the creation of housing for those with special housing needs.
     Goal H.5: Encourage the improvement, rehabilitation, and revitalization/reinvestment
                 of Chico’s existing residential neighborhoods.
     Goal H.6: Increase the homeownership rate in Chico.
     Goal H.7: Encourage energy efficient resources in new residential development as
                 well as the existing housing stock.
The purpose of this section is to provide a plan for meeting the housing needs of the existing and
future residents of Chico. The plan includes goals, policies and actions directed toward the
preservation, improvement and development of a range of housing types and choices affordable to
all income ranges in Chico. The housing program below provides a foundation upon which detailed
housing activities will be developed and implemented.
     GOAL H.1: Increase equal housing opportunities for all persons
      and households in Chico.
      •  Policy H.1.1: Encourage and support the enforcement of laws and regulations prohibiting
         discrimination in lending practices and in the sale or rental of housing.
        c Action H.1.1.1: In conjunction with Legal Services, provide workshops for tenants and
           landlords concerning fair housing and other relevant issues. In addition, flyers, press
           releases, official proclamations and other activities will be conducted to maintain a high
           profile for fair housing. Fair housing complaints will be referred to the Community Legal
           Information Center, Legal Services of Northern California, State of California Department
           of Fair Housing, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, depending on
           the specifics of the complaint.
             Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
             Funding Source: CDBG
             Time Frame:            Ongoing
      •  Policy H.1.2: Remove regulatory constraints that impede equal opportunity to housing in
         the City.
                                                                                   Chico General Plan  8-21

Chapter
 Icon                        8 HOUSING ELEMENT
            c Action H.1.2.1: Support a fair housing audit/review program to ensure that there are no
                regulatory constraints impeding persons from obtaining housing.
                  Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
                  Funding Source: CDBG
                  Time Frame:            Annually review the City’s fair housing procedure to ensure there
                  are no regulatory constraints.
         GOAL H.2: Provide housing that is affordable for residents
          with low-incomes and low paying jobs, fixed incomes and
          pensions.
          •   Policy H.2.1: Encourage development incentives that result in production of below-
              market-rate housing.
            c Action H.2.1.1: Develop an Infill Incentive Program in partnership with the Planning
                and Building Departments. This program will encourage an increase in the development
                of affordable infill housing that integrates with neighborhoods. The City will research and
                identify effective incentives, including infrastructure assistance, exceptions in development
                standards, decreased parking requirements, flexible building code, impact fee deferrals or
                waivers, and project financing. The City will also adopt zoning code revisions that remove
                obstacles to developing infill projects, such as modifications to allowable density, parking
                requirements, and 2nd unit standards.
                  Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services/Planning Services/Building &
                  Development Services
                  Funding Source: CDBG
                  Time Frame:            Adopt zoning code revisions s in 2011 subsequent to adoption of
                  the Updated General Plan. Conduct an impact analysis of incentives with respect to
                  effect on the city budget and economy by 2012. Develop a system for packaging and
                  advertising incentives to developers by 2013. Prepare a proposal for Planning
                  Commission and City Council consideration by 2014.
            c Action H.2.1.2: Adopt a revision to the City zoning code regarding density bonuses for
                housing affordable to low and moderate incomes. Make the City zoning code consistent
                with current State law (California Government Code 65915-65918), including the
                provision for a density bonus of up to 35 percent and three incentives or concessions for
                projects that have at least 20 percent of units affordable to low-incomes, or 11 percent of
                units affordable to very low-incomes.
                  Responsible Party: Planning Services Department/Housing & Neighborhood Services
                  Department
                  Funding Source: None.
 8-22     Chico General Plan

                                                                                                 Chapter
                     8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                            Icon
       Time Frame:           Revise zoning code      in 2011 subsequent to adoption of the
       Updated General Plan.
•  Policy H.2.2: Facilitate the use of federal and state programs which can assist in the
   development of new or purchase/rental of existing affordable housing.
  c Action H.2.2.1: Provide financial assistance to private developers and nonprofit
     agencies to acquire rental housing that will be affordable to extremely low-, very low- and
     low-income households and maintain affordability for at least 55 years. Leverage federal
     and state funding for 130 units of rental housing affordable to extremely low-, very low-
     and low-incomes.
       Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services/HACB
       Funding Source: Low- Moderate Income Housing Fund (LMIHF)
       Time Frame:           Allocate LMIHF for the development of 60 units by 2011. Allocate
       LMIHF for the development of 70 additional units by 2012.
•  Policy H.2.3: Facilitate the utilization of innovative programs and approaches to providing
   housing at affordable costs. Programs that should be continued or pursued include self-help
   housing, cooperative housing projects, co-housing, off-site constructed housing, and City-
   provided technical assistance.
  c Action H.2.3.1: The City will annually complete a Housing Element review and hold a
     public workshop or study session with the City Council to report the progress of the
     Housing Element implementation and discuss additional approaches to meeting the City’s
     housing needs.
       Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
       Funding Source: LMIHF
       Time Frame: Annually
  c Action H.2.3.2: Develop an Affordable Housing Resource Guide that efficiently
     connects people in need of affordable housing with available resources. Create a booklet
     that includes information about current programs (including a description, qualification
     requirements and contact information) and affordable units (including description, target
     population, amenities and services, disabled accessibility, qualification requirements,
     neighborhood information, deposit and rent amounts, and contact information). Develop
     an interactive website to post this information and notify of vacant units as they become
     available.
       Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
       Funding Source: LMIHF
                                                                            Chico General Plan    8-23

Chapter
 Icon                       8 HOUSING ELEMENT
                Time Frame: Distribute the booklet to government offices, service providers and the
                general public by 2010. Develop an interactive website on which housing providers can
                post vacant units as they become available by 2011.
        •   Policy H.2.4 Facilitate community awareness of the relationship between various housing
            densities and public impacts, costs and opportunities associated with the densities.
          c Action H.2.4.1: Develop an educational program for the public, development
              community and decision-making leaders to increase acceptance, collaboration and
              understanding of the need for a greater mix and variety of smaller, more affordable,
              creatively designed housing units. Incorporate an educational component to all affordable
              housing strategies proposed for adoption and financial assistance.
                Responsible Party: Planning Services/Housing & Neighborhood Services
                Funding Source: General Fund
                Time Frame: This educational program will be combined with the annual Housing
                Element review City Council workshop and public meeting.
        •   Policy H.2.5: Develop funding and housing production mechanisms that bring local
            resources to bear on the greatest housing needs.
          c Action H.2.5.1: Set up a Housing Trust Fund that is a certified Community
              Development Financial Institution capable of providing donors with tax credits. City staff
              will provide technical assistance to organize the trust fund as a 501c3 nonprofit, with
              board membership representing the City and other government bodies, nonprofits and the
              private sector. The board will establish funding criteria responsive to local housing needs
              and will raise funds. A small staff will manage the fund and market the program.
                Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
                Funding Source: LMIHF
                Time Frame: Establish a Housing Trust Fund by 2011. Research the fund generation
                capacity and economic impact of various permanent funding sources, including real
                estate transfer fees and impact fees, by 2012. After the trust fund is set up, present
                permanent funding source options to the City Council for consideration by 2014.
          c Action H.2.5.2: The City will develop and implement a Mixed Income/Inclusionary
              Zoning program that is responsive to the local political and economic environment. The
              City will at least consider the following topics:
                •    Minimum number of units threshold
                •    Feasible affordable set-aside requirements
 8-24   Chico General Plan

                                                                                                Chapter
                       8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                         Icon
         •   Alternatives to building on-site
         •   Types of effective incentives
         Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
         Funding Source: LMIHF
         Time Frame: Present these options to the City Council for consideration and feedback
         by 2012.
    c Action H.2.5.3: The City will explore an Employer Assisted Housing Program in the
       form of a first-time homebuyer assistance program for participating employers. This
       would be a match program in which the City contributes a match for each dollar of
       employer contribution to an employee’s home purchase, by means of a deferred-payment
       second loan. The City will form a working group with interested employers and research
       appropriate dollar amounts and types of loans, along with best practices. The City will
       share the working group’s information with employers to understand employers’ needs
       and assist them in conducting cost benefit analyses.
         Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
         Funding Source: LMIHF
         Time Frame: If there is adequate interest, draft policies and procedures to present to
         participating employers and the City Council for adoption by 2013.
    c Action H.2.5.4: At the time of entitlement applications, the City will negotiate with
       developers within newly developing Special Planning Areas (SPA) to assure the provision
       of housing units affordable to very low-, low-, and moderate-income households within
       the SPA.
         Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
         Funding Source: General Fund/LMIHF
         Time Frame: 2009-2014.
 Goal H.3: Promote the construction of a range of high-quality
  housing choices that serve all households, ranging from the
  workforce to seniors.
  •  Policy H.3.1: Ensure a balanced rate of growth between housing production, employment
     and provision of services.
                                                                            Chico General Plan   8-25

Chapter
 Icon                      8 HOUSING ELEMENT
          c Action H.3.1.1: Consider expanding the City’s Sphere of Influence to increase the
              amount of available land for housing that will meet the needs of all income groups and
              provide supporting land uses and employment.
                 Responsible Party: Planning Services
                 Funding Source: General Fund/Private Development
                 Time Frame: 2010/2012
                 Projected Units: N/A
          c Action H.3.1.2: Continue to implement the Transit Corridor Overlay (TCO) Zone
              throughout the City including parts of the Esplanade and Park Avenue to encourage
              higher density and mixed uses along underutilized transit corridors. The overlay zone
              allows residential uses above ground floor office or retail and reduced parking standards.
                 Responsible Party: Planning Services
                 Funding Source: General Fund
                 Time Frame: The City will inventory housing opportunities in the TCO zone by
                 August 2010.
        •   Policy H.3.2: Strive to maintain adequate opportunity for housing construction to meet
            future needs.
          c Action H.3.2.1: The City will continue to maintain a current inventory of vacant and
              underutilized residentially designated and zoned parcels and the development potential of
              such parcels, along with a list of the current status of development projects in the City.
              The City’s ability to meet the projected RHNA allocation is based on the current 1994
              General Plan (e.g., land plan, land use designations, densities), as amended, and current
              zoning. Anticipated additions to the City’s land supply from the General Plan Update will
              be incorporated after adoption of the 2030 General Plan. The City will also disallow
              incremental rezoning and/or General Plan amendments which reduce available acreage
              below that needed to provide for the regional housing allocation.
                 Responsible Party: Planning Services
                 Funding Source: General Fund
                 Time Frame: This will be completed as part of the General Plan implementation
                 program that will be completed by early 2011.
                 Projected Units: N/A
          c Action H.3.2.2: Most assisted housing developments utilizing State or federal financial
              resources include 50 to 150 units. The City will provide incentives and technical assistance
              through the processing of subdivision or larger sites located in Specific Plans and Special
              Planning Areas to facilitate development of a variety of housing types and affordability
 8-26   Chico General Plan

                                                                                                    Chapter
                      8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Icon
     consistent with typical developments affordable to lower income households. The City
     will offer the following incentives for the development of affordable housing including but
     not limited to: priority processing for subdivision maps that include affordable housing
     units, expedited review for the subdivision of larger sites into buildable lots where the
     development application can be found consistent with the General Plan, applicable
     Specific Plan and master environmental impact report, financial assistance (based on
     availability of federal, state, local foundations, and private housing funds, and modification
     of development requirements, such as reduced parking standards for seniors, assisted care,
     and special needs housing on a case-by-case basis.
        Responsible Party: Planning Services
        Funding Source: General Fund
        Time Frame: Ongoing , as projects are submitted to Planning Services.
•  Policy H.3.3: Promote a mix of dwelling types and sizes and avoid the formation of new
   residential areas having a uniform housing type and size throughout.
  c Action H.3.3.1: Implement the City’s adopted Neighborhood Plans, Master Plans and
     Specific Plans which identify underutilized areas for transitioning to residential or mixed
     uses, and provides specific design guidance requiring mixed housing, neighborhood-
     serving retail and maximization of transit opportunities.
        Responsible Party: Planning Services
        Funding Source: General Fund
        Time Frame: Ongoing.
  c Action H.3.3.2: Continue to implement the Traditional Neighborhood Development
     Code (TND) that promotes higher density, vertical and horizontal mixed use, and greater
     flexibility in the provision of parking. The goal of the code is to promote a significant
     variety of housing stock, commercial and community services within walking distance of
     residences, within a pedestrian scale environment.
        Responsible Party: Planning Services
        Funding Source: General Fund
        Time Frame: Ongoing. The TND code was adopted in 2007.
  c Action H.3.3.3: Update/modify the zoning code to implement land use policies and
     promote design flexibility for residential developments, particularly for those located in
     unique settings.
        Responsible Party: Planning Services
        Funding Source: City Funded/Private Development
                                                                               Chico General Plan    8-27

Chapter
 Icon                       8 HOUSING ELEMENT
                 Time Frame: 2010-2011; new land use designations currently being developed for the
                 General Plan update will be incorporated.
          c Action H.3.3.4: Implement mechanisms that promote and facilitate mixed residential-
              commercial development along commercial corridors served by transit such as:
                             Allow horizontal and vertical residential-commercial uses
                             Enable separate ownership of ground-level commercial and above-ground
                              residential uses
                             Include development standards that act as an incentive for mixed use,
                              including reduced off-site parking and open space standards
                             To achieve a better balance of jobs and workforce housing, target
                              appropriate mixed-use residential/commercial areas for a minimum ratio of
                              residential to commercial
                             Concentrate higher density housing near transit routes, shopping centers
                              and downtown
                             Facilitate development of a mixed-use demonstration project
                 Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
                 Funding Source: General Fund /LIHTF
        •   Time Frame: Implement mechanisms and adopt necessary code revisions,
            consistent with the Updated General Plan, by 2011. Policy H.3.4: Encourage
            residential development which provides quality housing and incorporates good design
            principles.
          c Action H.3.4.1: Amend the City’s Design Review Manual to provide a more predictable
              and transparent entitlement process.
                 Responsible Party: Planning Services
                 Funding Source: City Funded
                 Time Frame: 2009-2010.
        •   Policy H.3.5: Strive to maintain an adequate supply of rental housing in Chico to meet the
            needs of all renters, including students and employees of the college.
          c Action H.3.5.1: As part of the update to the General Plan Land Use Element, increase
              the zoning densities around the CSU Chico campus to encourage and promote
              construction of additional housing for students and faculty within walking distance of
              campus.
                 Responsible Party: Planning Services
 8-28   Chico General Plan

                                                                                                      Chapter
                        8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              Icon
         Funding Source: General Fund
         Time Frame: 2010-2011
    c Action H.3.5.2: Ensure the development of an adequate number of one- and two-
       bedroom apartments to serve the needs of small households within the community
       through negotiations with developers in newly developing Special Planning Areas (SPA)
       (Action H.3.2.2), mixed-use land designations in the General Plan update (Action H.3.3.4),
       and implementation of the density bonus provision in the Municipal Code (Action
       H.2.1.2).
         Responsible Party: Planning Services Department
         Funding Source: General Fund
  •  Time Frame: 2010–2014Policy H.3.6: Promote the continued maintenance and
     enhancement of residential areas, both in terms of housing and public facilities.
    c Action H.3.6.1: Provide for infrastructure and service demands, including sanitary
       sewers, storm drainage, street and alley improvements, transit facilities, utilities, schools,
       and park facilities, generated by residential development as development occurs.
         Responsible Party: Capital Projects/General Services Department
         Funding Source: General Fund/CDBG
         Time Frame: 2009–2014
 GOAL H.4: Encourage the creation of housing for those with
  special housing needs.
  •  Policy H.4.1: Encourage a diversity of housing opportunities that satisfy the physical,
     social and economic needs of all Chico residents.
    c Action H.4.1.1: The City currently evaluates the need for reasonable accommodations
       for persons with disabilities on a case-by-case basis. The City will develop a more
       formalized reasonable accommodation procedure that will provide an administrative
       exception process in zoning and land use matters for housing for persons with disabilities,
       as required by State law (SB 520). For example, a physically disabled resident may request
       an entrance ramp that must be built within the setback stipulated by the zoning code. The
       process may include minimal review by the Planning Director and may include the
       following criteria:
         •    The request for reasonable accommodation will be used by an individual with a
              disability protected under fair housing laws.
         •    The requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an
              individual with a disability protected under fair housing laws.
                                                                              Chico General Plan       8-29

Chapter
 Icon                       8 HOUSING ELEMENT
                •    The requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or
                     administrative burden on the City.
                •    The requested accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the
                     nature of the City’s land use and zoning program.
                Responsible Party: Planning Services
                Funding Source: General Fund
                Time Frame: The City will develop a formalized procedure by November 2010.
                Information regarding reasonable accommodations will be available on the City’s
                website.
        •   Policy H.4.2: Incorporate childcare services into new residential developments.
          c Action H.4.2.1: In coordination with the Local Child Care Planning Council and the
              Butte County Office of Education, identify mechanisms that encourage the integration of
              childcare into all family-oriented residential developments.
                Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
                Funding Source: General Fund
                Time Frame: 2010-2012
        •   Policy H.4.3: Assist in the provision of housing for persons with disabilities.
          c Action H.4.3.1: In cooperation with Independent Living Services of Northern
              California (ILSNC), provide an inventory of accessible and adaptable units to all agencies
              assisting the handicapped to obtain appropriate housing. The inventory shall be updated
              and distributed annually and contain the apartment name and address and the total
              number of accessible and adaptable units.The City and ILNC are also working to
              encourage more “visitability” in new residential construction to enable disabled persons to
              visit non-disabled persons.
                Responsible Party: Building & Development Services/Planning Services/Housing &
                Neighborhood Services
                Funding Source: CDBG
                Time Frame: The inventory will be distributed annually and the brochure on
                “visitability” will be completed in August of 2009.
        •   Policy H.4.4: Assist in the provision of housing for seniors.
          c Action H.4.4.1: Encourage the development of a variety of housing options for the
              elderly by providing financial support when feasible and by providing technical assistance
 8-30   Chico General Plan

                                                                                                    Chapter
                       8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Icon
      to organizations and individuals interested in development of elderly housing. Promote
      programs that allow seniors to age in place.
         Responsible Party: Housing and Neighborhood Services/Planning
         Services/Redevelopment Agency
         Funding Source: City-funded staff/HUD Section 202/LMIHF/other
         state/redevelopment and federal programs
         Time Frame: Ongoing, as projects are submitted to the Planning Services
•  Policy H.4.5: Seek to provide emergency shelter for persons temporarily in need of such
   housing.
  c Action H.4.5.1: Continue the Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program (TBRA) to assist
      households at risk of becoming homeless and who are participating in a self-sufficiency
      program.
         Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
         Funding Source: LMIHF/CDBG
         Time Frame: This program will continue as funding is available.
•  Policy H.4.6: House the homeless and others in crisis situations and identify adequate
   sites for emergency shelters and transitional housing.
  c Action H.4.6.1: California Health and Safety Code (Section 50801) defines an
      emergency shelter as “housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that
      is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or
      households may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.”
         Currently the City allows emergency shelters allows “outright” permanent emergency
         shelters in the Public/Quasi-Public (PQ) zone, the only vacant areas within the City with
         that designation are generally future park sites. Pursuant to Senate Bill 2, the City will
         amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow emergency shelters as a permitted use in the (ML)
         district without a conditional use permit or other discretionary review. In addition, the
         City will evaluate adopting development and managerial standards that will be consistent
         with Government Code Section 65583(a)(4). These standards may include such items as:
         •    Lighting
         •    On-site management
         •    Maximum number of beds or persons to be served nightly by the facility
                                                                              Chico General Plan     8-31

Chapter
 Icon                      8 HOUSING ELEMENT
                •    Off-street parking based on demonstrated need
                •    Security during hours that the emergency shelter is in operation.
                Funding Source: General Fund
                Time Frame: The City will amend the Municipal Code to allow permanent shelters in
                the ML zone by August 2010.
          c Action H.4.6.2: Pursuant to Senate Bill 2, the City must explicitly allow both supportive
              and transitional housing types in all residential zones. The City shall update its Zoning
              Code to include separate definitions of transitional and supportive housing as defined in
              Health and Safety Code Sections 50675.2 and 50675.14. Both transitional and supportive
              housing types will be allowed as a permitted use subject to only the same restrictions on
              residential uses contained in the same type of structure.
                Responsible Party: Planning Services
                Funding Source: General Fund
                Staff Time: The City will amend the Municipal Code to allow for transitional and
                supportive housing in all residential zones by August 2010.
        •   Policy H.4.7: Allow for the development of Single Room Occupancy units.
          c Action H.4.7.1: The City will continue to support the development of Single Room
              Occupancy (SRO) units or other types of housing affordable to extremely low-, very low-
              and low-income persons convenient to transportation and other support services. The
              City will prioritize and leverage federal and state funding for the development of SRO
              units (in conjunction with Action H.2.2.1). SROs are currently a permitted use in all multi-
              family zones in the City’s Municipal Code.
                Responsible Party: Planning Services/Housing and Neighborhood Services
                Funding Source: City-funded staff/LIHTC/RDA-LMIHF/other state and federal
                programs as available
                Time Frame: Ongoing, as funding becomes available and projects are processed
                through the Planning Department.
        •   Policy H.4.8.1: Continue to work with Chico State University to provide housing for
            students.
          c Action H.4.8.1: Encourage Chico State University to continue to involve residents,
              community organizations, students, staff, city government and school administrators in
              long and short-range plans for campus housing.
 8-32   Chico General Plan

                                                                                                      Chapter
                         8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Icon
          Responsible Party: Planning Services/Housing and Neighborhood Services
          Funding Source: General Fund
          Time Frame: Meeting with the Chico Campus Housing Department annually to discuss
          student housing plans.
 GOAL H.5: Encourage the improvement, rehabilitation, and
  revitalization/reinvestment of Chico’s existing residential
  neighborhoods.
  •  Policy H.5.1: Maintain and enhance the character and affordable nature of Chico’s older
     neighborhoods.
    c Action H.5.1.1: The City will continue implementing the neighborhood planning
       program that includes the following actions:
          1 Determine what local factors discourage infill development and/or redevelopment
          and consider opportunities to eliminate such disincentives.
          2 Identify, prioritize and schedule improvement of infrastructure in targeted
          neighborhoods that will encourage desired residential infill development and/or
          redevelopment.
          Responsible Party: Planning Services/Housing Neighborhood Services
          Funding Source: Apply for state infill grants as NOFAs are released.
          Time Frame: Infill development sites will be identified as part of the City’s General
          Plan update. The new Land Use Map is due for adoption in 2010.
  •  Policy H.5.2: Minimize the loss of existing assisted units because of conversion to market-
     rate units or physical deterioration.
    c Action H.5.2.1: Maintain a list of existing affordable housing developments that are at
       risk of losing affordability covenants and coordinate with the Housing Authority of the
       County of Butte and local nonprofit housing development organizations to preserve these
       units. Assist in negotiating affordability period extensions or sale of property to local non-
       profit organizations. Allow owners to redevelop their properties at higher densities as an
       incentive to maintain affordability covenants.
          Responsible Party: Housing and Neighborhood Services
          Funding Source: LMIHF/HOME/CDBG
          Time Frame: Annually update the list of existing affordable housing developments at
          risk. Contact the owners one year prior to expiration to determine the owner’s plan and
          the feasibility of preserving the affordability of the units.
                                                                                Chico General Plan     8-33

Chapter
 Icon                       8 HOUSING ELEMENT
        •   Policy H.5.3: Continue the commitment to preserve older neighborhoods through
            housing rehabilitation, compatible infill and redevelopment projects.
          c Action H.5.3.1: Continue to implement Infill Residential Flag Lot Standards. These
              regulations will allow infill development in the form of flag lots, while protecting the
              character of existing neighborhoods and the privacy of adjacent residents.
                 Responsible Party: Planning Services
                 Funding Source: General Fund
                 Time Frame: Ongoing
        •   Policy H.5.4: Aggressively enforce compliance where code violations exist in residential
            structures, in order to maintain existing housing stock in a safe and habitable condition.
          c Action H.5.4.1: The City will conduct a Rental Rehabilitation Inspection Program to
              develop an inventory of eligible rental complexes. A program for rehabilitating rental
              units will be developed after the inventory is completed.
                 Responsible Party: Housing and Neighborhood Services
                 Funding Source: LMIHF/HOME/CDBG
                 Time Frame: Conduct initial inspection by August 2011 and develop a program by
                 October 2012.
        •   Policy H.5.5: Continue to pursue low-interest loan programs targeted to rehabilitation of
            older residential structures.
          c Action H.5.5.1: Continue the City’s program for rehabilitating substandard owner-
              occupied residential units occupied by low-income households qualifying under federal
              guidelines.
                 Responsible Party: Housing and Neighborhood Services
                 Funding Source: HOME/CDBG
                 Time Frame: 2009–2014
        •   Policy H.5.6: Support and guide the rehabilitation of and reinvestment in existing
            residential buildings.
          c Action H.5.6.1: Establish an ongoing program to monitor and inventory housing
              conditions in the Chico Urban Area. This program should include annual review of
              demolition and home improvement activity with field follow-up as warranted and a
              comprehensive community survey conducted in conjunction with the update of the
              Housing Element.
 8-34   Chico General Plan

                                                                                                  Chapter
                       8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                           Icon
         Responsible Party: Building & Development Services/Planning Services/Housing and
         Neighborhood Services
         Funding Source: CDBG/LMIHF
         Time Frame: Inventory the City’s housing conditions by December 2011 and develop
         an annual review program thereafter.
 GOAL H.6: Increase the homeownership rate in Chico.
  •  Policy H.6.1: Promote homeownership opportunities for all economic sectors of the
     population.
    c Action H.6.1.1: Facilitate, through land acquisition or other leveraging of City resources,
       the development of a demonstration project featuring attached ownership housing, such as
       townhouses, condominiums or row-houses.
         Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
         Funding Source: LMIHF
         Time Frame: Begin construction of an attached ownership housing project by 2011.
         Complete construction by 2012.
  •  Policy H.6.2: Encourage the development of affordable housing for first-time
     homebuyers.
    c Action H.6.2.1: Promote homeownership through the Mortgage Subsidy Program for
       low- and moderate-income first-time homebuyers. The City will utilize its MSP HOME
       funds for lower-income households and the Redevelopment Agency Low and Moderate
       Income Housing Fund (LMIHF) as the funding source. Loan repayments will also
       provide significant funding for new loans.
         Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services
         Funding Source: LMIHF/HOME
         Time Frame: Ongoing, as funding is available
  •  Policy H.6.3: Continue to allocate resources to assist low- and moderate-income
     households to become homeowners.
    c Action H.6.3.1: In conjunction with local nonprofits, continue to develop local
       resources and apply for state and federal funds, as appropriate, needed to offer the urban
       self-help program to low-income first-time homebuyers.
         Responsible Party: Housing and Neighborhood Services/Nonprofits
         Funding Source: State HCD/CalHFA/LMIHF
                                                                             Chico General Plan    8-35

Chapter
 Icon                        8 HOUSING ELEMENT
                  Time Frame: Complete 8 self-help homes by 2011. Complete an additional 15 self-help
                  homes by 2012.
          •   Policy H.6.4: Continue to provide credit counseling services to residents.
            c Action H.6.4.1: Encourage counseling on the responsibilities of homeownership and
                debt management, home loan information and house analysis through assistance to local
                housing and credit counseling service providers.
                  Responsible Party: Local nonprofits, property management organizations, Chico
                  Redevelopment Agency and the Community Housing and Credit Counseling Center
                  (CHCCC)
                  Funding Source: CDBG/HOME
                  Time Frame: Ongoing
          •   Policy H.6.5: Consider the feasibility of a community land trust.
            c Action H.6.5.1: Consider a land trust program which combines land banking and
                improvements as the City’s equity share with a local nonprofit organization or private
                developer constructing units and/or supervising self-help projects. Land cost and
                improvements would be discounted to reduce the price of the house and thus lower
                payment and mortgage amounts.
                  Responsible Party: Housing and Neighborhood Services/Nonprofits
                  Funding Source: LMIHF
                  Time Frame: Ongoing
         GOAL H.7: Encourage energy efficient resources in new
          residential development as well as the existing housing stock.
          •   Policy H.7.1: Continue to enforce energy standards required by the State Energy Building
              Regulations for residential development and reduce long-term housing costs through
              planning and applying energy conservation measures.
            c Action H.7.1.1: Disseminate informational materials to developers and project designers
                during development review. These materials shall include, but not be limited to, passive
                solar planning through subdivision, lot and structure orientation, protection of solar
                access, and application of passive and active energy saving features.
                  Responsible Party: Planning Services
                  Funding Source: City Funded
                  Time Frame: 2009–2014
 8-36     Chico General Plan

                                                                                                        Chapter
                           8 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             Icon
      c Action H.7.1.2: The City shall review its land use regulations and subdivision ordinance
          and where appropriate add provisions which promote and/or require energy conservation
          planning and renewable energy systems as factors in project approval.
            Responsible Party: Planning Services
            Funding Source: City Funded
            Time Frame: 2009–2014
      c Action H.7.1.3: Explore financing options including State and Federal grants, low
          interest loans, etc. for the installation of energy-efficiency measures and renewable energy
          systems in all new and existing residential projects.
            Responsible Party: Planning Services/Housing & Neighborhood Services
            Funding Source: General Fund
            Time Frame: 2009–2014
      c Action H.7.1.4: Incorporate green building design, systems and materials into projects
          receiving City funding that exceed current City Building Code standards for energy
          efficiency.
            Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services Department
            Funding Source: CDBG/HOME/LMIHF
            Time Frame: 2009–2014
    •   Policy H.7.2: Increase the energy efficiency of the existing housing stock.
      c Action H.7.2.1: Partner with the local weatherization provider, Community Action
          Agency (CAA), to increase the energy efficiency of homes that receive assistance through
          the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program for low-income home owners. Establish a
          minimum number of homes to be assisted on an annual basis and assistance procedures
          through a Memorandum of Understanding with CAA.
            Responsible Party: Housing & Neighborhood Services Department
            Funding Source: Federal Department of Energy/PG&E
            Time Frame: Execute a Memorandum of Understanding with CAA by 2010.
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES SUMMARY
Based on the policies and actions outlined above, the following objectives represent a reasonable
expectation of the maximum number of new housing units that will be developed, rehabilitated or
conserved and the number of households that will be assisted over the next 5 years (Table 2). The
City should be able to facilitate the construction of 5,183 new units, assist 150 household with first-
                                                                                   Chico General Plan    8-37

Chapter
 Icon                                  8 HOUSING ELEMENT
        time home buyer loans, assist with the rehabilitation of 100 units, and preserve 295 units between
        2009 and 2014.
                                                                      TABLE 2
                               SUMMARY                     OF      QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
                                                                                    Income Level
                  Task                Extremely              Very                                                     Above
                                                                             Low              Moderate                              Total
                                           Low               Low                                                    Moderate
          New Construction                  717               637             990                 960                  1,879        5,183
          First-time
          Homebuyer                          0                 0               50                 100                      0         150
          Program
          Preservation1                      0                 0              1001                  0                      0         100
          Conservation                                       2952                                   0                      0         295
          Total                             717               932            1,140               1,060                 1,879        5,728
          1 Estimate for the number of owner occupied rehabilitations the City anticipates doing over the next five years.
          2 Units currently as risk of losing affordability: Villa Rita (52 units), Trans Pacific Gardens (163 units), and Cinnamon Village (80
          units).
 8-38        Chico General Plan
              9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                  AND SERVICES
    VISION
    Chico continues to be an attractive and well-run City in 2030, and the quality of its
    parks, greenways, preserves, public facilities, and services is a model to other
    communities. The City’s infrastructure is strategically planned, funded, and
    maintained to high standards. The storm drainage and sewer systems have been
    designed to minimize impacts to the environment and maximize efficiency and cost-
    effectiveness. Through education and conservation efforts the community continues to
    enjoy a high-quality, plentiful water supply. Neighborhood parks are incorporated into
    existing residential areas, and ample parks and recreation services are required in new
    development areas. Aging park facilities have been improved and updated. Tree-lined
    streets and boulevards continue to be a defining characteristic of Chico. Public
    services meet the diverse needs of the community.
INTRODUCTION
The Parks, Public Facilities, and Services Element is intended to address the community’s
needs and interests for its parks of all sizes as well as its public facilities and services, such as
infrastructure, schools, sewer and wastewater systems, and community services.
One of the fundamental responsibilities of a City is to provide primary public facilities and
services to its residents and businesses. The provision of cost-effective and efficient public
services and infrastructure is instrumental to the overall health and well-being of a balanced
community. Chico leads the region in providing a full range of public services to its citizens
and will continue to be a leader and innovator in the provision of local parks, greenways,
preserves, public facilities, and services.
This element establishes goals, policies, and actions to guide
the City’s planning, enhancement, and maintenance of parks,
greenways, preserves, utilities, public services, education,
and public arts and culture throughout the General Plan time
horizon. Due to the breadth of information covered in this
element, the chapter is organized into sections that address
the following seven topics:
    •    Parks, Greenways, Preserves and Open Space
    •    Educational Facilities
    •    Wastewater Facilities
    •    Water Facilities
    •    Storm Water Drainage Facilities                            Integrated Public Facilities
    •    Health, Social, and Community Service Facilities
    •    Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling
                                                                                 Chico General Plan   9-1

               9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                 AND SERVICES
    ISSUES AND CONSIDERATIONS
    This section of the element identifies and addresses primary parks, public facilities, and
    services issues raised during the outreach efforts for the General Plan Update. Policy
    guidance is found in the goals, policies, and actions section of this element. An explanation
    of specialized terms can be found in the General Plan Glossary (Appendix A).
    P ARKS , G REENWAYS , P RESERVES AND R ECREATIONAL O PEN S PACE
    Chico residents have identified the maintenance and enhancement of the City’s parks,
    greenways, recreation and open space resources as a key component in quality of life and
    overall community wellness. This element provides guidance on these issues to assure the
    continued provision of high-quality parks, community facilities, recreation programs and
    recreation and open space resources. Parks, recreation, and open space resources, facilities,
    and services have historically been provided by both the City and the Chico Area Recreation
    and Park District (CARD) with the City having primary responsibility for Bidwell Park and
                                      neighborhood parks and CARD having primary
                                      responsibility for recreation programming and community
                                      parks. Recognizing that opportunities exist to consolidate
                                      service delivery responsibilities for parks, recreation and
                                      open space services, the City and CARD have been
                                      working to realign responsibilities, including CARD taking
                                      primary responsibility for development and maintenance of
                                      neighborhood parks. This element provides an overview of
                                      the realignment of the City’s and CARD’s management
                                      structure for parks, recreation, and open space resources;
                                      provides policy guidance regarding park standards; and
    provides a policy framework for recreational facilities management to ensure the continued
    delivery of high-quality parks, recreation services and facilities, and open space and
    greenways.
    W ASTEWATER S ERVICE
    One of the most fundamental and important components of community infrastructure is
    wastewater collection and treatment. It must be sufficient to serve planned growth as well as
    older areas of the City not currently connected to the City’s wastewater disposal and
    treatment system. This element provides policy guidance on issues such as the continued
    implementation of the Nitrate Compliance Plan, which addresses groundwater contamination,
    and on-going upgrading of the City’s wastewater collection and treatment infrastructure to
    accommodate infill development and new growth.
9-2      Chico General Plan

               9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                 AND SERVICES
W ATER F ACILITIES
Water is one of the earth's most precious resources, and with California's warm climate,
unpredictable rainfall, and growing population, a guaranteed clean water supply cannot be
taken for granted. Water must be used wisely to ensure an adequate, high-quality water
supply, both now and in the future. Like the provision of wastewater collection and
treatment, the provision of water is a basic and essential component of the community
infrastructure system. Water delivery in the City is provided by California Water Service
Company (Cal Water). A key issue is to ensure that City residents are provided with safe and
sustainable water supplies through the responsible use, conservation, and management of the
available water supply. This element describes the relationship between the City and Cal
Water and provides policies addressing the need for continued coordination between the two
entities and the importance of strong water conservation efforts.
S TORM D RAINAGE
Throughout the public outreach process for the development of this
Plan, residents indicated a strong desire to maintain the natural
watercourses traversing the City and sought assurances that urban
runoff does not pollute the community’s streams. Residents in
areas with missing or deficient storm drainage infrastructure also
expressed an interest in becoming connected to a Citywide storm
drainage system. This element establishes policies to improve and
extend the City’s storm water drainage system while minimizing
impacts to the natural functioning of Chico’s waterways.
PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES, AND SERVICES
CONTEXT
This section of the element provides important context information on the seven topics
relevant to Parks, Public Facilities, and Services goals, policies, and actions. To introduce the
topics, information such as the relevant background, regulatory context, summary of related
plans, or information about future needs is provided. Figure PPFS-1 shows existing public
facilities and services within the Planning Area.
                                                                              Chico General Plan  9-3




              9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                AND SERVICES
P ARKS , G REENWAYS , P RESERVES AND R ECREATIONAL O PEN S PACE
The City of Chico and the Chico Area Recreation and Parks District (CARD) are in the
process of establishing operating parameters designed to streamline the provision of parks
and recreation services to the City and surrounding community through a realignment of the
roles and responsibilities of each agency. While CARD’s service delivery area extends well
beyond the boundaries of the City, the majority of CARD’s service area population is located
in the City. Through this new arrangement, the City will retain ownership, management, and
maintenance responsibility for Bidwell Park, creekside greenways and City-owned preserves,
while CARD will assume ownership and operation of the various other developed parks and
recreation systems in the City, such as neighborhood and
community parks, and recreation programming.
In 2008, CARD adopted a Park and Recreation Master Plan
(PRMP) which provides a comprehensive evaluation of
existing parks and recreation resources; identifies and
describes resource types and facilities; identifies current
system deficiencies and projected system demands; and
establishes new standards for developed parks and
community use facilities. The City and CARD will continue
to work together, through their cooperative arrangement, to plan for and develop new park
and community use facilities that offer high quality recreation services for City residents.
While schools are not direct recreation providers, school facilities are available for public use
and CARD’s PRMP promotes the improvement and use of school facilities for recreation
purposes. Both the City and CARD maintain a relationship with Chico Unified School
District and work cooperatively to enhance the recreational opportunities at school site
locations.
The City is responsible for the management, operation and maintenance of the 3,670-acre
Bidwell Park. In 2008, the City Council adopted the Bidwell Park Master Management Plan
(BPMMP) which sets forth the City’s vision for the Park and establishes policies and
practices for operation and management of the Park.
Park Inventory and Classification
Growth within the City and the surrounding unincorporated areas has increased the use of
existing parks and recreation facilities and has created a demand for new recreation services
and amenities. New growth within the northern portions of the City has resulted in the need
for additional facilities to provide the level of service that is desired and expected by
residents. The PRMP identifies both current deficiencies and future needs for parks and
recreation services in the City and CARD service area. Existing park deficiencies are
primarily for neighborhood parks in existing neighborhoods. The CARD Master Plan Map
(Figure PPFS-2) identifies the locations of existing and future parks and recreation areas in
the City.
                                                                             Chico General Plan   9-7




                9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                 AND SERVICES
The PRMP identifies a total of 37 existing sites that are parks, open space, or recreation
centers totaling 4,176 acres, shown by park type in Table PFFS-1 below:
                                       T ABLE PPFS-1
                   E XISTING P ARK AND R ECREATION F ACILITIES
               Park Type                      # of Sites                    Acreage
  Neighborhood and Mini Parks                      7                           29.3
  Community Parks                                  5                          164.3
  Special Purpose Parks                            8                          13.44
  Natural Areas                                    7                          252.6
  Regional Parks                                   2                         3,671.2
  Other Parks or Open Space                        2                           14.0
  Recreation Centers                               3                           7.1
  Undeveloped Park Sites                           4                          24.1
As part of the PRMP, various services and standards ratios have been adopted for the
different facility types. The PRMP establishes standards for four types of parks and park
facilities as follows:
    •    Neighborhood Parks: Neighborhood parks are intended to serve residents in the
         neighborhoods surrounding the park. These parks are designed primarily for
         unsupervised activities. They are generally small in size with 5 to 10 acres of usable
         area. Smaller versions of neighborhood parks, Mini Parks, are intended to provide
         service to higher density and mixed-use housing
         types. These smaller facilities are usually one to
         two acres in size.
    •    Community Parks:          Community Parks are
         larger, multi-purpose parks that serve the entire
         community and provide venues for organized
         recreational programs. These parks are generally
         designed to provide active play opportunities for
         people of all ages.
    •    Special Purpose Parks: Other parks include facilities that serve a focused
         community need or recreational opportunity such as an environmental education
         center, historical park, or land occupied by major structures such aquatic centers,
         skateboard parks, community centers, and gymnasiums.
                                                                            Chico General Plan  9-11

                9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                    AND SERVICES
          •   Open Space, Trails and Greenways: This category of parks contains natural areas,
              corridors, greenways, regional parks, regional open spaces, and watershed amenities.
              Within this category of parks, the City generally retains ownership or management
              responsibilities. In the future, CARD might own and manage a regional park if there
              were programmed recreation associated with it. Regional parks are described as
              usually exceeding 50 acres in size and designed to accommodate large numbers of
              people for a variety of day use activities.
     Standards
     The City of Chico’s 1994 General Plan had a parkland dedication standard of 5.0 acres of
     total parkland per 1,000 new residents broken down as follows:
          •   0.9 acres of neighborhood parkland per 1,000 residents;
          •   1.6 acres for community parkland per 1,000 residents; and
          •   2.5 acres of greenways per 1,000 residents.
     As part of the PRMP development, CARD established new parkland requirements for
     neighborhood and community parks:
          •   1.5 acres of neighborhood parkland per 1,000 residents; and
          •   2.5 acres of community parkland per 1,000 residents.
     The 2030 General Plan directs use of CARD’s PRMP parkland standards for future
     neighborhood and community parks. In addition, the City’s existing standard of 2.5 acres of
     greenways per 1,000 residents is being maintained. Through these standards, it is the
     intention of the City and CARD that most residents would be within a convenient walking
     distance of a neighborhood or community park and have access to open space and
     greenways.
     Future Needs
     As part of the PRMP effort, analysis was undertaken to quantify the current parks and
     recreation deficiencies and to identify the future parks and recreation needs using the new
     park dedication standards for the entire CARD service area. Table PPFS-2 lists the future
     park and recreation acreages that will be needed to accommodate the anticipated population
     in the CARD service area in the year 2030.
9-12      Chico General Plan

               9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                 AND SERVICES
                                        T ABLE PPFS-2
                          P ROJECTED F UTURE P ARK N EEDS
                                                                       Additional
                                     Standard        Acreage Needed
                                                                     Parks Needed
                Parks               (Acres/1,000         to Meet
                                    Population)                       for Build-out
                                                        Standard
                                                                       Population
         Community Parks                2.5                130              1-2
         Neighborhood Parks             1.5                 78             7-14
         Total                          4.0                208             8-16
As identified in Table PFFS-2, there will be a need for one or two additional community
parks and 7 to 14 additional neighborhood parks to accommodate the anticipated CARD
service area population by the year 2030. Council adoption of park fees consistent with
CARD’s PRMP park standards will be initiated by CARD and is a separate action from
General Plan adoption.
E DUCATIONAL F ACILITIES
The Chico Unified School District (CUSD) serves the City and surrounding area with public
school services. CUSD currently provides a full range of K-12 education services through
traditional school facilities, charter schools, focused learning and special needs facilities,
continuation schools, independent study programs and advanced learning initiatives in
partnership with local employers and institutions of higher learning. Current CUSD
enrollment is estimated to be approximately 13,000
students. In addition to its existing facilities, CUSD has
two undeveloped school sites within the City. CUSD is
limited to levying a state-determined maximum fee on
residential and commercial development to cover its
impact on local schools. The Chico Municipal Code
provides authority for the City to require subdivisions to
reserve land for elementary school sites for a reasonable
period of time, and CUSD is required to provide funds
for the reserved sites.
Chico is also home to California State University (CSU) Chico and the Chico Campus of
Butte College along with other private K-12 and higher education providers. CSU Chico is
located on approximately 130 acres adjacent to Downtown and is the second oldest campus
in the state university system. CSU Chico adopted a Campus Master Plan in 2005, which
envisions accommodating a 2025 enrollment of 17,900 students (full-time equivalents) and is
guiding significant upgrades and renovations to campus facilities.
                                                                          Chico General Plan   9-13

                9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                   AND SERVICES
     The Chico Campus of Butte College is located in southeast Chico, adjacent to Highway 99,
     providing a convenient location for instruction that supplements the coursework offered at
     the college’s main campus about ten miles south of the City. Butte College also has plans for
     expanding its Chico Campus in the vicinity of Skyway and State Route 99.
     W ASTEWATER F ACILITIES
     The City of Chico Water Pollution Control Plant (WPCP) is a regional-serving, gravity-fed
     facility located southwest of the City. The WPCP provides treatment of the City’s
     wastewater and discharges treated effluent to the Sacramento River. The facility is a
     secondary treatment facility with a current treatment capacity of 12 million gallons per day
     (mgd). The WPCP is a leader in the generation and use of alternative power, including a
     photovoltaic solar array installation which provides approximately 35 percent of the facility’s
     total power demand. A significant additional portion of the facility’s power demand is
     provided by the WPCP’s cogeneration facility.
     In 1985, the City of Chico and Butte County adopted the Nitrate Action Plan to address high
     levels of nitrates in portions of the groundwater under the City that resulted from the wide-
     spread use of septic tanks within the urban area. Subsequently, the Chico Urban Area Nitrate
     Compliance Plan (NCP) was developed to provide consistency between City and County land
     use and utility infrastructure policies, as well as to outline a plan to expedite the connection
     of septic tank users to the City sewer system. Implementation of the NCP is underway and is
     due to be complete in 2017.
                                W ATER F ACILITIES
                                Water service in the City is provided by the California Water
                                Service Company (Cal Water). Cal Water is a private company
                                whose Chico District was formed in 1926. Residents not supplied by
                                Cal Water obtain water through private wells. Cal Water currently
                                uses a system of 65 wells which deliver approximately 27 million
                                gallons of water to customers each day. The delivery system is
                                composed of over 355 miles of pipeline, seven storage tanks and six
                                booster pumps.
9-14      Chico General Plan

              9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                AND SERVICES
Cal Water maintains two primary management plans for the Chico area water system, as
required by state law. Their Urban Area Management Plan, adopted in 2007, provides an
overview of Cal Water and the Chico area water system, establishes policies and programs
concerning water delivery and treatment, as well as water conservation and management
practices. The Water Supply and Facilities Master Plan, adopted in 2008, guides the growth
and development of their water delivery system to meet the community’s future needs.
S TORM W ATER D RAINAGE F ACILITIES
Storm drainage management within the City and the urban area is provided by a system of
developed and undeveloped collection systems operated and maintained by the City and
Butte County. The City is not constrained by any formally designated service areas, but has
established storm drainage basins for the purpose of planning for infrastructure. New
development is required to install storm drainage infrastructure when necessary. Storm
drainage facilities in unincorporated areas surrounded by the City and in areas immediately
adjacent to the City are maintained through County Service Areas. In areas of the City that
do not have developed storm drainage collection, unpaved shoulders,
roadside swales and naturally occurring drainages help to control runoff.          Point     sources     are
                                                                                   identifiable   localized
The developed storm drainage system consists primarily of drop inlets              sources such as pipes or
located along the street system. Water in the system is transported to outfall     man-made ditches.
locations located along the major creeks including Sycamore, Mud,
Comanche, Big Chico, and Little Chico Creeks and Lindo Channel.
Consistent with the 1994 General Plan and the City’s 2000 Storm Drain Master Plan
Integrated Document, new development must incorporate storm water quality and quantity
mitigations into their designs. As required by the Clean Water Act, the City has an
established Storm Water Management Program (SWMP) in compliance with its National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. The City’s NPDES permit
controls water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants into local
waters. The SWMP addresses storm water quality issues in the areas of construction and
post-construction Best Management Practices, municipal operations, and community
involvement.
H EALTH , S OCIAL , AND C OMMUNITY S ERVICE F ACILITIES
Chico has a full range of high quality and diverse health,
social, and community service facilities including a
branch of the Butte County library system, an active arts
community with a public art program, and Enloe Medical
Center, a locally-governed non-profit regional trauma
center that provides health care services ranging from
emergency services to diagnostic and preventative
medicine.
                                                                          Chico General Plan          9-15

               9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                  AND SERVICES
     S OLID W ASTE D ISPOSAL AND R ECYCLING
     Consistent with State law, the City has developed a Source Reduction and Recycling Element
     (SRRE) and a Household Hazardous Waste Element (HHWE) as parts of the Butte County
     Integrated Waste Management Plan. The City is achieving its 50 percent diversion goal in
     accordance with State requirements.
     Collection and Disposal
     Solid waste services for the City are provided by two waste hauling companies, North Valley
     Waste Management and Recology. Solid waste generated in the City is disposed of at the
     Neal Road Landfill, which is operated and owned by Butte County. The landfill is located
     approximately seven miles southeast of Chico. The Neal Road Landfill has a total permitted
     capacity of approximately 25 million cubic yards of solid waste and has a tentative closure
     date of 2035.
     Recycling
     Curbside recycling services for the City are provided by North Valley Waste Management
     and Recology. Current recycling practices include curbside collection of metals, paper, glass,
     and plastic from single-family residences, multi-family residences, and businesses. Green
     yard waste is hauled to the City’s Compost Facility near the Chico Municipal Airport or the
     Neal Road Landfill. The City provides collection of leaves placed in the streets by City
     residents from mid October to mid January each year with an estimated annual total of
     between 40,000 to 45,000 cubic yards of leaves.
     Household Hazardous Waste
     Hazardous materials, used in many household products such as drain cleaners, waste oil,
     cleaning fluids, insecticides, and car batteries are often improperly disposed of as part of
     normal household trash. These hazardous materials could interact with other chemicals which
     can create risks to people and can also result in soil and groundwater contamination. Local
     residents are able to recycle and properly dispose of household hazardous waste at the Butte
     Regional Household Hazardous Waste Collection Facility, which is located near the Chico
     Municipal Airport.
9-16     Chico General Plan

            9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                              AND SERVICES
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
  Goal PPFS-1:      Continue cooperative efforts with the Chico Area Recreation and
                    Park District and the Chico Unified School District to provide a
                    broad range of high quality parks and recreation facilities and
                    services for all residents.
  Goal PPFS-2:      Utilize creeks, greenways and preserves as a framework for a
                    system of open space.
  Goal PPFS-3:      Support efforts by Chico Unified School District, CSU Chico,
                    Butte College and private educational institutions to maintain
                    and improve educational facilities and services in the City.
  Goal PPFS-4:      Maintain a sanitary sewer system that meets the City’s existing
                    and future needs, complies with all applicable regulations, and
                    protects the underlying aquifer.
  Goal PPFS-5:      Maintain a sustainable supply of high quality water, delivered
                    through an efficient water system to support Chico’s existing and
                    future population, including fire suppression efforts.
  Goal PPFS-6:      Provide a comprehensive and functional storm water
                    management system that protects people, property, water
                    quality, and natural aquifers.
  Goal PPFS-7:      Support arts, cultural, social service and health facilities and
                    services to enhance the local quality of life.
  Goal PPFS-8:      Ensure that solid waste and recyclable collection services are
                    available to City residents.
P ARKS , G REENWAYS , P RESERVES AND R ECREATIONAL O PEN S PACE
   Goal PPFS-1: Continue cooperative efforts with the Chico Area Recreation and
   Park District and the Chico Unified School District to provide a broad range of
   high quality parks and recreation facilities and services for all residents.
   • Policy PPFS-1.1 (Park and Recreation Facilities) – Partner with CARD and
       local providers to provide parks and recreation facilities that offer recreation
       opportunities for the community.
          Action PPFS-1.1.1 (CARD Leadership) – Convey properties and funding
          mechanisms to the Chico Area Recreation and Parks District (CARD) for
          operation, maintenance and programming of parks identified in the City of
                                                                       Chico General Plan 9-17

                   9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                       AND SERVICES
                    Chico/CARD Memorandum of Intergovernmental Cooperation, Coordination, and
                    Understanding.
   Cross
                    Action PPFS-1.1.2 (Park Development Fees) – Adopt park development fees
 reference          that support the goals of the CARD Parks and Recreation Master Plan to fund the
OS-2.1.2 and        acquisition and development of neighborhood and community parks, and
 OS-2.2.1
                    community use facilities, such as an aquatic park, needed as a result of new
                    development.
                    Action PPFS-1.1.3 (Cooperative Development of Facilities) – Pursue
                    cooperative development of neighborhood, community, and regional parks, as well
                    as facilities that enhance recreational opportunities and economic development,
                    such as sports and aquatic complexes, with the Chico Area Recreation and Parks
                    District.
                    Action PPFS-1.1.4 (Park Maintenance Funding) – Aid in the formation of
                    maintenance districts or other funding mechanisms to pay for the cost of ongoing
                    maintenance and operation of parks.
                    Action PPFS-1.1.5 (CARD Review of City Projects) – Solicit comments from
                    Chico Area Recreation and Parks District staff as part of early project review for
                    Special Planning Areas and larger subdivision proposals.
                    Action PPFS-1.1.6 (Multiple Use of School Facilities) – Encourage the Chico
                    Unified School District, CSU Chico, Butte College, and the Chico Area
                    Recreation and Parks District to coordinate the joint use of school facilities for
                    community recreation and other public purposes.
                    Action PPFS-1.1.7 (Evaluate Progress) – Coordinate with the Chico Area
                    Recreation and Parks District (CARD) to provide periodic reports to the City
                    Council, the Bidwell Park and Playground Commission, and the CARD Board of
                    Directors documenting the status of the City’s and District’s efforts to develop and
                    improve parks and recreational facilities.
   Cross            Action PPFS-1.1.8 (Funding to Develop Recreation Facilities) – Pursue local,
 reference          state, federal, and other funds for the development of parks and recreation
  OS-2.1
                    facilities.
   Cross
                    Action PPFS-1.1.9 (Bidwell Park Master Management Plan) – Utilize the
 reference          Bidwell Park Master Management Plan and consider the intent of Annie Bidwell’s
  OS-2.2            Deed to direct management and guide decision-making for Bidwell Park.
             Goal PPFS-2: Utilize creeks, greenways and preserves as a framework for a
             system of open space.
    9-18     Chico General Plan

            9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                               AND SERVICES
   • Policy PPFS-2.1 (Use of Creeks and Greenways) – Utilize the City’s creeks,
      greenways and other open spaces for public access, habitat protection, and to
      enhance community connectivity.
         Action PPFS-2.1.1 (Greenway Acquisition) – Continue the City’s greenway                    Cross
         purchase program to acquire properties located adjacent to creeks as they become         reference
                                                                                                OS-2.2.1 and
         available in order to expand habitat protection, trail creation, and public recreation   CD 2.1.3
         opportunities.
         Action PPFS-2.1.2 (Creekside Design) – Continue to use Chico’s Design                      Cross
         Guidelines Manual for proposed development adjacent to creeks to address                 reference
                                                                                                OS-2.5.1, CD
         setbacks, building orientation, security measures, and lighting to promote public       2.1.4, and
         access and use of the City’s creeks as amenities without detracting from the             DT-6.2.4
         natural setting.
         Action PPFS-2.1.3 (Pathway and Trail Planning) – Design pedestrian and                     Cross
                                                                                                  reference
         bicycle paths and trails adjacent to and across creeks that protect the riparian
                                                                                                   OS 2.5
         environment.
         Action PPFS-2.1.4 (Assess Potential Impacts to Creeks) – Through the
         development and environmental review process, including consultation with state
         and federal agencies and non-profit organizations, ensure that natural areas and
         habitat located in and adjacent to the City’s creeks are protected and enhanced.
E DUCATIONAL F ACILITIES
   Goal PPFS-3: Support efforts by Chico Unified School District, CSU Chico,
   Butte College and private educational institutions to maintain and improve
   educational facilities and services in the City.
   • Policy PPFS-3.1 (CUSD Coordination) – Support Chico Unified School District’s
      efforts to provide school sites and facilities that meet the educational needs of the
      community.
         Action PPFS-3.1.1 (School Sites) – Encourage Chico Unified School District to:
          •   Locate schools to serve new neighborhoods.
          •   Locate school sites safely away from heavy traffic, excessive noise, and
              incompatible land uses.                                                               Cross
                                                                                                  reference
                                                                                                 CIRC-2.2.4
          •   Locate schools in areas where existing or planned circulation infrastructure
              allows for safe access.
          •   Promote safe student loading and unloading.
          •   Promote walking, biking, riding transit, or carpooling to schools.
                                                                            Chico General Plan       9-19

                   9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                        AND SERVICES
                    Action PPFS-3.1.2 (Plan for School Sites) – Consult with Chico Unified School
                    District staff when planning the Special Planning Areas to ensure that school
                    facilities are in place to meet the needs of development.
                    Action PPFS-3.1.3 (School Information) – Provide information to developers
                    and interested parties on school locations and school facility fees during the City’s
                    project review process.
            • Policy PPFS-3.2 (Support Facilities for Higher Education) – Support facilities
                 expansion and collaboration opportunities with higher education institutions.
                    Action PPFS-3.2.1 (Collaborate with Educational Institutions) – Work with
                    CSU Chico, Butte College, and private educational institutions to meet existing
                    and new student housing, transportation, and facility needs.
  Cross             Action PPFS-3.2.2 (Education/Business Connections) – Support the
reference           development of research and business opportunities associated with the City’s
ED-1.2.5
                    institutions of higher learning.
          W ASTEWATER F ACILITIES
            Goal PPFS-4: Maintain a sanitary sewer system that meets the City’s existing
            and future needs, complies with all applicable regulations, and protects the
            underlying aquifer.
            • Policy PPFS-4.1 (Sanitary Sewer System) – Improve and expand the sanitary
                 sewer system as necessary to accommodate the needs of existing and future
                 development.
                    Action PPFS-4.1.1 (Require Connection to Sewer System) – Require all
                    commercial and industrial development, as well as all residential development
                    with lots one acre or smaller, to connect to the City’s sewer system.
                    Action PPFS-4.1.2 (Sanitary Sewer Master Plan) – Update and maintain the
                    City’s Sanitary Sewer Master Plan, as well as the Sewer System Model, to assure
                    that improvements to the system are identified, planned, and prioritized.
                    Action PPFS-4.1.3 (Wastewater System Costs) – Secure financing for the
                    expansion and maintenance of the Water Pollution Control Plant and sewer system
                    through the use of connection fees, special taxes, assessment districts, developer
                    dedications, or other appropriate mechanisms. Financing should be sufficient to
                    complete all related project-specific sewer trunk and main lines at their full
                    planned capacities in a single phase.
   9-20      Chico General Plan

           9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                              AND SERVICES
  • Policy PPFS-4.2 (Protection of Groundwater Resources) – Protect the quality
     and quantity of groundwater resources, including those that serve existing
     private wells, from contamination by septic systems.
        Action PPFS-4.2.1 (Septic System Information) – Assist Butte County with
        their effort to implement a public information campaign aimed at informing
        homeowners with septic systems of the proper design, use, and care of septic
        systems, as well as sewer connection opportunities.
        Action PPFS-4.2.2 (Implementing the Nitrate Compliance Plan) – Continue                  Cross
                                                                                               reference
        collaboration with Butte County to implement the Nitrate Compliance Plan.              OS-3.2.3
        Action PPFS-4.2.3 (Funding the Nitrate Compliance Plan) – Continue to seek
        funding opportunities to assist with the cost of connecting parcels currently relying
        on septic systems to the City’s sewer system.
  • Policy PPFS-4.3 (Capacity of Water Pollution Control Plant) – Increase system
     capacity by reducing wet weather infiltration into the sanitary sewer system.
        Action PPFS- 4.3.1 (Infiltration Program) – Develop and implement an inflow
        and infiltration program to identify, monitor, and line or replace existing pipes that
        are the source of excessive wet weather infiltration and reduced system capacity.
  • Policy PPFS-4.4 (Wastewater Flows) – Ensure that total flows are effectively
     managed within the overall capacity of the Water Pollution Control Plant.
        Action PPFS-4.4.1 (Wastewater Meters for Industrial Uses) – Require
        installation of wastewater meters for all new or expansions of existing Significant
        Industrial User facilities.
        Action PPFS-4.4.2 (Emerging Technologies) – Incorporate emerging wastewater
        treatment technologies to enable wastewater management practices to adapt and be
        more efficient.
W ATER F ACILITIES
  Goal PPFS-5: Maintain a sustainable supply of high quality water, delivered
  through an efficient water system to support Chico’s existing and future
  population, including fire suppression efforts.
  • Policy PPFS-5.1 (Protect Aquifer Resources) – Protect the quality and capacity               Cross
     of the upper and lower Tuscan and Tehama aquifers underlying the Chico                    reference
                                                                                                OS-3.2
     Planning Area.
                                                                          Chico General Plan      9-21

                  9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                     AND SERVICES
                   Action PPFS-5.1.1 (Groundwater Protection Advocacy) – Oppose regional
                   sales and transfers of local groundwater, including water export contracts, and
                   actively participate in county-wide and regional discussions and advocacy for the
                   protection of groundwater resources.
                   Action PPFS-5.1.2 (Groundwater Supplies and Budgeting) – Support periodic
                   evaluation of groundwater availability using the Butte Basin Groundwater Model
                   and Cal Water’s work to establish a water supply budget with specific measures to
                   assure sustainable levels of groundwater.
                   Action PPFS-5.1.3 (Groundwater Recharge and Quality) – Where feasible
                   given flood management requirements, maintain the natural or existing condition
                   of waterways and floodplains and protect watersheds to ensure groundwater
                   recharge and water quality.
   Cross            Action PPFS-5.1.5 (Monitor Groundwater Levels) – Utilize the annual
 reference          comprehensive groundwater monitoring data collected by the Butte County
 SUS-1.2.1
                    Department of Water & Resource Conservation to assess the quality and quantity
                    of water for the Chico area.
           • Policy PPFS-5.2 (Future Water System) – Consult with Cal Water to ensure that
               its water system will serve the City’s long-term needs and that State regulations
               SB 610 and SB 221 are met.
                   Action PPFS-5.2.1 (Water Flow and Pressure) – Ensure that new City
                   infrastructure provides for water flow and pressure at sufficient levels to meet
                   domestic, commercial, industrial, institutional, and firefighting needs.
                   Action PPFS-5.2.2 (Wells and Private Water Systems) – Where public water
                   delivery systems are available, discourage use of wells and private water systems
                   for domestic water use.
                   Action PPFS-5.2.3 (Water Services for New Development) – Work with Cal
                   Water to ensure that water treatment and delivery infrastructure are in place prior
                   to occupancy or assured through the use of bonds or other sureties to the City and
                   Cal Water’s satisfaction.
   Cross   • Policy PPFS-5.3 (Water Conservation) – Work with Cal Water to implement
 reference
  OS-3.3.1     water conservation management practices.
  Cross            Action PPFS-5.3.1 (Treated Wastewater) – Explore the feasibility of using
reference          treated wastewater to provide irrigation to landscaped areas and other suitable
OS-3.3.4
                   locations to reduce the demand for groundwater.
    9-22   Chico General Plan

             9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                AND SERVICES
          Action PPFS-5.3.2 (Water Reuse) – Encourage new development to install water
          conserving irrigation systems such as grey water systems.
   • Policy PPFS-5.4 (Large Water Users) – Encourage large water users such as
       Chico Unified School District, City of Chico, Chico Area Recreation and Park
       District, Enloe Medical Center, and large commercial and industrial users to
       implement water conservation practices.
           Action PPFS-5.4.1 (City Water Efficiency) – Develop plans and seek funding             Cross
                                                                                                reference
           to replace water-intensive City landscape and irrigation systems with drought        OS-3.3.2
           tolerant and water efficient systems.
S TORM W ATER D RAINAGE F ACILITIES
   Goal PPFS-6: Provide a comprehensive and functional storm water management
   system that protects people, property, water quality, and natural aquifers.
   • Policy PPFS-6.1 (Storm Drainage Master Plan) – Address current and future
       storm drainage needs in a Storm Drainage Master Plan.
          Action PPFS-6.1.1 (Update the Storm Drainage Master Plan) – Update, adopt
          and implement an updated Storm Drainage Master Plan that identifies areas with
          infrastructure deficiencies and establishes a program to address the deficiencies.
          Address drainage issues on a basin or sub-basin scale. Identify opportunities to
          increase infiltration, based on factors such as existing infrastructure, geology, the
          hydrology and hydraulics of the receiving waters, and planned land uses.
          Action PPFS-6.1.2 (Development Fees) – Update the development fee program
          as needed to ensure that storm water drainage development fees are equitable and
          adequate to pay for the storm water drainage infrastructure needed for future
          development.
   • Policy PPFS 6.2 (Storm Water Drainage) – Continue to implement a storm
       water drainage system that results in no net increase in runoff.
          Action PPFS-6.2.1 (Storm Water Drainage Standards) – Regularly update
          storm water drainage standards to include all current best management practices
          and ensure water quality and quantity standards governing the discharge of storm
          water drainage to downstream receiving waters conform with State and Federal
          regulations.
          Action PPFS-6.2.2 (Expand Storm Water Infrastructure) – As funding allows,
          continue installation of storm water drainage infrastructure in areas not served.
                                                                            Chico General Plan     9-23

                      9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                         AND SERVICES
                • Policy PPFS-6.3 (Storm Water Drainage BMPs) – To protect and improve water
                    quality, require the use of Best Management Practices for storm water drainage
                    infrastructure suited to the location and development circumstances.
    Cross              Action PPFS-6.3.1 (Alternative Storm Water Infrastructure) – Continue to
  reference            develop engineering standards and guidelines for the use of alternative storm water
  OS-3.2.1
                       infrastructure in order to minimize impervious area, runoff and pollution, and to
                       maximize natural storm water infiltration wherever feasible.
                • Policy PPFS-6.4 (Water Runoff) – Protect the quality and quantity of water
                    runoff that enters surface waters and recharges the aquifer.
    Cross              Action PPFS-6.4.1 (Storm Water Management Program) – Continue to
  reference            implement the City’s Storm Water Management Program (SWMP) and enforce
   OS-3.1.2
                       storm water provisions in the City’s Municipal Code.
                • Policy PPFS-6.5 (Flood Control) – Manage the operation of the City’s flood
                    control and storm drainage facilities and consult with local and state agencies
                    that have facilities providing flood protection for the City.
    Cross              Action PPFS-6.5.1 (Flood Management) – Consult with Butte County and other
  reference            flood control agencies to ensure that all possible actions are taken to prevent
   S-2.1.2
                       floodwaters from entering the City.
                       Action PPFS-6.5.2 (Natural Watercourses) – Utilize natural watercourses and
                       existing developed flood control channels as the City’s primary flood control
                       channels when and where feasible.
    Cross              Action PPFS-6.5.3 (Flood Impacts) – Require that new development not increase
  reference            flood impacts on adjacent properties in either the upstream or downstream
   OS-3.1.2
                       direction.
    Cross
  reference            Action PPFS-6.5.4 (Flood Zones) – Require new development to fully comply
LU-6.2.6 and           with State and Federal regulations regarding development in flood zones.
     S-2.1
             H EALTH , S OCIAL , AND C OMMUNITY S ERVICE F ACILITIES
                Goal PPFS-7: Support arts, cultural, social service and health facilities and
                services to enhance the local quality of life.
    Cross       • Policy PPFS-7.1 (Libraries, Art and Culture) – Support local libraries, the arts,
  reference         and cultural organizations, to the greatest extent feasible, to enhance the local
 CD-7.2 and
   DT-1.5
      9-24      Chico General Plan

            9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                              AND SERVICES
      quality of life and expand the City’s reputation as a regional art and culture
      destination.
         Action PPFS-7.1.1 (Library Services) – Consult with Butte County regarding
         strategies to assure the continued operation of the Chico Branch of the Butte
         County library system.
                                                                                                Cross
         Action PPFS-7.1.2 (Funding Arts and Cultural Programs) – Seek opportunities          reference
         to provide financial and governmental assistance which leverages additional         CD 7.1.2 and
         funding for arts and cultural programs.                                              DT-1.5.3
         Action PPFS-7.1.3 (Partnerships for Cultural Programs) – Encourage                     Cross
         partnerships among art and cultural groups, community organizations, and the         reference
                                                                                             CRHP-2.4.2
         local business community to develop new and expand existing cultural programs.
   • Policy PPFS-7.2 (Health and Social Services) – Support efforts to improve and
      expand health and social services for all segments of the community.
S OLID W ASTE D ISPOSAL AND R ECYCLING
   Goal PPFS-8: Ensure that solid waste and recyclable collection services are
   available to City residents.
   • Policy PPFS-8.1 (Waste Recycling) – Provide solid waste collection services that
      meet or exceed state requirements for source reduction, diversion, and recycling.
         Action PPFS-8.1.1 (Green Waste) – Encourage recycling, composting, and                 Cross
         organic waste diversion within the City and continue providing green yard waste      reference
                                                                                               OS-4.1.5
         recycling services, seasonal leaf collection and street sweeping services.
         Action PPFS-8.1.2 (Reduce Municipal Waste) – Establish the City as a role              Cross
         model for businesses and industrial operations through programs designed to          reference
                                                                                               SUS-3.3
         encourage recycling, waste diversion, source reduction, and use of renewable
         resources.
         Action PPFS-8.1.3 (Recycled and Recyclable Products) – Pursue City                      Cross
         procurement that emphasizes the use of recycled and recyclable products.              reference
                                                                                               SUS-3.1.1
         Action PPFS-8.1.4 (Locations for Waste Management) – Identify safe and
         convenient locations and hours for the disposal and recycling of hazardous waste,
         plastics, glass, metals, electronics, food and other organic waste, construction
         waste, and other special wastes.
                                                                          Chico General Plan     9-25

                9. PARKS, PUBLIC FACILITIES,
                                   AND SERVICES
  Cross          Action PPFS-8.1.5 (Recycling on Public Land) – Provide recycling bins and
reference        collection services wherever waste containers are located on City property and in
SUS-4.3.1
                 public parks.
                  Action PPFS-8.1.6 (Recyclable Construction Materials) – Use the Green
                  Building Checklist to encourage the use of recyclable materials in new
                  construction.
                  Action PPFS-8.1.7 (Commercial and Industrial Recycling) – Require
                  compliance with the State-wide Mandatory Commercial Recycling requirements
                  for commercial and industrial customers.
   9-26   Chico General Plan

