of San Dimas
III.
CIRCULATION ELEMENT General Plan
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
The Circulation Element has been a mandatory element of the General Plan since 1955. It represents an infrastructure plan concerned with the circulation of people, goods and resources it is closely related to the Land Use Element of the General Plan. The provisions of the Circulation Element support the goals, objectives, policies of the Land Use Element; while the Land Use Element is a reflection of a community’s circulation system and the planning proposals for that system.
The provisions of the Circulation Element affect the City ’ s physical, economic and social environment in several ways. The circulation system is one of the chief generators of physical settlement patterns, and its location, design and constituent modes have major effects on air quality, environmental noise, community appearance and other elements of the environment. Economic activities also require circulation for materials, products, or employees. Finally, the circulation system has a major impact on the areas and activities which it serves, on community cohesion, and on the quality of human life. Clearly, it should be a system accessible to all segments of the population, including the disadvantaged, the young, the poor, and elderly, and the handicapped.
The City of San Dimas, located in the easterly sector of Los Angeles County, is served by a network of roadways illustrated in Exhibit HI-1. Located inland, access to San Dimas is possible through three primary corridors: Inter-
77/-/
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
state 10, Interstate 210, and. State Route 30. These corridors traverse San Dimas and surrounding communities in a north-south (Interstate 210) and east-west (Interstate 10 and State Route 30) orientation. The high capacity freeway lengths attract the majority of through traffic and commuter type traffic.
The network affords connections to neighboring cities to the east such as La Verne, Pomona, Claremont, Upland, Ontario, and Chino in the Pomona Valley. In the San Gabriel Valley to the west are Glendora, Covina, West Covina, Irwindale, Baldwin Park, and Azusa.
FINDINGS ■	---- The following findings summarize a compre-
hensive circulation analysis consisting of interviews, review of existing documents, community attitude survey, community-wide workshops and numerous work sessions with the General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC) including:
•	Regional Coordination, Transit and Commuter Provisions;
•	Equestrian/Recreational Trails;
•	DilzaTunxr CtTfifarM’ uiAvway \j jo ivii-i,
•	Fiscal Limitations;
•	Jurisdictional Responsibility; and
•	Traffic Capacity
These findings form the basis for the updated circulation element’s goals, objectives, plan proposals and implementation measures.
777-2

GENERAL
PLAN
r
EXISTING CIRCULATION ELEMENT
LEGEND
CITY LIMITS LINE
FREEWAY
MAJOR ARTERIAL
SECONDARY ARTERIAL
COLLECTOR
SCENIC PARKWAY (also secondary arterial)
LOWERED RAILROAD
of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
Regional Coordination, Transit and Commuter Provisions
San Dimas lies in the eastern portion of Los Angeles County, is an island in its regional setting. The Circulation Element should therefore be coordinated with the regional mobility and congestion management plan to provide regional continuity. Opportunities for commuter rail on the existing railroad rights-of-way could provide alternative means of transportation and potential transit stations and nodes within the City. Additional park and ride facilities could also be added.
There are many equestrian trails in the City
Equestrian and Recreational Trails
The City has developed an extensive system of equestrian trails; the need has basically kept up with the demand. The City has an Equestrian Commission; they review proposed trails and recommend trails and facilities for implementation to the City Council. These trails are primarily used for recreation, but these trails offer an alternative transportation mode to get to work, school and shop.
The community attitude survey and community meetings confirmed the equestrian trail needs have been adequately met. However, in order to meet the need for more bicycle and hiking trails, there are opportunities to link equestrian, bicycle and hiking trails to existing regional trails and to trail systems of the adjacent cities of Covina, Glendora, La Verne and Pomona. (Please see Open Space Element for a detailed discussion regarding equestrian trails.)
III-4
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
Bikewav Svstem
Bicycle trails can connect key areas of the City

The local bikeway system, including the regional bike paths, could be expanded to serve more of the City. Several loop systems in the downtown core area and connecting links each with Via Verde and Frank G. Bonelli Regional Park would facilitate the bicycle system immensely.
Opportunities for on street bicycle trails can expand the City trail system with minimal capital outlay.
Additional trail opportunities can be implemented by providing joint use trails by combining mountain bike, equestrian and hiking uses. These joint trails shall consider safety of the user as an integral part of the design.
Fiscal Limitations
Many of the improvements included in the Circulation Element will have citywide and/or regional benefit and may need to be constructed prior to the development of the contiguous property. The City should develop alternate funding mechanisms to pay for the construction of circulation improvements included in the Circulation Element. Potential alternatives include allocation of general fund revenues to a Capital Improvement Program, Proposition “A” funds, implementation of an off-site Road Improvement Fee on new developments, or consideration of Benefit Assessment or Mello-Roos Districts to assess all
III-5
of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
benefiting property owners for infrastructure improvements.
Jurisdictional Responsibilities
Within the limits of San Dimas, all of the streets/roads fall under the jurisdiction of the City, except State Route 30 and Interstate 210 which are part of the Interstate System and under the jurisdiction of CalTrans. Outside of the City, in the immediately adjacent areas, the street/roads are under the jurisdiction of the City of Glendora, City of Covina, City of Pomona, City of La Verne, and County of Los Angeles.
Traffic Capacity Future Roadway Conditions
Traffic Capacity measured by Level of Service (LOS). Level of Service is a qualitative measure of roadway and intersection performance stated on a scale from "A" to "F", with LOS "A" representing free flow traffic and LOS "F" representing severe traffic congestion. It is a ratio of traffic volume to the capacity of the roadway, (see Table III-1) and the basis for the traffic analysis.
III-6
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
r r»c a
ijvo n.
TABLE HI-1
LEVEL OF SERVICE DEFINITIONS
Volume/ Capacity Ratio
Free flow conditions
No motorist waits longer than one signal
LOSB
Stable traffic flow
Motorists rarely wait through more than one signal
LOSC
Stable and acceptable flow but speed and maneuverability somewhat restricted due to higher volumes
Motorists intermittently wait through more than one signal
Occasional backups behind left turning vehicles
LOS D
Extensive delays at times
Some motorists, especially left turners, may wait through one or more signals, but no excessible backups Maneuverability restricted
LOS E
Very long lines may create lengthy delay, especially for left turns
Volume at or near capacity Unstable flow
LU3 f
Backup from locations downstream restrict movement at
intersection approaches
Forced flow conditions
Stoppage for long periods due to congestion
Volumes drop to zero in extreme cases
0-0.60
0-61-0.70
0.71-0.80
0.81—0.90
0.91-1.00
1.01 or above
III-7
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
This methodology reflects the fact that most of the City is adequately planned and will remain unchanged during the life of the update General Plan. As noted in the land use element, market analysis conducted for the General Plan update indicates limited potential for additional City-serving commercial due to the small increase in population, current establishments competing for the same market, and already developed character of the commercial areas.
Typical right-of-way illustration section-cut
Without improvements, the following roadway segments are estimated to experience traffic demands which exceed existing capacities:
1.	Foothill Boulevard between SanDimas Avenue and Walnut Avenue.
2.	Gladstone Street between Lone Hill Avenue and San Dimas Avenue.
3.	Bonita Avenue between Cataract Avenue and Walnut Avenue.
4.	Lone Hill Avenue between Cienega Avenue and Covina Boulevard.
5.	Cataract Avenue between Bonita Avenue and Arrow Highway.
6.	San Dimas Avenue between Gladstone Street and Via Verde.
With improvements, the roadway system is generally brought into balance in terms of volume to capacity relationships.
III-8
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
Some of the artieral roadways in the City of San Dimas have not been constructed to ultimate cross-section widths based upon existing City and County highway classifications. Roadways that experience volume to capacity ratios greater than 0.70 should be evaluated for improvements, such as, restriping, increased lanes by restriping, left-turn pockets and syn-cronized signalling to improve traffic conditions. San Dimas Avenue between Gladstone Street and Bonita Avenue has existing volume to capacity ratios of 0.74 and 0.90 and Bonita Avenue between Cataract Avenue and Walnut Avenue has existing volume to capacity ratios ofO.88toO.93.
In order to retain neighborhood character, the GPAC was fully supportive of retaining existing street configurations and widths on San Dimas Avenue and Bonita Avenue.
The volume and speed of traffic on residential streets are key determinants in the quality of life residents perceive of their neighborhoods. It is of great importance that the circulation system not only be designated to facilitate the movement of people and goods, and that it be coordinated with regional facilities, but that it be designed to maintain an acceptable quality of life in residential areas.
777-9
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
DEVELOPMENT POLICIES	A development policy is a general plan state-
ment that guides action; it includes:
•	Goals
•	Objectives
•	Policies
•	Plan Proposals
•	Implementation Measures
Please refer to Section	I for a detailed defini-
tion and explanation of these elements and how these implementation measures are referenced.
These development policies are summarized in a matrix on page HI-25.
III-10
GENERAL
PLAN
,eiJT or
saUFQRHia
Legend
■■■■■ .
•	• • * S«con<j4fy
•	• • « • Co< lector
COMMLMTY OKVtLOFMTXT OETAtTMEXT
comvitants: castanfda/takata ASSOCIATES

ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS
EXHIBIT III-2
III-11
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
GOALS STATEMENT C-1:
TO PROVIDE A STREET NETWORK TO MOVE PEOPLE AND GOODS SAFELY AND EFFICIENTLY THROUGHOUT THE CITY OF SAN DIMAS
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
1.1	Maintain a minimum Level of Ser- 1.1.1 vice C at all intersections during non-peak hours and Level of Service D (volume/capacity ratio of 0.90 or less) at all intersections during peak hours to ensure that traffic delays	1.1.2 are kept to a minimum.	Classified road facilities (see Figure III-2) shall be constructed or upgraded, where feasible, to meet City standards. The City shall require new developments to be served by roads of adequate capacity and design standards to provide reasonable access.
1.1.3	The City shall pursue measures to reduce congestion at intersections and maintain levels of service as identified in Objective 1.1.
1.1.4	They shall analyze the feasibility of widening San Dimas Avenue and Walnut Avenue at the railroad crossing.
III-12
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
1.2	Establish adequate measures to en- 1.2.1 sure traffic safety.	The City shall enforce speed restrictions.
1.2.2	The City shall require that future and imnrm/pmpnlc to AYiefind VUiVJ	U T VillVllkJ W roads be designed to minimize conflicting traffic movements such as turning, curb parking, uncontrolled access, and frequent stops.
1.2.3	The City shall require that pedestrian and vehicular traffic is separated to the maximum feasible extent.
1.3	Preserve the quality of residential 1.3.1 neighborhoods by maintaining the legally enforceable speed limits and by discouraging the flow of truck traffic and through traffic in these areas. 1.3.2	The City shall enforce speed limits of 25 miles per hour in residential areas defined by the California Vehicle Code as residential neighborhoods. The City shall establish weight restrictions where necessary on routes traversing through residential neighborhoods.
1.3.3	The City shall maintain adequate levels of service on major City streets pursuant to Objective 1.1 as measures to avoid diversion of through traffic into residential neighborhoods and adequate levels of safety pursuant to Objective 1.2.
111-13
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
Establish financing programs which 1.4.1 incorporate adequate funding for the City’s roadway system.
The City shall identify and evaluate potential revenue sources for financing roadway system development and improvement projects.
1.4.2	The City shall pursue viable revenue sources to meet the roadway system
k funding needs.
1.4.3	The City shall only implement street widenings when Transportation System Management strategies, such as the removal of on-street parking, lane restriping, etc., have been exhausted.
Plan Proposal: Identify Candidate Transit Stops on the Land Use Plan.
Implementation: a, b, c, d, e, f, q (see page HI-22)
III-14
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
GOALS STATEMENT C-2:
TO PROMOTE A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM THAT IS SAFE, CON-
VENIENT, EFFICIENT, AND MEETS THE IDENTIFIED NEEDS OF THE CITY OF SAN DIMAS
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
2.1 Require dedication and/or construction of appropriate facilities in support of a public transportation systems noted in the regional mobility plan.
2.1.1
2.1.2
2.1.3
2.1.4
2.1.5
The City shall work with the transportation agencies to designate commuter rail stations within the City of San Dimas.
The City shall support improved transit services for elderly disabled and other transit dependent persons.
The City shall work with all public transportation and coordinating regional agencies and adjacent cities in pursuing additional transit routes within the City, to the City and from the City.
The City shall strive for reasonable and practical means through current technology to find transit solutions which are economically feasible not only in terms of ridership fees but in terms of City support for investigation and promotion.
Manage truck traffic entering the City by enforcing and posting of designated truck routes and lanes.
Plan Proposal: Identify Candidate Transit Stops on the Land Use Plan.
Implementation: g, h, r (see page III-23)
III-15
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
GOALS STATEMENT C-3:
TO PROMOTE SAFE ALTERNATIVES TO MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION THAT MEET THE NEEDS OF ALL CITY RESIDENTS.
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
3.1	Provide a circulation network that accommodates the safe and efficient movement of cyclists.	3.1.1 The City shall create a system of bicycle routes within the street right-of-way to meet the needs of both the local and commuter cyclist. The routes shall be designed for the safety of the cyclist.
3.2	Provide a system of sidewalks or pathways in residential and commercial areas that provides a safe environment for pedestrians.	3.2.1	Where possible future developments shall contain an internal system of trails linking schools, shopping centers, and other public facilities with residences. 3.2.2	The City shall promote the design and location of future land uses to encourage access by non-automotive .. means.
3.3 Provide a circulation network . that accommodates the safe and efficient movement of equestrians.	3.3.1 The City shall create a system of recreational trails to meet the needs of both the recreational and commuter equestrian. The trails shall be safe and easily maintained.
Plan Proposal: Map the City's existing and proposed recreational trails designating bicycles, equestrian and hiking trails in the Open Space Element.
Implementation: i, j, k, 1, s (see page HI-23)
III-16
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
GOALS STATEMENT C-4:
TO PROVIDE AN ADEQUATE SUPPLY OF PRIVATE OFF-STREET AND PUBLIC PARKING TO MEET THE NEEDS OF RESIDENTS AND VISITORS TO THE CITY.
AB TT?/^'T'TT 7T7 C .
11 Y ilo;
pr>T TZ^TTTC.
Provide joint-use and public parking facilities where needed by special assessment districts or other mechanisms.
4.1.1
4.1.2
4.1.3
4.1.4
The City shall enforce its parking ordinance and standard requirements such as necessary design features, the number of required handicapped parking spaces, etc. in conjunction with the parking ordinance.
The City shall pursue methods of encouraging the provision of increased on-site parking supply through a range of techniques including redevelopment activities.
The City shall require developers to provide adequate on-site parking and/or to contribute to a program to acquire and/or maintain off-site facilities.
The City shall encourage joint development of parking facilities to the maximum extent feasible.
Plan Proposal: None
Implementation: m, p (see page IH-24)
III-17
City o f San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
GOALS STATEMENT C-5:
TO MANAGE PEAK HOUR TRAFFIC FLOW AND CHANGE DEMAND ON THE CIRCULATION SYSTEM TO REDUCE TRAFFIC CONGESTION WHERE NECESSARY AND FEASIBLE.
	
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
Provide for the development and monitoring of Transportation System Management (TSM) and Travel Demand Management (TDM) programs at locations where trip making is concentrated. See III-2 for definitions of TSM and TDM.
5.1.1	The City shall support programs with the objective of increasing the vehicle occupancy rate.
5.1.2	The City shall encourage public support for the development of a balanced circulation system through a well organized public relations program.
5.1.3	Provide Park and Ride Facilities with in the flood control right-of-way (on the south side of San Dimas Canyon Road).
Plan Proposal: None
Implementation: n, o (see Page III-24)
III-18
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
EXHIBIT m-2
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM MANAGEMENT
The Transportation System Management (TSM) plan is designed to address the shortterm transportation needs of urban areas through more efficient use of existing transportation resources. In developing the Transportation System Management plan, urban areas are expected to consider a wide range of actions of operational, pricing and regulatory nature. Typical examples of Transportation System Management actions are traffic operations improvements; provision of reserved lanes and other forms of preferential treatment for transit and other high occupancy vehicles; graduated parking fees and peak-hour tolls to reduce commuter traffic congestion; reduced transit fares to stimulate off-peak use of transit facilities; incentives for ride sharing; provision of better local collection, distribution and internal circulation services in suburban areas; more flexible and responsive routing, scheduling and dispatching of transit vehicles; greater coordination between feeder and line-haul services; and other measures designed to make a more productive use of existing highway and transit investment.
The problem in many cities is not one of too little capacity but rather one of inefficiently used facilities and services. The objective of Transportation System Management is to make more efficient use of the highways and transit systems already in place, and thus reduce the need for new capital investment and, hopefully, for operating assistance.
111-19
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND
MANAGEMENT ........—-------TDM is the set of measures designed to reduce
the number of trips made by the single occupant vehicle during the peak traffic period.
As the name implies, TDM does not expand the supply of transportation services or infrastructure, but adjusts the demand for various means to get to work. For example, TDM measures can be categorized into three groups: 1) person trip reduction strategies that eliminate trips altogether (e.g., work at home); 2) vehicle trip reduction strategies that accommodate person trips in fewer vehicles (e.g., vanpooling); and 3) peak period modification strategies that move trips out of the most congested periods (e.g., flex-time). Categorized by these groupings, TDM measures include:
TDM Category	Measures
Person Trip Reduction Compressed Work Weeks.
Telecommunications and Work-At-Home.
Non-Work Trip Reduction.
Walking and Cycling to Work.
Vehicle Trip Reduction	Carpooling
Vanpooling
Transit and Shuttles Employer Bus Pass
Subsidies or Sales Parking Management Auto Use Restrictions
Peak Period	Flex-Time
Modifications	User Fees
III-20
of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
Other supportive TDM strategies include designing new employment sites to encourage alternative transportation modes, such as, car pools, van pools, transit and bicycling commuting. Also provision of on site amenities, such as, on site cafeterias and automated teller machines can reduce automobile trips.
111-21
City of San Dimas •
General Plan Circulation Element
Plan Proposals
A:	Identify candidate transit stops on the
Land Use Plan.
B:	Designate the Packing House on the
M&E site as a potential transit stop.
C:	Map the City’s existing and proposed
recreational trails designating bicycle, equestrian and hiking trails in the Open Space Element.
Implementation:
a:	The City shall require an adequate
evaluation of potential traffic impacts associated with proposed new developments prior to project approval. Further, the City shall require the implementation of appropriate mitigation measures prior to or in conjunction with project development.
b:	The City shall prohibit parking on
Major roadways to increase the traffic capacity of these roadways.
c:	The City shall identify the major inter-
sections requiring special design treatment to increase their vehicular capacity.
d:	The City shall properly interconnect
traffic cianalc in nrrlcr fn mavimirc
progression and minimize the accele-ration/deceleration that produces significantly highervehicular emission and noise levels.
777-22
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
e:	The City shall ensure that the dev-
elopment of new private driveways do not pose significant traffic conflicts for major roadways and residential collector roads.
f:	The City shall maintain an ongoing
monitoring program to ensure the s afe ty of the City’s roadway system.
g:	The City shall review site plans to
determine if pedestrian access to public transit stops will be direct and convenient.
h:	The City shall require construction of
bus turnouts adjacent to new developments where transit demand levels may be sufficient in the future to warrant such accommodations.
i:	Adequate traffic control devices shall
be provided for bicycle and equestrian crossings.
j:	The City shall conduct a public infor-
mation program to increase public awareness of bicycle, equestrian and hiking safety.
k:	The City shall review site plans to
determine if shopping areas are designed for pedestrian access.
1:	The City shall require the installation
of wheelchair ramps on all new sidewalks and shall encourage their installation in older neighborhoods.
III-23
City of San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
m:	The City shall work cooperatively with
developers and the business community to develop funding mechanisms for the construction of future parking facilities.
n:	The City shall require the develop-
ment and implementation of Transportation Management Plans for key industrial and office areas. These plans shall be designed to reduce peak hour traffic and vehicle miles of travel.
o:	The City shall encourage the develop-
ment of park-n-ride lots near freeway interchanges in conjunction with Cal-Trans policies.
p:	Enforce and periodically update the
zoning ordinance which specifies minimum parking requirements for various types of land use.
q.	Encourage an interchange on Route 30 in La Veme at Foothill Boulevard.
r.	Reevaluate truck routes and update to today's standards for larger trucks and pavement sections.
s.	When development opportunities present themselves, the City shall require the developer to contribute to the construction of a north-south equestrian trail link.
III-24
City o f San Dimas
General Plan Circulation Element
Circulation Element - Goals / Implementation Matrix
Goals / Implementation	a	b	c	d	e	f	g	h	i	j	k	1	m	n	0	p	q	r	5
C-l. Provide a street network to move people and goods safely and efficiently throughout the City of San Dimas.	■	■	■	■ f	■	■											■		
C-2. Promote a public transportation system that is safe, convenient, efficient, and meets the identified needs of the City of San Dimas.							■	■										■	
C-3. Promote safe alternatives to motorized transportation that meets the needs of all City residents.									■	■	■	■							■
C-4. Provide an adequate supply of private off-street and public parking to meet the needs of residents and visitors to the City.													■			■			
C-5. Manage peak hour traffic- flow and change demand on the circulation sytem to reduce traffic congestion where necessary and feasible.														■	■				
III-25﻿of San Dimas
VI.
CONSERVATION ELEMENT General Plan
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
Hawks are found in the canyon areas of the City
FINDINGS
The Conservation Element is required for the purposes of establishing a management plan for natural resources to prevent waste, destruction or neglect. This element of the General Plan is concerned with the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources such as water, soils, rivers, harbors, wildlife, minerals and other natural and cultural resources. This element specifically addresses the following principal categories:
•	Managed production of resources,
•	Conservation of natural resources, and
•	Conservation of cultural resources.
The Conservation Element overlaps those categories of the Open Space Element which deal with open space for the preservation of natural resources and open space for the managed production of resources they are discussed in this section.
A comprehensive conservation baseline setting, existing conditions and community attitudes regarding conservation are detailed in the Technical Appendix.
The following findings summarize a comprehensive conservation analysis consisting of interviews, review of existing documents, community attitude survey, community-wide workshops and numerous work sessions with the General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC) including:
VI-1
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
•	Managed production of resources,
•	Conservation of natural resources, and
•	Conservation of cultural resources.
These findings form the basis for this element’s goals, objectives, plan proposals and implementation measures.
Managed Production of Resources
A detailed analysis was undertaken in determining the City’s managed production of resources; they include:
Agricultural soils, Aggregate resources, Mineral resources, and Solid waste recycling.
Water Resources
The analysis of the City’s water resources included:
•	Watersheds,
•	Groundwater,
•	Surface Drainage, and
•	Water purveyors.
VI-2
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
Water Sheds
There are two agencies responsible for the protection of water sheds in the City of San Dimas: the United States Forest Service and Los Angeles County.
Los Angeles County U.S. Forest Service
The United States Forest Service is responsible for the management of the watershed in the Angeles National Forest. The Forest Service has been conducting an on going experimental forest program to protect water sheds and natural habitats. The program has five primary objectives:
•	Measure air and water quality effects,
•	Measure stream and watershed levels,
•	Reduce damages resulting from flood and soil erosion,
•	Perform controlled bums, and
•	Erosion control resulting from fires.
There are two departments within the Los Angeles County government which are responsible for watershed areas. These are the Los Angeles County Flood Control District (LACFCD) and the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works - Flood Control and Maintenance Division and to a lesser degree the LAFCO Fire Department.
VI-3
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
The Los Angeles County Flood Control District maintains considerable amounts of lands for flood control and water conservation purposes. These lands consist of channels and parcels related to existing drainage patterns. There are two reservoirs in the City: Pudding-stone Reservoir and San Dimas Canyon Reservoir. The Flood Control Maintenance Division is responsible for maintaining flood control improvements. The Los Angeles County Fire Department also participates with its program of replanting burned watershed areas.
Groundwater
The City overlies three groundwater basins. They include the San Dimas Basin, Way Hill Basin, and Foothill Basin. A fourth basin, outside of the City, the San Gabriel Valley Basin is fed by the water from San Dimas Canyon; this basin is managed by the Upper San Gabriel Valley Municipal Water District. The depth to groundwater varies yearly, however the general trend is towards increased depth from overdrafting of the water resources.
The Los Angeles County Flood Control District (LAFCD) is responsible for flood control and groundwater recharge along the San Dimas Canyon wash and Walnut Creek.
VI-4
t ' i i
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
Sycamore Canyon is a major drainage feature
Surface Drainage
There are four major surface drainage courses in the City; they include the:
•	Wildwood Canyon wash,
•	Sycamore Canyon wash,
•	San Dimas Canyon wash and
•	Walnut Creek wash.
The Wildwood Canyon wash drains into the Big Dalton Wash located to the west of San Dimas in the City of Glendora. The Sycamore Canyon wash drains into the San Dimas Can7 yon wash which is diverted to the Pudding-stone Diversion Dam and reservoir. The Walnut Creek wash is located at the northern base of the San Jose Hills, it drains the central section of the City and the San Jose Hills. It eventually drains into the Big Dalton Wash and ultimately into the San Gabriel River.
All of these drainage courses are a part of the Los Angeles County Flood Control System and are maintained by them. In the northern sections of the San Dimas Canyon wash the flood control channels are not paved but are levees with natural bottoms that eventually become paved channels. The Walnut Creek wash is entirely natural.
VI-5
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
Water Purveyor
Southern California Water Company (SCWC) is responsible for supplying all water to the City of San Dimas; with the exception of the upper northwes t comer of San Dimas, which is served by the City of Glendora.
There are three sources from which Southern California Water serves the City of San Dimas:
•	Three Valleys Metropolitan Water District
•	Covina Irrigation, and
•	Local Wells.
Interviews with SCWC indicate that the district currently has ten wells with a current capacity of 21 million gallons/day (mgd). The average daily consumption is 15 mgd.
Because of the current capacity and the multiple water supply sources, SCWC is confident they can continue to serve existing and future customers in the City of San Dimas.
Southern California Water does offer suggestions on water conservation to the residents of San Dimas including:
Household conservation,
Drought tolerant planting and Landscape irrigation information.
VI-6
Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
Agricultural Soils
The City of San Dimas began as an agricultural town. Citrus orchards and row crops, such as strawberries were grown in the City. The U.S. Soil Conservation Service has analyzed the soils in San Dimas area into Land Capability Classification groups. These soil classifications are based on their ability to produce common cultivated crops and pasture plants without soil deterioration over an extended period of time. The broadest category places all soils into eight classes arranged from I through VIH. Conservation of Class I (prime agricultural) and Class II (potential prime agricultural) soils is of major concern of this element.
As Exhibit VI-1 illustrates, there are no Class I (prime agricultural) soils within the City of San Dimas. There are Class II (potential prime agricultural) soils located in the northern half of the City.and areas north of Bonelli Regional Park. About 507 acres of Class H soils remain undeveloped.
Table VI-1 shows that of the remaining 507 available acres of Class II soils, 172 acres are designated open space while the remaining 335 acres are undeveloped parcels of various sizes. These remaining parcels have been identified for future development and are fragmented throughout the City with the largest undeveloped parcel approximately 26 acres,
VI-7
tJJT or

IA
iALlFORNlA
SOIL CLASS
LEGEND
GENERAL
PLAN

EXHIBIT VI-1
CONSULTANTS! CASTANEDA/TAJIATA ASSOCIATES
COMMUNITY DKVELOPMSNT DSP AXTMBNT
CONSULTANTS! CASTANEDA/TAJIATA ASSOCIATES
VIS
t !
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
TOTAL REMAINING CLASS II SOILS			
			
			
	ACRES UNDEVELOPED	ACRES OPEN SPACE	TOTAL REMAINING ACRES
			
CLASS II SOILS	335	1 72	507
			
			
			
			
		*	
		Source: U.S. Soil Conservation Services,	
		Los Angeles County Report and General Soils Map -	
		December 1969, Takata Associates - 1990	
TABLE VI-1
PRIME AGRICULTURAL SOILS
VI-9
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
undeveloped parcel approximately 26 acres, for the most part they are too small to be suitable for significant agricultural production. Most of these parcels are adjacent to existing residential developments, making the agricultural uses incompatible because of the use of pesticides, fertilizers and equipment noise.
San Dimas is in the Claremont-Upland Aggregate Production-Consumption Region. Exhibit VI-2 identifies the City’s aggregate resources. There are three categories of (Mineral Resource) ratings:
•	MRZ-1, no significant resources;
•	MRZ-2, significant resources; and
•	MRZ-3, not enough evidence to make a finding.
The MRZ-2 is of particular interest because it is an area which has significant aggregate deposits. The total MRZ-2 area is 521 acres of which the majority of land is urbanized. The State Department of Conservation, Department of Mines and Geology has determined that the only significant remaining undevel-
10/1 or'rdc	i f c nrimorih/
jvvtvi ij x>z —r uvivj	uvyvjiu p'xx-iiitxx xx j
found in the San Dimas Wash, an area currently devoted to percolation basins, undeveloped park land and flood control. The majority of this sector is owned and managed by the City of San Dimas and the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP).
VI-10

GENERAL
PLAN
ltjiY or
&
ri_ru
EXHIBIT VI-2
C1A/V* «L'U->
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
CONSULTANTS: CAETANEDA/TAKATA ASSOCIATES
HJaLIFORNJa
AGGREGATE
RESOURCES
LEGEND
—— CITY LIMITS LINE
MRZ-1 NO SIGNIFICANT MINERAL DEPOSITS
PRESENT OR THEIR LS LITTLE LIKELIHOOD THAT THEIR PRESENCE EXISTS
MRZ-1 SIGNIFICANT MINERAL DEPOSITS PRESENT OR A HIGH LIKELIHOOD THAT THEIR PRESENCE EXISTS
MRZ-3 AREAS CONTAINING MINERAL DEPOSITS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF WHICH CANNOT BE EVALUATED FROM AVAILABLE DATA


VI-11
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
There is no aggregate mining currently in the City.
Mining these remaining resources would cause considerable impact to the existing adjacent andsurroundingresidentialneighborhoods and parks. The noise, dust and truck traffic generated by the extraction activities would decrease the quality of life of the community.
Mineral Resources
Mineral resources in the City of San Dimas have included mining for precious metals and oil and gas.
Mining for precious metals on a small scale primarily have taken place in the Angeles National Forest. The mining has been administered by the U.S. Forest Service on a permit basis. Recent interviews with the U.S. Forest Service indicate that no permits are being issued for mining and no permits have been authorized for the last fifteen to twenty years.
Discussions with the State Division of Oil and Gas indicate that the there are no significant major oil or gas fields within the City of San Dimas. There may be some wildcat wells drilled in the past, however, there are currently no oil or gas drilling or active wells currently within the City.
VI-12
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
Solid Waste Recycling
The California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (AB939) requires that cities reduce waste going to landfills by at least 25% by 1995 and 50% by the year 2000. To achieve these goals, cities are required to prepare a comprehensive waste management plan called Source Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE).
The City Source Reduction and Recycling Element shall include, but not be limited to, all the following coponents for solid waste generated in the jurisdiction:
Recycle With
•	Waste characterization component
•	Source reduction component
•	Recycling component
•	Composting component
•	Solid waste facility capacity component
•	Education and public information component
•	Funding component
•	Special waste component
•	Household hazardous waste component
The City of S an Dimas instituted a Solid Waste Recycling Program in 1989. The community attitude survey indicated that there was very strong support for solid waste recycling. The respondents to the community attitude survey were willing to pay an additional dollar per month for recycling efforts. The City is currently reviewing a Green Waste Program for composting gardening waste, in which the City’s Parks and Maintenance will compost 90% of its waste.
W-75
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
90% of its waste.
A Joint Powers Authority with other East San Gabriel cities is drafting a solid waste source reduction plan (see Land Use Element).
A Regional Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) was prepared by the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG). One of the implementation measures is for the City to develop an air quality element at the local level. Please refer to Section II, Land Use Element for further detailed discussion.
Conservation of Natural Resources
This subsection summarizes the two major components of the conservation of natural resources:
•	Wildlife habitat and
•	Native plant areas.
The City of San Dimas has extensive undeveloped areas of potential wildlife habitat. The City’s open foothills and canyons provide an environment for numerous animal and plant species to flourish. The Technical Appendix, details and lists animal and plant life known to exist in the City. The majority of the habitats and native plant species are found in the following areas of the City:
-	U.S. Forest Service Land
-	Puddingstone Reservoir,
-	Bonelli Regional Park,
-	San Dimas Canyon,
-	Walnut Creek,
-	Cinnamon Creek,
-	Wildwood Canyon, and
-	Sycamore Canyon.
VI-14
! yi- <•»,.i
dry of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
Big Horn Sheep roam the San Gabriel Mountains
Representative animals include deer, raccoons, coyote, hawks, owls and other species common to the area. The California Big Hom Sheep is identified by the, State Department of Fish and Game (DFG) as rare. There are no known endangered species. Except for the Big Hom Sheep, there are no rare or unique species known to habitat the San Dimas area. The DFG is responsible for the fish and wildlife at Puddingstone Reservoir. Wildlife migration patterns are disrupted when fences are placed within wildlife corridors. Current development standards and CC & Rs in private developments need to be improved to address this issue.
The plant species found in these areas include large stands of sycamores, oaks, alders and other vegetation found in the chaparral and riparian environments. There are no endangered, rare or unique plant species identified in the San Dimas area. However, the City ’ s plant environment is a major scenic and visual resource which should be protected (see the Open Space Element for additional discussion). The City currently utilizes a preservation ordinance to protect all significant mature trees within the City.
VI-15
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
Conservation of Cultural Resources
The cultural resources of San Dimas include:
•	Paleontological,
•	Archaeological, and
•	Historic
A detailed discussion of these resources are discussed in the Technical Appendix.
Paleontology
Paleontological sites yield specimens of fossil flora and fauna which are a resources for scientific knowledge Within the City of San Dimas there are certain fossil bearing rocks. There are specific shale and siltstone strata in the Via Verde area and around Bonelli Park. Care should be taken to conserve these fossil bearing sites. Future development should avoid needless destruction of the remaining paleontological sites.
Archeology
There is evidence that the Gabrielano Indians, nomadic food gatherers, inhabited the San Dimas area. There may be some archaeological sites of value within San Dimas. These probable sites include:
-Cienega Springs,
VI-16
Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
-San Dimas Canyon ,
-Walnut Creek, and
-Way Hill.
It is important that opportunities remain so that study, record and salvage artifacts can occur before development takes place on a specific site.
Historic
Within the City boundaries the San Dimas Historical Society has identified twenty four structures of cultural and historic importance. These structures are clustered in the residential.areas north and south of Bonita Avenue between Cataract Avenue and San Dimas Avenue and are part of a walking tour designed by the Historical Society. The City is currently developing an historical element, which would develop goals, objectives, policies and implementation measures for the preservation of historical and cultural resources. Furthermore, historic neighborhoods which are significant and reinforce toe City’s heritage are also to be protected (see Land Use Element Goal L-l.l)
There is a strong desire to have an agricultural heritage park to preserve some orchards and structures that contributed to the City’s farm environment.
VI-17
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
DEVELOPMENT POLICIES_________________ A development policy is a general plan state-
ment that guides action; it includes:
•	Goal,
•	Objectives,
•	Policies,
•	Plan Proposals and
•	Implementation Measures
Please refer to Section I for a detailed definition and explanation of how the Plan proposals and implementation measures are referenced.
These development policies are summarized in a matrix on page VI-25.
VI-18
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
GOAL STATEMENT CN-1:	
MANAGE AND CONSERVE SAN DIMAS’ NATURAL RESOURCES WHICH CONTRIBUTE AND ENHANCE THE QUALITY OF LIFE	
	
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
1.1	Promote the conservation of nat- ural resources,encouraging those measures that maintain clean air,	1.1.1 Protect the remaining MRZ-2 aggregate resource areas and sectors in the San Dimas Wash.
water, earth resources and energy
resouces.	1.1.2 Discourage mining of aggregate re-
sources where potential conflicts (such as, traffic, noise, and dust impacts) may be experienced with adjacent land uses.
1.1.3	Evaluate the MRZ-3 areas on a case by case basis prior to development to determine if there are significant ag gregate resources.
1.1.4	Encourage alternative sources of en ergy to conserve non-renewable re sources.
Plan Proposals: A (see page VI-23)
Implementation Measures: b, c, d, e, f, i (see page VI-23)
VI -19
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
GOAL STATEMENT CN-2:
CONSERVE THE HISTORICAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES OF SAN DIMAS
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
2.1 Promote the conservation of histor- 2.1.1 Preserve significant paleontological
ical and cultural resources through programs and policies to identify and protect these resources.
and archaeological sites. Evaluate the significance of each site on a case by case basis.
2.1.2 Preserve significant historical resources within the City of San Dimas. Evaluate each historical structure, place, and site on a case by case basis.
Plan Proposals: A
Implementation Measures: g, h, j (see page VI-23)
GOAL STATEMENT CN-3:
MANAGE AND CONSERVE SAN DIMAS’ WATER RESOURCES TO MAINTAIN A HIGH LEVEL OF QUALITY AND SUFFICIENT QUANTITY TO ITS CITIZENS.
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
3.1 Protect the remaining natural water- 3.1.1 Retain flood control areas in their
sheds and ground water with open space systems coordinated with multiple use flood plain management.
Plan Proposals: A
Implementation Measures: a, e, f (see page VI-23)
natural state, where possible as passive open space for habitate preservation, viewing, and recreation.
VI-20
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
GOAL STATEMENT CN-4:
CONSERVE SAN DIMAS’ NORTHERN FOOTHILLS.
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
4.1	Conserve the integrity of the northern foothills and maintain a reasonable economic return for the land-owner.
4.1.1	. Designate the northern foothills as
very low density residential development to minimize grading and protect its natural appearance.
Plan Proposals: A
Implementation Measures: a (see page VI-23)
GOAL STATEMENT CN-5:
STRIVE FOR AIR QUALITY THAT IS COMPATIBLE WITH HEALTH, WELL BEING AND ENJOYMENT OF LIFE FOR ALL CITIZENS
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
5.1	S upport the regional air quality goal to attain and maintain National Air Quality Standards while continuing economic growth and improvement in the quality of life afforded to the citizens of San Dimas and Los Angeles County.
5.1.1	Separate sensitive areas and uses (e.g., schools, childcare centers, playgrounds etc.) from significant sources of air pollution.
5.1.2	The City shall coordinate with SCAQMD, SCAG, ARB and other local, state and national agencies in ef forts to plan and implement clean air strategies for the South Coast Air Basin.
5.2:	Coordinate air quality planning and
implementation efforts with other responsible agencies.
Plan Proposals: none
Implementation Measures: i (see page VI-23)
VI-21
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
GOAL STATEMENT CN-6:
CONSERVE PUDDINGSTONE HILLS
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
6.1 Conserve the integrity of the Puddingstone Hills and maintain a reasonable economic return for the land owner.
6.1.1 Designate the Puddingstone Hills as very low density residential development and minimize grading and protect its natural appearance.
Plan Proposals: A
Implementation Measure: a (see page VI-23)
VI-22
Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
A. Retain the following areas as conservation overlay areas (see Exhibit II-4):
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8. 9. 10
U.S. Forest Service Land Puddingstone Reservoir Bonelli Regional Park San Dimas Canyon Walnut Creek Cinnamon Creek Wildwood Canyon Sycamore Canyon Northern Foothills Puddingstone Hills
Implementation Measures:
a:	The City shall develop standards, spe-
cial requirements, and revise the City ’ s zoning ordinance and conservation overlay zones where necessary, to protect natural resources within areas to be preserved or developed. Specific sections shall address fences which impact wildlife habitats and corridors. (See Land Use Element Implementation Measure g.)
b:	The City shall support programs to
promote natural resources conservation, such as solid waste recycling, water conservation, efficient irrigation systems, drought tolerant planting materials, and soil conservation.
c:	The City shall pursue a composting
program (green waste) in conjunction with Cal Poly University and the Los Angeles County Sanitation District.
VI-23
City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
d:	The City shall pursue a program with
interested parties for the recycling of paper, glass, and aluminum.
e:	The City shall utilize and promote more
efficient water management The City shall consider the use of reclaimed water for irrigation of public areas, such as medians, parkways, golf courses, and selected public landscaped areas.
f:	The City shall consider the establish-
ment of drought tolerant landscaping for public areas and for commercial, industrial and residential planned unit development.
g:	The City shall develop a Historical
Preservation Plan.
h:	The City shall encourage development
of a Heritage Citrus Grove Park to preserve San Dimas’ agricultural heritage.
i:	The City shall prepare an Air Quality
Element, or equivalent, of the General Plan.
j:	The City shall seek a corporate spon-
sor to assist in the development and promotion of a Heritage Citrus Grove Park.
k:	The City shall support programs to
promote energy conservation, such as, but not limited to: solar panels, hot water loop systems, insulation, energy audits, and other appropriate means to conserve energy.
VI-24

City of San Dimas
General Plan Conservation Element
Conservation Element - Goals / Implementation Matrix
Goals / Implementation	a	b	c	d	e	f	g	h	i	j	k
CN-1. Manage and conserve San Dimas’ natural resources which contribute and enhance the quality of life.		■	■	■	■	■			■		■
CN-2. Conserve the historical and cultural resources of San Dimas.							■	■		■	
CN-3. Manage and conserve San Dimas’ water resources to maintain a high level of quality and sufficient quantity to its citizens.	■				■	■					
CN-4. Conserve San Dimas’ northern foothills.	■										
CN-5. Strive for air quality that is compatible with health, well being and enjoyment of life for all citizens.									■		
CN-6 Conserve Puddingstone Hills	■										
VI-25﻿City of San Dimas
2008-2014 Housing Element
October 2008



City of San Dimas 2008-2014 Housing Element
October 2008
City of San Dimas Community Development Department 245 East Bonita Avenue
San Dimas, CA 91773
IXY/J
KAREN WARNER ASSOCIATES
Housing Policy Consultants
Table of Contents
Section	Page
I.	Introduction
A.	Role and Organization	of	Housing	Element..........................1-1
B.	Sources of Information.............................................I-2
C.	Public Participation................................................I-3
D.	Relationship to Other General Plan Elements .......................I-5
II.	Housing	Needs Assessment
A.	Demographic Profile.............................................  11-1
B.	Household Profile...............................................  ll-6
C.	Housing Stock Characteristics....................................11-18
D.	Regional Housing Needs...........................................II-34
III.	Housing	Constraints
A.	Governmental Constraints.........................................111-1
B.	Market Constraints............................................  111-16
C.	Environmental and Infrastructure Constraints....................111-19
IV.	Housing	Opportunities
A.	Availability of Sites for Housing.................................IV-1
B.	Financial Resources ....................;........................IV-13
C.	Administrative Resources.........................................IV-18
D.	Opportunities for Energy Conservation............................IV-19
V.	Housing	Plan
A.	Evaluation of Housing Element Accomplishments......................V-1
B.	Housing Goals and Policies........................................V-11
C.	Housing Programs.................................................V-14
Appendices
A.	Residential Sites Inventory
B.	Public Outreach
ii
Section
List of Tables
Page
Housing Needs Assessment
11-1 Regional Population Growth Trends.....;................................
11-2	Age Distribution......................................................
II-3 Racial and Ethnic Composition..........................................
II-4 Household Characteristics..............................................
II-5 State Income Categories................................................
II-6 Household Income Levels................................................
11-7	Income by Owner/Renter Tenure.........................................
11-8	Income Level by Household Type........................................
II-9 Special Needs Populations..............................................
11-10 Regional Housing Growth Trends........................................
11-11 Housing Type..........................................................
11-12 Housing Tenure........................................................
11-13 Age of Housing Stock..................................................
11-1 4 Survey of Vacant Rental Units........................................
11-1 5 Single-Family Home and Condo Sales - San Dimas and Environs..........
11-1 6 Single-Family Home and Condo Sales Prices - San Dimas................
11-1 7 Maximum Affordable Housing Cost......................................
11-18 Maximum Affordable Rents..............................................
11-19 Assisted Housing Inventory............................................
II-20 Market Value of At-Risk Projects......................................
11-21 Required Rent Subsidies for At-Risk Projects..........................
II-22 Overcrowded Households................................................
II-23 Housing Overpayment...................................................
II-24 Severe Housing Overpayment by Type and Tenure.........................
II-25 Regional Housing Needs Assessment.....................................
... 11-1 ... II-3 ... II-4 ... II-6 ... II-7 ... II-8 .11-10 .11-11 .11-12 .11-18 .11-19 .11-19 . II-22 . II-25 . II-26 . II-27 . II-28 . II-29 . II-30 . II-32 . II-33 . II-34 . II-36 . II 39 .11-41
Housing Constraints
111-1 Residential Development Standards........................................................
III-2 Residential Parking Standards............................................................
III-3 Housing Types by Zoning District.........................................................
III-4 Residential Development Fees.............................................................
III-5 Summary of Development Fees - Multi-Family Condominium...................................
III-6	Residential Development Review Process..................................................
Ill 7	Ctnb ir I—Iomo 0i ir/-h neo I s~\n oe ( 71 _ Qon f~7i m nc n r»/“l I A ni inf\/
III”/	kJ tatU □ </l l l CJ l l l l l_Jlv.ii CIO V lucu IJ	o y _ uui ■ i__z ■i ■ Izij UI ICI	i i uy .
111-8 Vacant Residential Land Sales (January 2005 - June 2007).................................
Housing Opportunities
IV-1	Developable Available Residential Sites ....................................
IV-2 Sites for Rezoning at 30 Units/Acre ..........................................
IV-3 Potential Future Residential Sites............................................
IV-4 Comparison of Regional Growth Need and Residential Sites .....................
IV-5 Financial Resources for Housing...............................................
iii
.. III-2 .. III-3 .. III-5 111-11 111-12 111-14 HI-1 7 111-18
..IV-2
..IV-8
..IV-9
IV-12
IV-13
Housing Plan
V-1	Review of Accomplishments under 2000 Housing Element..............V-2
V-2	Summary of Quantified Objectives for 2000 Housing Element.........V-10
V-3 Housing Program Summary 2008-2014....................................V-25
V-4 Summary of Quantified Objectives 2008-2014...........................V-31
List of Figures
Figure	Page
1	2000 Census Tracts and Block Groups................................II-2
2	Median Household Income, 1999..................................... II-9
3	Senior Households.................................................11-15
4	Renter-Occupied Housing Units.....................................II-20
5	Severe Renter Overcrowding........................................II-36
6	Severe Renter Overpayment.........................................II-39
7	General Plan Land Use Map..........................................IV-3
8	Sites for Rezoning.................................................IV-7
iv
^LiroRifikM™
I. Introduction
A.	Role and Organization of the Housing Element
State law recognizes the vital role local governments play in the availability, adequacy and affordability of housing. Every jurisdiction in California is required to adopt a long-range General Plan to guide its physical development; the Housing Element is one of the seven mandated elements of the General Plan. Housing Element law mandates that local governments adequately plan to meet the existing and projected housing needs of all economic segments of the community. The law recognizes that in order for the private market to adequately address housing needs and demand, local governments must adopt land use plans and regulatory systems that provide opportunities for, and do not unduly constrain housing production. Housing element statutes also require the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) to review local housing elements for compliance with State law and to report their findings to the local government.
California's Housing Element law requires that each city and county develop local housing programs to meet its "fair share" of existing and future housing needs for all income groups. The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) is
£zm- zJz^i ,zd^.G«z-r	z4 -»/» z» I z-c « I « ~ 4-L. z^ z^	~ ~ J ~	~ zJ	- //Rl IMA//
icspuiisiuic mi ucvaupmg ciiiu aligning Liici>c itgiuiicu neeub, ui	,
tu Southern
California jurisdictions. Pursuant to the RHNA planning period, the San Dimas Housing Element is a seven-year plan extending from 2008-2014.
San Dimas' Housing Element identifies strategies and programs that focus on:
1)	Preserving and improving housing and neighborhoods;
2)	Providing adequate housing sites;
3)	Assisting in the provision of affordable housing;
4)	Removing governmental and other constraints to housing investment; and
5)	Promoting fair and equal housing opportunities.
The City's Housing Element consists of the following major components:
>	An analysis of the City's demographic,, household and housing characteristics and related housing needs (Section II);
>	A review of potential market, governmental, and infrastructure constraints to meeting San Dimas' identified housing needs (Section III);
>	An evaluation of residential sites, financial and administrative resources available to address the City's housing goals (Section IV);
2008-2014 Housing Element
M
Introduction
> The Housing Plan for addressing the City's identified housing needs, constraints and resources; including housing goals, policies and programs (Section V).
B.	Sources of Information
In preparing the Housing Element, various sources of information are consulted. The 2000 Census provides the basis for population and household characteristics. Although dated, the Census remains the most comprehensive and widely accepted source of information on demographic characteristics, and provides consistency with other regional, State and federal housing plans. Several data sources are used to supplement and provide reliable updates of the 2000 Census, including:
>	Population and housing count data is updated by the State Department of Finance;
>	SCAG's 2003-2035 Regional Integrated Forecast provides population, housing and employment projections;
>	Household income data by type of household (e.g. seniors, large families, etc) is derived from the Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) prepared by HUD;
>	Housing market information, such as home sales and rents, is updated through newspaper and internet rent surveys, DataQuick sales transactions, and regional market data reports;
>	Housing conditions information is obtained from a field survey conducted in 2001.
>	SCAG's 2008-2014 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) provides information on existing and projected housing needs;
>	Lending patterns for home purchase and home improvement loans are provided through the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) database;
>	Information on San Dimas' development standards is derived from the City's Zoning Ordinance; and
>	Information on planned expenditures of City/Agency Housing Funds is derived from the Redevelopment Agency's 2007 Implementation Plan.
2008-2014 Housing Element
I-2
Introduction
C.	Public Participation
Section 6553(c)(6)(B) of the Government Code states that, "The local government shall make diligent effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments of the community, in the development of the housing element, and the program shall describe this effort." Opportunities for community stakeholders to provide input on housing issues and recommend strategies are critical to the development of appropriate and effective programs to address the City's housing needs. San Dimas solicits input from the public throughout the housing element process: during development of the draft element; during public review of the draft element; and during the adoption process.
The City solicited public input early during development of the draft element through distribution of a Housing Needs Survey to City residents. The Needs Survey focused on three primary areas: housing conditions; housing affordability; and new housing development. Survey participants were asked to rank the relative importance of various existing and potential programs within each of the three areas; the survey instrument and tabulated results are presented in the Appendix to the Housing Element. The survey was made available on the City's website during December 2007 to mid-February 2008. All persons on the City's e-notification list, encompassing approximately 700 individuals, received direct notification and were encouraged to complete the survey.
The survey results, from 25 respondents, indicate that the areas with highest perceived need are: property maintenance/code enforcement; first-time homebuyer assistance; and revitalizing older commercial/industrial properties through the introduction of housing. Some of the written comments covered the need to prioritize senior housing, including shared housing; the need for more affordable housing in order to keep present and future generations from leaving San Dimas; and the need for targeted code enforcement and beautification programs in certain neighborhoods. The results of the Housing Needs Survey have been shared with the city's decision-makers, and have been reflected within the Element's Housing Plan. The City's survey results are provided in the Appendix to the Element.
As a participating jurisdiction in the Los Angeles County CDBG program, San Dimas participates in the Consolidated Plan process for the County of Los Angeles. As part of the County's update to its Consolidated Plan in 2007, the County distributed a community development needs survey to its participating cities. In San Dimas, a link to the County's survey was posted on the City's website. The survey asked participants to rate priorities in the following categories: Community Services; Community Facilities; Infrastructure; Neighborhood Services; Special Needs Services; Decent Housing; and Creating Economic Opportunities. The County summarized the survey responses for its participating cities to assist in developing priorities for expenditure of CDBG. San Dimas had between 230 and 250 respondents for each program, and identified the following priority housing needs: senior housing; code enforcement; and affordable for-sale housing. In terms of broader community development needs, San Dimas respondents
2008-2014 Housing Element
1-3
Introduction
also indicated a need for anti-crime programs; senior activities; youth and educational services; park and recreational facilities; healthcare facilities; youth centers; street/alley and lighting improvements; graffiti removal; trash and debris removal; centers and services for neglected/abused children; and business district revitalization. The County survey results are provided in the Appendix to the Element
In addition to soliciting public input through resident surveys, the City conducted the following public meetings and hearings related to the preparation of the draft Housing Element:
>	City Council and Planning Commission Study Session held at the Senior Citizen Community Center on Saturday, September 15, 2007;
>	Planning Commission Public Hearing on the draft Element held on February 6, 2008 in a public meeting room at City Hall;
>	City Council Public Hearing on the draft Element held on February 26, 2008 in a public meeting room at City Hall.
Notification of the public meetings was provided in the local newspaper and posted at the post office, Library and the Via Verde Shopping Center at least 10 days in advance of the meeting. In addition, direct notification was provided to individuals and organizations on the City's list of parties that have standing requests for notification of public hearings. The City also provided direct notification to local stakeholders including: for-profit and non-profit developers active in the City; advocacy groups representing lower income populations; business organizations; realtors; and adjacent jurisdictions. A copy of the meeting notification and distribution list is included in the Appendix to the Element.
Upon completion of the draft Housing Element, the City circulates a Notice of Availability to a variety of interested organizations. The Notice defines a 60 day review and comment period, and identifies locations for review of the draft document, including the local library, the Senior Center, City Hall, and the Planning Department. In addition, the draft Housing Element is placed on the City's website at www.ci.san-dimas.ca.us. The draft is also sent to the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) for review and comment.
Public hearings are held on the Housing Element before both the Planning Commission and City Council. Notification is published in the local newspaper in advance of each hearing, and direct notices are mailed to interested groups and individuals. Public hearings are videotaped and rebroadcast for several days, allowing greater access to individuals unable to attend in person.
2008-2014 Housing Element
1-4
Introduction
D.	Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
The San Dimas General Plan is comprised of the following seven elements: Land Use; Circulation; Housing; Open Space; Conservation; Safety; Noise and Historic Preservation. As part of the update of the Housing Element, the other Elements of the General Plan were reviewed to ensure consistency with the policies set forth in those elements.
The City will ensure consistency between the Housing Element and the other General Plan elements so that policies introduced in one element are consistent with other elements. Whenever any element of the General Plan is amended in the future, the Housing Element will be reviewed and modified, if necessary, to ensure continued consistency between elements.
2008-2014 Housing Element
I-5
Introduction
^aLIFORNia^™^
II. Housing Needs Assessment
This section of the Housing Element discusses the characteristics of the City's population and housing as a means of better understanding the nature and extent of unmet housing needs. The Housing Needs Assessment is comprised of the following components: A) Demographic Profile; B) Household Profile; C) Housing Stock Characteristics; and D) Regional Housing Needs. Several housing needs maps are presented based on census tract data; Figure 1 depicts the 2000 census tract and block group boundaries for San Dimas.
A.	Demographic Profile
Demographic changes, such as population growth or changes in age, can affect the type and amount of housing that is needed in a community. This section addresses the population, age, race and ethnicity, and employment characteristics of San Dimas residents.
1. Population Growth and Trends
Table 11-1 presents population growth trends in San Dimas, and compares this growth to neighboring jurisdictions and the entire County of Los Angeles. This Table illustrates that San Dimas experienced the highest percentage of growth during the 1990s, with an 8 percent increase in population, slightly above the 7 percent increase for the County. The State Department of Finance estimates San Dimas' 2007 population at 37,011, representing a moderate 6 percent increase since 2000. This level of growth is less than the 9 percent population increase in Claremont and the County, and comparable to both Glendora and La Verne.
Table 11-1
Regional Population Growth Trends 1990 - 2007
Jurisdiction	1990	2000	2007	Percent Change	
				1990- 2000	2000- 2007
Claremont	32,503	33,998	37,141	5%	9%
Glendora	47,828	49,415	52,557	3%	6%
La Verne	30,897	31,638	33,449	2%	6%
San Dimas	32,397	34,980	37,011	8%	6%
County of Los Angeles	8,863,164	9,519,338	10,331,939	7%	9%
Source: U.S. Census 1990 and 2000. Dept of Finance 2007 Population and Housing Estimates.
2008-2014 Housing Element
h-1
Housing Needs Assessment



San Dimas Res.
400203.1
400203.3
GLENDORA
403802.1
COVIN^'1
CENSUS BLOCK GROUP
401311.1
iMONA
DIVERSA CONSUL'
Figure 1.
City of San Dimas
2000 CENSUS BLOCKGROUPS
403703.1
Source: 2000 Census

2.	Age Characteristics
Housing need is often affected by the age characteristics of residents in the community. Different age groups have different lifestyles, income levels, and family types that influence housing needs.
Table 11-2 shows the age distribution of San Dimas in 1990 and 2000, and compares this to the age distribution of Los Angeles County. As shown in the table below, 26 percent of San Dimas' 2000 population is comprised of children under the age of 18, compared to 28 percent Countywide. While the total proportion of children in San Dimas remained constant throughout the 1990's, the proportion of school age children (5-17 years) increased slightly from 19 to 20 percent, whereas the proportion of preschool children (under 5 years) decreased slightly from 7 to 6 percent. The college age population (18-24 years) also decreased slightly, from 10 to 9 percent.
The biggest changes to San Dimas' age profile occurred in the young adult (25-44 years) and middle age (45-64 years) groups. Both the proportion and number of young adults declined significantly during the last decade, decreasing from 34 to 28 percent of the population, and declining by over 1,500 residents. This trend is a reflection of the aging in place of young adults into middle age, and the limited number of new young adults moving into the community. Conversely, the middle age population grew during the 1990's, now comprising 26 percent of the City's population, with an increase of over 1,400 residents. This shift in growth from young adults to middle age is indicative of the area's higher for-sale housing costs. In comparison, the County's young adult population is at 33 percent, middle-age population at 19 percent, and seniors at 10 percent of total County population
Finally, the percentage of seniors (65 years and older) in San Dimas increased from 9 to 12 percent during this time, somewhat higher than the Countywide 10 percent. The population of San Dimas, as a whole, is aging. The City experienced the greatest numeric population increase in its two oldest age categories (middle age and seniors). The 2000 Census puts the median age of San Dimas at 37 years, 5 years older than the median age for the County.
Table 11-2
Age Distribution 1990 - 2000
Age Group	1990		2000		
	Persons	Percent	Persons	Percent	L.A. Co. %
Preschool (<5 yrs)	2,256	7%	2,051	6%	8%
School Age (5-17 yrs)	6,216	19%	6,883	20%	20%
College Age (18-24 yrs)	3,246	10%	3,129	9%	10%
Young Adults (25-44 yrs)	11,139	34%	9,825	28%	33%
Middle Age (45-64 yrs)	6,510	20%	8,933	26%	19%
Seniors (65+ years)	3,030	9%	4,159	12%	10%
TOTAL	32,397	100%	34,980	100%	100%
Source: U.S. Census 1990 and 2000.
2008-2014 Housing Element
II-3
Housing Needs Assessment
3.	Race and Ethnicity
Table 11-3 displays the racial/ethnic distribution of San Dimas' population and compares it to the Countywide distribution. The City experienced some change in ethnic composition over the decade, with Whites decreasing in proportion from 70 to 61 percent, representing a decrease of just over 1,400 persons. In contrast, Whites comprise only 31 percent of the population Countywide.
The Hispanic population has increased significantly, from 17 percent in 1990 to 23 percent in 2000. This represents an increase of over 2,500 persons. The percentage of Asian/Pacific Islanders (9%), African Americans (3%), and American Indians (<1%) in San Dimas remained relatively constant throughout the 1990's. The percentage of "Other" races increased to 3 percent of the population from less than one percent in 1990.
Table 11-3
Racial and Ethnic Composition 1990 - 2000
Racial/Ethnic Group	1990		2000		
	Persons	Percent	Persons	Percent	L.A. Co. %
White	22,746	70%	21,381	61%	31%
Hispanic	5,612	17%	8,163	23%	45%
Asian/Pacific Islander	2,682	8%	3,279	9%	13%
African American	1,182	4%	1,114	3%	9%
American Indian	128	<1%	117	<1%	1%
Other Race	47	<1%	926	3%	1%
TOTAL	32,397	100%	34,980	100%	100%
Source: U.S. Census 1990 and 2000.
4.	Employment
Employment characteristics also affect housing needs by affecting one's ability to afford and acquire housing. The 2000 Census documents 27,283 persons 16+ years old in San Dimas, of which 18,017 were in the labor force, representing a labor force participation rate of 66 percent. As could be expected, participation in the labor force varies by gender, with 58 percent of women and 75 percent of men in the labor force. The primary occupations in which residents were employed include: Management, Professional, and Related occupations (42%); Sales and Office occupations (30%); and Service occupations (12%). The 2000 unemployment rate in San Dimas was 5.4 percent, compared to 8.2 percent Countywide. The current unemployment rate for San Dimas is 2.9 percent, compared to 5.2 percent for the County as estimated by the State Economic Development Department for 2007.
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) estimates there were a total of 15,357 jobs in San Dimas in 2005. SCAG projects the City's employment base will grow to 17,663 by 2030, a 16 percent increase in jobs. This level of employment
2008-2014 Housing Element
II-4
Housing Needs Assessment
growth is significantly lower than that projected for the San Gabriel subregion (31%), and the County as a whole (18%).
Major employers in San Dimas include professional/technical, public utilities, manufacturing/production and sales/entertainment. This year, the new Costco building will open, increasing the number of employees in sales. Listed below are San Dimas major employers and the number of employees by general type of employment.
Professional/Technical -
Automatic Data Processing, Inc. (ADP)	1,192
Wescorp	410
ITT Technical Institute	215
Public Utility Office Centers -	
Southern California Gas Co.	431
Southern California Edison	281
Golden State Water Co.	114
Manufacturing/Production -	
Louis Vuitton	336
Gilead Sciences	200
Organic Milling	120
Sales/Entertainment	
Raging Waters	261
Target	200
Lowe's	133
Automatic Data Processing, Inc. (ADP)
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-5
Housing Needs Assessment
B.	Household Profile
Household type and size, income levels, and the presence of special needs populations are all factors that affect the type of housing needed by residents. This section discusses the various household characteristics that affect housing needs in San Dimas.
1.	Household Type
A household is defined as all persons living in a housing unit. Families are a subset of households. They include persons living together who are related by blood, marriage, or adoption. A single person living alone is also a household. "Other" households are unrelated people residing in the same dwelling unit. Group quarters, such as dormitories or convalescent homes are not considered households.
In 2000, San Dimas was home to 12,163 households, an increase of approximately 1,200 households since 1990. The City had an average household size of 2.78 persons and an average family size of 3.23 persons, reflecting a slight decrease from 1990 levels (refer to Table II-4). The City's average household size is slightly less than the Los Angeles County average household size of 2.98.
The overwhelming majority of the households in San Dimas are families, comprising 74 percent of all households. These family households are almost evenly divided between families with children (36% of total households) and families without children (38% of total households). During the 1990s, families without children and singles grew at the fastest rate of any household type, increasing by 20 percent and 28 percent, respectively. In contrast, families with children decreased by 2 percent and other nonfamily households decreased by 4 percent. This loss in families with children is consistent with the decline in young adult (25-44) households during this same period.
Table 11-4
Household Characteristics 1990 - 2000
Household Type	1990		2000		Percent Change
	Households	Percent	Households	Percent	
Families	8,300	76%	8,985	74%	8%
With children	4,409	40%	4,319	36%	-2%
With no children	3,891	36%	4,666	38%	20%
Singles	2,005	18%	2,558	21%	28%
Other non-families	643	6%	620	5%	-4%
Total Households	10,948	100%	12,163	100%	11%
Average Household Size	2.86		2.78		-3%
Average Family Size	3.26		3.23		-1%
Source: U.S. Census 1990 and 2000.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-6
Housing Needs Assessment
2. Household Income
Household income is one of the most important factors affecting housing opportunity. It is also crucial in determining a household's ability to balance housing costs with the other basic necessities of life.
Income Definitions
The State and Federal government classify household income into several groupings based upon the relationship to the County median income (AMI) adjusted for household size. The State uses the income groups presented in Table 11-5, while federal housing programs use slightly different income groupings and definitions, with the highest income category generally ending at >95% AMI. For purposes of the Housing Element, State income definitions are used throughout, except where specifically noted.
Table 11-5
State Income Categories
Income Level	% County Adjusted Median Income (AMI)
Extremely Low	0-30% AMI
Very Low	0-50% AMI
Low	51-80% AMI
Moderate	81-120% AMI
Above Moderate	120%+ AMI
Source: Section 5000093 of the California Health and Safety Code
Income Characteristics
Between 1990 and 2000, the average median household income (AMI) in San Dimas grew from $50,268 to $62,885, an increase of 25 percent. Both the $62,885 level and 25 percent growth of household income in San Dimas are well above the $42,189 median household income level and 21 percent growth in Los Angeles County. Figure 2 illustrates median household incomes in San Dimas by Census block group. The highest incomes are generally found in the newer single-family neighborhoods in the southwest area of San Dimas, as well as in the hillside areas north of Foothill Boulevard. More modest income households are located in the relatively older core of San Dimas west of San Dimas Avenue; these areas also contain a higher proportion of multi-family rental units.
2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
11-7
Housing Needs Assessment
Table 11-6 presents the distribution of household income in San Dimas by income category measured as a percentage of the County median. As illustrated by this table, the City has evidenced an overall 5 percent decrease in lower income households (below 80% AMI) during the decade, with a numerical decrease in nearly 350 households. In contrast, households earning moderate incomes and above (above 80% AMI) now comprise 79 percent of San Dimas households, having increased by nearly 1,500 households. This shift in the City's income distribution reflects both the accumulation of wealth as the City's young adults age in place, as well as more affluent households moving into the City.
Table 11-6
Household Income Levels 1990 - 2000
Income Level	1990		2000	
	Households	%	Households	%
Extremely Low <30% AMI	947	9%	703	6%
Very Low 31-50% AMI	817	7%	694	6%
Low 51-80% AMI	1,113	10%	1,131	9%
Moderate and Above >80% AMI	8,222	74%	9,701	79%
TOTAL	11,099	100%	12,229	100%
Source: http:socds.huduser.org/chas/reports
Income Level
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-8
Housing Needs Assessment
A	San Din	Figure 2. ias
J \	Res.	i
City of San Dimas
MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME, 1999
GLENO
MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME |	| $40,104-$45,999
|	| $46,000 - $57,999
□ $58,000 - $69,999 | $70,000 - $84,999 I $85,000 - $100,603
ARRf
COVINA
POMONA
Source: 2i
Income by Household Type and Tenure
Table 11-7 shows the income level of San Dimas residents by household tenure. As could be expected, a significantly higher percentage of lower income households (<80% AMI) were renters (35%) compared to lower income owners (15%). However, because the majority of households in San Dimas are homeowners (74%), the actual number of lower income homeowners (1,390) is greater than the number of lower income renters (1,138). The median income of renter households in 1999 was $39,699 compared to $70,497 for homeowners, further illustrating the discrepancy in income levels among the City's owner and renter populations. This is further reflected in the proportion of owners with moderate and above incomes (85%) compared to renters (65%).
Table 11-7
Income by Owner/Renter Tenure 2000
Income Level	Renters		Owners		Total %
Extremely Low <30% AMI	445	14%	258	3%	6%
Very Low 31-50% AMI	321	10%	373	4%	6%
Low 51-80% AMI	372	11%	759	8%	9%
Moderate and Above >80% AMI	2,103	65%	7,598	85%	79%
Total	3,241	100%	8,988	100%	100%
Source: SCAG Existing Housing Needs (HUD User WebPage)
As highlighted in Table 11-8, in addition to owner/renter tenure, income levels also vary by household type. Almost half of the elderly households in San Dimas (46%) have lower incomes, compared to 10 and 16 percent of large and small families respectively. The City's senior households are almost evenly split between renters and owners. The 27 percent of elderly households with extremely low and very low incomes (0-50% AMI) are particularly vulnerable to any increase in housing costs due to increases in apartment rents or mobile home park space rents.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-10
Housing Needs Assessment
Table 11-8
Income Level by Household Type
Income Level	Elderly	Small Family	Large Family	Other
Extremely Low <30% AMI	13%	3%	2%	8%
Very Low 31-50% AMI	14%	2%	6%	4%
Low 51-80% AMI	19%	5%	8%	10%
Moderate and Above >80% MFI	54%	90%	84%	79%
Total Households	2,727	6,123	1,551	1,828
Source: SCAC Existing Housing Needs (HUD User WebPage)|

2008-2014 Housing Element
u-11
Housing Needs Assessment
2.	Special Needs Populations
State law recognizes that certain households have more difficulty in finding decent and affordable housing due to special circumstances including, but not limited to the following: economic status, age, disability, household size and household type. Special needs populations in San Dimas include large households, the elderly, persons with disabilities, female-headed households, and the homeless. Table 11-9 summarizes the number of households or persons in each of these special needs groups in the City.
Table 11-9
Special Needs Populations 2000
Special Needs Groups	Persons	Households	Percent*
Large Households		1,571	13%
Renter		349	(22%)
Owner		1,222	(78%)
Seniors (65+)	4,159		12%
With a Disability	1,802		(43%)
Seniors Living Alone	1,146		(28%)
Senior Households		2,537	21%
Renter		775	(31%)
Owner		1,762	(69%)
Persons with Disability	6,497		19%
Female-Headed Households		4,098	34%
With Related Children		2,211	(54%)
Farmworkers**	27		<1%
TOTAL Persons/Households	34,980	12,163	
Source: U.S. Census 2000.
*	Numbers in () reflect the % of the special needs group and not the % of the total City population/households. For example, of the City's large households, 22% are renters and 78% are owners.
*	‘Persons employed in Farming, Forestry or Fishing Occupations
2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
11-12
Housing Needs Assessment
Large Households
Large households consist of five or more persons and are considered a special needs population due to the limited availability of affordable and adequately sized housing. The lack of large units is especially evident among rental units. Large renter households are vulnerable to overcrowding due to the shortage of adequately sized rentals, and insufficient income to afford 3+ bedroom rentals which typically consist of single-family homes.
In San Dimas, large households comprise 13 percent of total households. Of the City's approximately 1,571 large households, only 22 percent are renters. The 2000 Census documents 1,045 rental units and 6,857 owner units in San Dimas with 3 or more bedrooms, in general, the appropriate size for households with 5-6 members. Since San Dimas is home to only 349 large renter households and 1,222 large owner households, there is a more than adequate supply of both rental and ownership units to accommodate the City's large households.
Senior Households
Approximately 12 percent of San Dimas' population, or 4,159 residents, are 65 years of age or older. Close to half (43%) of these elderly residents have some type of disability, which may require some type of housing accommodation or assistance with housing maintenance. Approximately 21 percent of the City's households are headed by a senior, of which 1,762 (69%) own their homes. Of senior households, 46 percent are lower income (<80% AMI), and 11 percent have incomes which fall below the level of poverty. Figure 3 shows the percent of senior households in each census tract block group. Higher concentrations of senior households (20-40%) are generally found in neighborhoods adjacent to the older areas of the City. The small northeast area with the highest percentage of senior households in the City reflects includes a 137 unit senior only housing complex.
Of San Dimas' senior population, 1,146 or 28 percent live alone. Of those that live alone, 615 are owners and 531 are renters. To assist these seniors, the City offers a unique service, SHARES (Senior Housing Alternatives, Resources, Education, and Support), which matches older adults with others who are interested in sharing a living space. The senior may be either a home provider or a home seeker. In the last five years, 138 clients have participated in the shared housing program; while almost 3,500 seniors have received other types of assistance, referrals and/or case management.
The City also operates a Single Family Housing Rehabilitation Program that assists low and moderate income homeowners in making needed repairs. This program is available to assist senior homeowners who may not be able to maintain their homes or perform minor repairs. Furthermore, accessibility can be enhanced by the installation of grab bars and other assistance devices in the home.
San Dimas currently has fifteen residential care facilities for the elderly licensed by the State of California. Twelve of these facilities are in a small, group home setting, with six
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-13
Housing Needs Assessment
or fewer occupants, with three large facilities - Atria Rancho Park, Brighton Gardens of San Dimas and San Dimas Retirement Center - providing capacity for up to 740 seniors. These residential care facilities provide care, supervision and assistance with activities of daily living, such as bathing and grooming, and may also provide incidental medical services to persons 60 years of age and over.
In addition to housing, seniors have a variety of service needs including transportation, health care, and recreation. The San Dimas Senior Center offers a number of programs specifically designed for seniors and their needs. These programs include life-long learning opportunities in a field of choice, computer classes, fitness classes designed to assist seniors live independently, and health and nutrition classes. The Senior Center is able to provide a limited assessment of senior health throughout the year. In addition, the City's homeowner and renter assistance programs are located in the Senior Center. Other efforts to support the elderly in San Dimas include a Meals-on-Wheels program that prepares and delivers meals to homebound seniors; information about transportation services; a monthly senior newsletter; a senior help line; a listing of senior housing; and other essential referrals. The Senior Center serves as a central hub for many of these activities. The seniors using the services at the Center are increasingly frail. The San Dimas Senior Citizen Commission provides guidance and advice to City Council and staff regarding the on-going senior activities provided by the City.
Female-Headed Households
Female-headed households typically have a special need for such services as health care and childcare, among others. Single person female households are frequently elderly widows, whereas female-headed households with two or more members are frequently single mothers. Female-headed households, especially those with children, tend to have lower incomes, which limits their housing options and access to supportive services. The 2000 Census reports 4,098 female-headed households in San Dimas, comprising 34 percent of total households and the City's largest special needs group. Of these femaleheaded households, just over half (54%) have children and 10 percent have incomes below the poverty line. These households need assistance with housing subsidies, as well as accessible and affordable day care.
The City of San Dimas offers a variety of youth programs that can help supplement day care. Children and teens can participate in a range of activities including a drop-in teen center at the City's Swim and Racquet Center, various intramural sports leagues, arts and dance classes, day camps, and dances.
There is one group home for children in San Dimas, licensed through the State of California, providing care and supervision for up to six children.
2008-2014 Housing Element
II-14
Housing Needs Assessment
City of San Dimas
PERCENT SENIOR HOUSEHOLDS
San Dimas Res.
GLENDO
PERCENT SENIOR HOUSEHOLDS ]	None
| 10.1-9.9 |	10-19.9
QJ 20-39.9 ^■ 40-83.4
ARRC
Citywide: 21.0%
Source: 2i
	r	1		-L	r-		
		1111			111 r	B*.	
Persons with Disabilities
A disability is defined as a long lasting condition that impairs an individual's mobility, ability to work, or ability to care for themselves. Persons with disabilities include those with physical, mental, or emotional disabilities. Disabled persons have special housing needs because of their fixed income, shortage of affordable and accessible housing, and higher health costs associated with their disability.
An estimated 6,034 San Dimas residents, or 17 percent of the City's population, suffer from one or more disabilities. Approximately 28 percent of these disabled residents have an employment disability, while 16 percent have a physical disability and 15 percent have self-care limitations. Of the City's senior population, almost half (45%) suffer from a disability.
Efforts to support the disabled in San Dimas include a Meals-on-Wheels program that prepares and delivers meals to individuals who are temporarily or permanently disabled. The City's Housing Rehabilitation Program can provide assistance to low and moderate income disabled households for accessibility accommodations. The City also provides exercise classes and hosts an annual dance for persons with disabilities at the City's Community Center.
The living arrangements for persons with disabilities depends on the severity of the disability. Many persons live at home in an independent environment with the help of other family members. To maintain independent living, disabled persons may require assistance. This can include special housing design features for the physically disabled, income support for those who are unable to work, and in-home supportive services for persons with medical conditions. San Dimas has four licensed adult residential facilities providing housing for up to 24 disabled adults.
Farmworkers
Farmworkers are traditionally defined as persons whose primary incomes are earned through seasonal agricultural work. Farmworkers have special housing needs because they earn lower incomes than many other workers and move throughout the season from one harvest to the next. In many parts of southern California, agriculture production is an important contribution to local economies. The City of San Dimas has no agricultural land in active crop production, but does have approximately 78 acres zoned for agriculture that is used for grazing.
According to data compiled by SCAG, only 27 San Dimas residents are employed in the industries of farming, fishing or forestry, representing only 0.2 percent of the City's labor force. Therefore, given the extremely limited presence of farmworkers in the community, the City has no specialized housing programs targeted to this group beyond overall programs for housing affordability.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-16
Housing Needs Assessment
Homeless
The 2007 Greater Los Angeles Homeless Count, conducted by the Los Angeles Homeless Service Authority (LAHSA) included a count of homeless individuals and families housed overnight in shelters and institutions, as well as a street count of unsheltered homeless in a sampling of locations. In San Dimas, these actual count figures are most helpful, identifying 12 homeless people as living in shelters, 89 homeless living on the streets in the Puddingstone area, and 10 homeless in areas near the freeways.
According to interviews with the Sheriff's Department at the San Dimas Station, the homeless living on the streets in San Dimas are primarily single males aged 40-60 years, The number of homeless varies with the seasons, increasing in visibility during the summer months, and is a fairly transient population. The Sheriff's Department indicated that the homeless tend to encamp in open space throughout the City, particularly near the freeways. The Sheriff Department's policy is to leave these individuals alone unless they are creating a public nuisance, such as through public intoxication or urination. On occasion, individuals found panhandling near the freeway on- and off-ramps are given a warning that panhandling is illegal and asked to move on.
Services available to the homeless include a Food Bank in the City, which offers a limited number of overnight motel vouchers in addition to food. Many churches in the area also provide food and overnight vouchers. The Beta Center in Pomona offers rental and utility assistance in addition to food. The San Gabriel Valley Center, located in El Monte, services communities from Monterey Park to Pomona, providing street outreach, an access center (with case management, counseling, and other services), a 90-day emergency center, and short-term housing for victims of domestic violence. The West Covina Access Center also offers referrals, case management and other services to the homeless.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-17
Housing Needs Assessment
C.	Housing Stock Characteristics
This section identifies the characteristics of San Dimas' physical housing stock. This includes an analysis of housing growth trends, housing conditions, housing prices and rents, and housing affordability.
1. Housing Growth
Table II-10 displays housing production in San Dimas compared to neighboring cities and the County of Los Angeles. During the 1990's, San Dimas' housing stock grew by 9 percent, well above the 3 percent housing growth experienced Countywide. Only Claremont came close to the same housing growth at 7 percent. The neighboring cities of Glendora and La Verne experienced growth levels of only 2 percent.
The State Department of Finance documents the 2007 San Dimas housing stock at 12,609 units, reflecting a modest one percent increase since 2000.
Table 11-10
Regional Housing Growth Trends 1990-2007
Jurisdiction	1990	2000	2007	Percent Change	
				1990- 2000	2000- 2007
Claremont	10,831	11,559	12,063	7%	4%
Glendora	16,876	17,145	17,365	2%	1%
La Verne	11,113	11,286	11,364	2%	1%
San Dimas	11,479	12,503	12,609	9%	1%
L.A. County	3,163,343	3,270,909	3,382,356	3%	3%
Source: U.S. Census 1990 and 2000. Dept of Finance 2007 Population and Housing Estimates.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-18
Housing Needs Assessment
2. Housing Type and Tenure
Table 11-11 depicts the mix of housing types in San Dimas. Single-family homes remain the dominant housing type, comprising 77 percent of the housing stock. The proportion of single-family, multi-family, and mobile homes has remained the same since 1990. However, from 1990-2007, the number of single-family attached housing increased by over 500 units compared to single-family detached units which increased by over 300 units. San Dimas also has over 900 mobile homes located in 5 mobile home parks - 3 senior parks and 2 family parks.
Table 11-11
Housing Type 1990 - 2007
Unit Type	1990		2000		2007	
	Units	Percent	Units	Percent	Units	Percent
Single-Family (SF) Detached	7,252	63%	7,530	60%	7,591	60%
SF Attached	1,581	14%	2,114	17%	2,100	17%
Total SF	8,833	77%	9,644	77%	9,69/	77%
2 to 4 Units	310	3%	363	3%	357	3%
5 or more units	1,404	12%	1,629	13%	1,618	13%
Total Multi-Family	1,714	15%	1,992	16%	1,975	16%
Mobile Homes & Other	932	8%	949	8%	943	7%
Total Housing Units	11,479	100%	12,585	100%	12,609	100%
Vacancy Rate	4.63%	-	2.80%	-	2.71%	-
Source: U.S. Census 1990 and 2000. Depl of Finance 2007 Population and Housing Estimates.
Housing tenure refers to whether a housing unit is owned or rented. Tenure also influences residential mobility, with owner units generally seeing lower turnover rates than rental units. According to the 2000 Census, 74 percent of San Dimas households were homeowners, fairly comparable to the City's 1990 home ownership levels (76%). The proportion of owner-occupied households in San Dimas is significantly higher than the Countywide average of 48 percent.
Table 11-12 Housing Tenure
Occupied Housing Units	1990		2000	
	Units	Percent	Units	Percent
Renter	2,608	24%	3,196	26%
Owner	8,340	76%	8,967	74%
Total	10,948	100%	12,163	100%
Source: U.S. Census, 1990 and 2000.
As shown in Figure 4, the highest concentrations of renter households (>40%) reside in the central portions of San Dimas surrounding Bonita Avenue. These areas also correspond to the greatest number of multi-family buildings and the areas with more modest income households, as shown in Figure 2.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-19
Housing Needs Assessment
Figure 4.
City of San Dimas
PERCENT RENTER-OCCUPIED UNITS
San Dimas Res.
GLENDOI
PERCENT RENTER 1 None 10.1-14.9
[	115.0-24.9
■■25.0-39.9 ■ 40.0 - 73.8
Citywide: 26.5%
COVINA
Source: 2000
	~dlL	li-t (2zD	1
-1'	i assn coving n	U 111 t=zi n"j—		
_ IX			, F I
J?			
Vacancy Rate
The vacancy rate measures the overall housing availability in a community and is often a good indicator of how efficiently for-sale and rental housing units are meeting the current demand for housing. A vacancy rate of five percent for rental housing and two percent for ownership housing is generally considered healthy and suggests that there is a balance between the supply and demand of housing. A vacancy rate of less than five percent may indicate that households are having difficulty finding affordable housing, which can lead to overcrowding or overpayment. A low vacancy rate or a particularly 'tight' housing market may also lead to high competition for units, raising rental and housing prices.
According to the 2000 Census, the citywide residential vacancy rate in San Dimas was 2.8 percent, somewhat lower than the City's 1990 vacancy rate of 4.6 percent. Rental vacancies in 2000 were at 5.2 percent, and ownership vacancies were 1.8 percent. These vacancy levels are close to ideal levels, and indicate that the supply of housing in 2000 was sufficiently meeting demand and providing mobility. However, interviews with property management staff at several of the City's larger apartment complexes indicate a current vacancy rate of 2-4 percent. This is somewhat lower than the rental vacancy rate in 2000 and reflects the limited housing development since 2000.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-21
Housing Needs Assessment
3.
Housing Age and Condition
The age of a community's housing stock can provide an indicator of overall housing conditions. Typically, housing over 30 years in age is likely to have rehabilitation needs that may include new plumbing, roof repairs, foundation work, and other repairs. Table 11-13 displays the age of San Dimas' occupied housing stock by tenure. In 2000, 32 percent of the City's housing units were over 30 years old. During the next ten years, 34 percent will reach the 30 year benchmark (pre-1980). The aging of such a large portion of San Dimas' housing stock indicates a need for code enforcement, property maintenance and housing rehabilitation programs to stem potential housing deterioration.
In 2001, the City conducted a survey of both property and housing conditions in neighborhoods with concentrations of pre-1970 housing. The properties were generally in good to excellent condition with 10 percent in poor or deteriorated conditions. The survey of housing conditions indicated that 50 homes (16%) of the 314 homes in the survey areas needed minor repair; 60 homes (19%) were in need of moderate to substantial rehabilitation; while no homes were in a dilapidated state. This survey represents observations from the exterior only and does not reflect other conditions that are often present in older housing stock. For example, at 30 years, a home's original systems (plumbing, electrical, heating and air conditioning) are usually in need of replacement or substantial repair. As housing stock ages, more units will be in need of at least minor repair. Rehabilitation of existing housing is important to the City. The City's rehabilitation program is a way to assist lower income households maintain their residence. As the housing stock grows older the City may want to evaluate the program to determine if the loan limits are sufficient to address the need.
Table 11-13
Age of Housing Stock 2000
Year Structure Built	Renter Occupied Housing	Percent Renter	Owner Occupied Housing	Percent Owner	Total Percent
1990-2000	415	13%	743	8%	9%
1980-1989	859	27%	2,173	24%	25%
1970-1979	1119	35%	3,004	33%	34%
1960-1969	359	11%	1849	21%	18%
1950-1959	239	7%	710	8%	8%
1940-1949	117	4%	144	2%	2%
1939 or earlier	127	4%	375	4%	4%
Total	3,235	100%	8,998	100%	100%
Source: U.S. Census 2000.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-22
Housing Needs Assessment
4. Housing Costs and Affordability
The cost of housing is directly related to the extent of housing problems in a community. If housing costs are relatively high in comparison to household income, there will be a higher prevalence of overpayment and overcrowding. This section summarizes the cost and affordability of the housing stock to San Dimas residents.
Rental Housing Market
Regional Trends
Several factors contributed to a strong rental market in Los Angeles County during 2006.' The addition of over 45,000 new jobs to the County, combined with a slowdown in the for-sale market and tighter mortgage lending standards, stimulated the demand for rentals. The conversion of apartment buildings to condominium ownership in many submarkets, including Long Beach, Pasadena and intown Los Angeles, further reduced the supply of available rentals. Overall apartment occupancy in the County remained tight, at 97.3 percent.
The tightening supply of rentals led to continuing increases in rents during 2006, with effective apartment rents increasing an average of 5.6 percent County-wide, following a 7 percent increase in 2005. Average monthly rents for existing apartments in Los Angeles were $1,470 at the close of 2006, the fourth highest in the State behind San Francisco, San Jose and Orange County.
The forecast for the Los Angeles County apartment market is for continued high occupancy rates (over 97%) and rising rents over the next two years. Due to the tight supply of rentals and continued job growth, annual rent increases of 4.5-5.5 percent are expected.
San Dimas Rents
Rental information for San Dimas was obtained from internet rental listings on Craig's List, Westside Rentals, and Southland Rentals websites. In addition, rent surveys were conducted at some of the City's major apartment complexes: Villas at San Dimas Canyon (156 units); Villas at Bonita (102 units); and Waterstone San Dimas (280 units). Table 11-14 presents the results of the rent survey by unit type, including apartments, condominiums/townhomes, single-family homes, and individual rooms for rent.
A total of 64 apartment units were advertised for rent from August 22, 2007 through September 9, 2007, accounting for 70 percent of all available rentals. The majority of listings were two-bedroom units, commanding an average rent of $1,410. Over 70 percent of the apartment units advertised were located within the three complexes mentioned above.
’ 2007 Southern California Multifamily Market Report, Casden Forecast - USC Lusk Center for Real Estate.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-23
Housing Needs Assessment
The Waterstone San Dimas property (444 N. Amelia Avenue), built in 1977, was purchased by the current owners about 1.5 years ago. The new owners are renovating each unit as it is vacated. Many of the existing residents are moving to newly renovated units as they are available. According to interviews with property management staff, rent levels in this complex were previously below market and are now comparable to other similar complexes in San Dimas, La Verne and Covina, with the same high level of amenities offered. Due to the renovation occurring, occupancy levels are currently at 93-94 percent, but are anticipated to become closer to 95-97 percent. Both the Villas at San Dimas Canyon (325 S. San Dimas Canyon Road) and the Villas at Bonita (477 E. Bonita) were built in 1978, and both were purchased by the current owners 3 years ago. Property management staff indicate that approximately half of the residents are long-term with the other half short-term (6 months to 2 years). These two complexes have also undergone recent renovation, offer many amenities and have occupancy levels of 96-98 percent.
A limited number of townhomes and single-family home rentals supplement apartments in San Dimas, offering larger unit sizes for families. Three-bedroom townhomes rented for a median of $1,820, and three-bedroom single-family homes commanded median rents of $2,400. Other homes offered included two-bedroom to six-bedroom, with median rents ranging from $1,570 to $7,500.
There was one individual room advertised for rent within a single family home, providing a lower cost rental option, with a rent of $600. As previously discussed, the City administers the SHARES program (Senior Housing Alternatives, Resources, Education, and Support) which encourages and supports shared housing for senior home seekers and providers. Shared housing provides a lower cost rental option for singles, as well as allowing the homeowner to supplement their income, which is particularly useful for senior homeowners on fixed incomes.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-24
Housing Needs Assessment
Table 11-14
Survey of Vacant Rental Units: August -September 2007
Unit Type and Bedrooms	# Units Advertised	Rental Range	Average Rent
Apartments			
Studio	1	$1,090	$1,090
1	7	$1,050 - $1,325	$1,180
2	54	$1,150-$1,645	$1,410
3	2	$1,595-$1,800	$1,700
Condominium*	/Townhomes		
3	3	$1,795 -$1,855	$1,820
Single-Family Home			
2	3	$1,400-$1,900	$1,570
3	5	$1,595 -$3,3OO	$2,400
4 or more	3	$2,850 - $7,500	$5,950
Rooms for Rent			
1	1	$600	$600
Source: Craigslist.com; WestsideRentals.com; SouthlandRentals.com; Phone survey of selected San Dimas apartments
Homeownership Market
Regional Trends
Southern California is experiencing a significant decline in the volume of single-family home sales, placing downward pressure on home prices. Data Quick reports that sales have dropped to their lowest level since 1992 (August 2007). While the initial slow down in sales in 2006 was just coming off the frenzied pace of sales activity in 2004 and 2005 and had little impact on price, beginning in January 2007, Southern California prices had fallen about 2 percent below the prior year's levels. As of August 2007, sales prices were 3.5 percent below the prior year, with 71 percent of the Southland's zip codes showing price declines. Sales price declines are most pronounced in the lower end of the market, with prices in the upper half of the market flat or modestly increasing as potential sellers wait the market out. Slow sales, flat appreciation, and subprime lending activity have all contributed to significant increases in foreclosures, with the number of mortgage default notices in Southern California the highest in ten years.
San Dimas Housing Sales
Table II-15 compares single-family and condominium sales prices in San Dimas and nearby communities by zip code during August 2007. A total of 17 single-family homes were sold within the 91773 San Dimas zip code, commanding a median sales price of $536,000. The City's median home price increased by about 9 percent from the previous year, in contrast to the nearby cities of La Verne, Glendora, and Claremont, whose home values had either decreased or stayed relatively unchanged from the prior year. Home prices in San Dimas were slightly lower than many of the surrounding communities. Claremont and La Verne both had median home prices that exceeded
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-25
Housing Needs Assessment
$600,000. Only Glendora had home prices similar to San Dimas, ranging from $502,000 in zip code 91 740 to $575,000 in zip code 91 741.
Only two condominiums were sold in San Dimas in August 2007; in July, no condos were sold. The median condo sales price was $383,000; fairly comparable to the prior year. Condominium sales were also limited in the surrounding communities with prices in Claremont and Glendora above San Dimas, and prices in La Verne well below all the neighboring communities.
Table 11-15
Single-Family Homes and Condominium Sales August 2007 San Dimas and Nearby Communities
Community	Zip Code	# Homes Sold	Median Home Price	% Change from 8/06	# Condos Sold	Median Condo Price	% Change from 8/06
Claremont	91711	34	$615,000	1.8%	4	$445,000	-16.2%
Glendora	91740	14	$502,000	1.4%	1	$500,000	8.7%
	91741	31	$575,000	-3.4%	n/a	n/a	n/a
La Verne	91750	28	$600,000	-9.1%	4	$285,000	-0.7%
San Dimas	91773	17	$536,000	8.7%	2	$383,000	-0.6%
Los Angeles County	All	4,444	$599,000	9.1%	1,187	$428,000	4.3%
Source: DQNews - 2007 Los Angeles Times Zip Code Chart, http://www.dqnews.com
While the prior Table 11-15 provides an overview of the subregional housing sales market during the month of August 2007, the following Table 11-16 provides detailed information on all sales of existing and new single-family homes and condominiums within the San Dimas city limits from September 2006 - August 2007. A total of 312 single-family home sales were recorded during this period. Three and four-bedroom units were the most prevalent homes sold, characteristic of San Dimas' relatively newer housing stock of larger sized units. For example, the average unit size among the 108 four-bedroom units sold was 2,120 square feet, and the average year built was 1977. Single-family lot sizes average over 8,400 square feet. Median sales prices ranged from $419,000 (two-bedroom), to $689,000 (four-bedroom), and $741,000 (five-bedroom). The overall median home price in San Dimas was $566,000 for a 1,670 square foot home.
2008-2014 Housing Element
II-26
Housing Needs Assessment
Table 11-16
Home and Condominium Sales Prices September 2006 - August 2007
# Bdrms	Units Sold	Price Range	Median Price	Avg. Unit Size	Avg. Lot Size	Avg. Year Built
Single- Family Homes						
1	4	$400,000-$565,000	$488,000	1,003 sq. ft.	11,980 sq.ft.	1944
2	57	$276,000-$650,000	$419,000	1,150 sq.ft.	6,101 sq.ft.	1959
3	138	$300,000-$787,000	$528,000	1,519 sq.ft.	7,470 sq.ft.	1968
4	108	$360,000-$2,000,000	$689,000	2,123 sq.ft.	10,566 sq.ft.	1977
5	5	$480,000-$895,000	$741,000	2,629 sq.ft.	10,483 sq.ft.	1986
Total	312	$276,000-$2,000,000	$566,000	1,669 sq.ft.	8,406 sq.ft.	1970
Condominium Sales						
2	6	$305,000-$3 75,000	$341,000	1,030 sq.ft.	-	1980
3	4	$314,000-$390,000	$364,000	1,179 sq.ft.	-	1979
4	3	$420,000-5538,000	$489,000	1,885 sq.ft.	-	1993
Total	13	$305,000-$538,000	$436,000	1,274 sq. ft.	-	1983
Source: Dataquick On-Line Real Estate Database. Complied by Karen Warner Associates.
A total of only 13 condominiums were sold during this one year period, comprising less than 5 percent of all sales in the City. Median prices for condominiums ranged from $341,000 (two-bedroom), to $364,000 (three-bedroom) and $489,000 (four-bedroom). These two and three-bedroom units, built primarily in the late 1970's and early 1980's, continue to offer a relatively affordable homeownership option in San Dimas.
Housing Affordability
The affordability of housing in San Dimas can be assessed by comparing market rents and sales prices with the amount that households of different income levels can afford to pay for housing. Compared together, this information can reveal who can afford what size and type of housing as well as indicate the type of households that would most likely experience overcrowding or overpayment.
California Health and Safety Code2 defines affordable owner and rental housing costs as follows:
Affordable Ownership Housing Cost - moderate income
>	Housing costs consist of mortgage debt service, homeowner association dues, insurance, utility allowance and property taxes.
>	Affordable costs are up to 35% of the defined household income.
>	Affordable costs for moderate income households are based on standard of 110% of Area Median Income (AMI) for a household size equal to one more person than the number of bedrooms in the unit.
2 Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5 establishes affordable housing cost, and Section 50053 establishes affordable rents.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-27
Housing Needs Assessment
Affordable Renter Housing Cost
>	Housing costs include rent plus utilities paid for by the tenant.
>	Affordable costs are up to 30% of the defined household income.
>	Affordable rents are based on a standard of 50% of AMI for very low income households; 60% of AMI for low income households; and 110% of AMI for moderate income households for a household size equal to one person more than the number of bedrooms in the unit.
The HUD published 2007 Area Median Income (AMI) for a four-person household in Los Angeles County is $56,500.
Homeowner Affordability
Based on these definitions of income and affordable housing cost, Table 11-17 presents the maximum affordable purchase price for moderate income households (110% AMI), and compares this with market sales prices for single-family homes and condominiums in San Dimas as previously documented in Table 11-16. As illustrated in Table 11-17, median single-family home prices in San Dimas are beyond the level of affordability for moderate income households. For example, the maximum affordable purchase price for a moderate income four person household is $206,700 whereas the median priced three bedroom home in San Dimas is $528,000, an affordability gap of $321,300.
Escalation in sales prices over the past several years have placed even condominiums out of reach to households earning moderate incomes. As shown in Table 11-1 7, the maximum affordable purchase price for a three person moderate income household is $186,900, whereas the median priced two-bedroom condominium in San Dimas sells for $341,000, an affordability gap of $154,100.
Table 11-17
2007 Maximum Affordable Housing Cost (Moderate Income) Los Angeles County
Moderate Income Affordable Housing Cost	1 Bedroom (2 persons)	2 Bedroom (3 persons)	3 Bedroom (4 persons)	4 Bedroom (5 persons)
Household Income @ 110% Median	$49,720	$55,990	$62,150	$67,100
Income Towards Housing @ 35% Income	$17,400	$19,600	$21,750	$23,490
Maximum Monthly Housing Cost	$1,450	$1,633	$1,813	$1,957
Less Expenses:				
Utilities	$77	$90	$107	$131
Taxes (1.1% affordable hsg price)	$152	$171	$189	$202
Maintenance and Insurance	$225	$250	$275	$300
Monthly Income Available for Mortgage	$996	$1,122	$1,242	$1,324
Supportable Mortgage @ 6.5% interest	$157,600	$177,600	$196,400	$209,500
Homebuyer Downpayment (5%)	$8,300	$9,300	$10,300	$11,000
Maximum Affordable Purchase Price	$165,900	$186,900	$206,700	$220,500
San Dimas Median Single-Family Sales Price	$488,000	$419,000	$528,000	$689,000
San Dimas Median Condo Sales Price	NA	$341,000	$364,000	$489,000
Source: Karen Warner Associates; Keyser Marston Associates September 2007.
2008-2014 Housing Element
II-28
Housing Needs Assessment
Renter Affordability
Table 11-18 presents the maximum affordable rents for very low, low and moderate income households by household size, and compares with median apartment rents on vacant units in San Dimas, as documented in Table 11-14. As Table 11-18 indicates, Citywide median rents are well above the level of affordability for very low, low and even most moderate income households. The monthly affordability gap for a three person household ranges from $827 for very low income households, $699 for low income households, and $63 for moderate income households. Some of the least cost rentals advertised, however, ($1,050 1-bedroom and $1,150 2-bedroom apartments) are within a level generally affordable to the top end of the moderate income range.
Table 11-18
2007 Maximum Affordable Rents*
Los Angeles County
Income Level**	1 Bedroom (2 person)	2 Bedroom (3 person)	3 Bedroom (4 person)
Very Low Income	$523	$583	$642
Low Income	$636	$711	$784
Moderate Income	$1,201	$1,347	$1,490
San Dimas Median Rents	$1,180	$1,410	$1,700
‘Maximum rent reflects deduction of utility allowance per LAHA/Central LA utility schedule: $42 for 1 bdrms, $53 for 2 bdrms, and $63 for 3 bdrms.
“Income levels reflect the 2007 Official State Income Limits published by State HCD.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-29
Housing Needs Assessment
5.	Assisted Housing At-Risk of Conversion
State law requires the city to identify, analyze, and propose programs to preserve housing units that are currently restricted to low income housing use and that will become unrestricted and possibly be lost as low income housing. This section presents an inventory of all assisted rental housing in San Dimas, and evaluates those units at risk of conversion during the 2008-2018 planning period.
Assisted Housing Inventory
San Dimas' assisted rental housing is summarized in Table 11-19. Of the 300 deed-restricted affordable rental units, 229 (76%) are for seniors, while the remaining 71 are family units.
Table 11-19
Assisted Housing Inventory
Project Name	Tenant Type	Total Units	Affordable Units	Applicable Programs	Potential Conversion Date
Voorhis Village	Family	65	21 (Section 8)	236(j)(1)	9/30/2007 (Section 8) 5/1/2012 (Loan)
Villa San Dimas	Family	50	50	223(a)(7)/ 221(d)(3)M	12/10/2007 (Section 8) 6/1/2021 (Loan)
Monte Vista Place	Senior	12	12	RDA Set-Aside	2048
Sunnyside Apartments	Senior	164	33	Bond Refunding	2021
Charter Oak Mobile Home Estates	Senior	186	184	City Bond	(City purchased in 1998)
There are two federally assisted multi-family housing developments in San Dimas, Villa San Dimas and Voorhis Village. Villa San Dimas is 51 family units (including one manager's unit), of which 50 receive federal rental subsidies through the Section 8 program. Voorhis Village is 65 family units, of which 21 receive Section 8 subsidies. These project-based Section 8 rental subsidies are subject to annual renewals.
The City of San Dimas (San Dimas Housing Authority) owns Monte Vista Place, 12 senior rental units on the second floor of a mixed-use building in the Downtown.
In 2012, the owner of the commercial space has an option to purchase the City's ownership of the senior rental units. The affordability covenants would remain in place.
The Sunnyside senior apartment complex was built in 1984 using bond financing. The project was refinanced in 1996 with a $5.67 million bond. The current bond requires 33 units (20%) to be available for lower income households, while the remaining units can be rented at market rates.
2008-2014 Housing Element
II-30
Housing Needs Assessment
In addition, the City owns a mobile home park with 186 space for seniors, Charter Oak Mobile Home Estates. The City acquired the park in 1998 with an $8.5 million bond in order to maintain affordability for the seniors living there.
The City of San Dimas has also been proactive in working with the local mobile home parks. In 2000, the City entered into the first Mobile Home Accord with the five mobile home parks in the City. The Accord establishes maximum rents and annual rent increases for each of the five parks in the City. The Accord was renegotiated and approved for a second five year term from January 2005 through December 2010. The Accord has been positive for the City, the park owners and the park residents.
At-Risk Projects
This section evaluates those lower income rental projects in San Dimas at-risk of converting to market-rate uses prior to June 30, 2018. Of the five assisted rental housing projects in San Dimas, two are considered to be at-risk during this period - Villa San Dimas and Voorhis Village - due to the uncertainty of the annual renewals of project-based Section 8 rental assistance. In addition, Villa San Dimas' mortgage loan with HUD expires in May 2012.
Preservation and Replacement Options
Preservation or replacement of these two at-risk projects in San Dimas can be achieved in several ways: (1) transfer of ownership to non-profit organizations; (2) provision of rental assistance to tenants using other funding sources; (3) replacement or development of new assisted multi-family housing units; and/or (4) purchase of affordability covenants. These options are described below, along with a general cost estimate for each.
Option 1: Transfer of Ownership
Transferring ownership of the at-risk projects to non-profit organizations has several benefits: (1) affordability controls can be secured indefinitely, and (2) the project would be eligible for a range of governmental assistance. The feasibility of this option depends on several factors, including the willingness of the apartment owner to sell the project, the existence of non-profit corporations with sufficient administrative capacity to manage the project, and the availability of funding. Potential funding sources for acquisition include Federal tax credits, State mortgage revenue bonds, County administered funds, and local redevelopment funds.
Table 11-20 provides an economic evaluation of the market value of the two at-risk federally assisted family rental developments in San Dimas. Both properties contain a number of three- and four-bedroom units. Maintaining affordability of these larger units can help address the needs of larger families in San Dimas.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-31
Housing Needs Assessment
Table 11-20
Market Value of At-Risk Developments
Project Units	Villa San Dimas	Voorhis Village	— Total
1 bedroom	0	9	9
2 bedroom	16	22	38
3 bedroom	20	22	42
4 bedroom	15	12	27
Total Units	51	65	116
Annual Operating Cost	$440,000	$450,000	$890,000
Gross Annual Income	$990,000	$1,025,000	$2,015,000
Net Annual Income	$550,000	$575,000	$1,125,000
Est. Market Value	$8,450,000	$8,800,000	$17,250,000
Market value for each project based on the following assumptions:
1.	Market rents: 1-bd $1,180, 2-bd $1,410, 3-bd $1,700; 4-bd $2,000; 5% vacancy
2.	Average unit size: 1-bd 700 sq.ft., 2-bd 900 sq.ft., 3-bd 1,100 sq.ft.
3.	Annual operating expense = 35% gross income + 1.1% property taxes
4.	Market value based on 6.5% capitalization rate
Option 2: Rental Assistance
As mentioned previously, the two at-risk developments in San Dimas use Section 8 project-based contracts for rental assistance. Availability of funding at the federal level for Section 8 contract renewal is uncertain. Should Section 8 be terminated, the City could provide rent subsidies to maintain affordability at these projects. The feasibility of this alternative depends on the willingness of property owners to accept rental assistance. Nonprofit owners are most likely to be willing to accept other rent subsidies, while for-profit owners will compare the negotiated rents to market rents.
Table II-21 provides an analysis of the estimated cost of providing rent subsidies for all 115 units in the two developments (one manager's unit is excluded). The estimated subsidy required is approximately $985,000 annually. The cost of annual subsidies would continue to increase as market rents and operating costs increase. Though affordable rents will also increase based on the area median income, this rise trends at a lower rate than rents and operating costs, raising the annual subsidy required.
Table 11-21
Required Rent Subsidies for At-Risk Projects
# Bdrms #		Fair Market Rents	Hhld Size	Hhld Income (50% AMI)	Max. Afford Rent	Per Unit Subsidy	Total Monthly Subsidy	Total Annual Subsidy
	Units							
1 bdrm	9	$1,117	2 person	$29,600	$565	$552	$4,968	$59,616
2 bdrm	37	$1,395	3 person	$33,300	$636	$759	$28,083	$336,996
3 bdrm	42	$1,874	4 person	$3,700	$706	$1,168	$49,056	$588,672
4 bdrm	27	$2,256	5 person	$39,950	$763	$1,493	$40,311	$0
Total	115						$122,418	$985,284
2008-2014 Housing Element
II-32
Housing Needs Assessment
An alternative is to provide rental subsidies for only the 71 units (50 at Villa San Dimas and 21 at Voorhis Village) currently receiving HUD project-based Section 8 rental assistance. The estimated rent subsidies needed for only these 71 units is estimated at $600,000 annually.
Villa San Dimas
Option 3: Construction or Purchase of Replacement Units
The construction or purchase of replacement units is another option to replace at-risk units should they be converted to market rates. The cost of developing housing depends upon the density, size of the units, location, land costs, and type of construction. Based on apartment acquisitions in comparable communities, current acquisition costs for market rate apartment buildings in the area would be $250,000 -$300,000 per unit. Therefore, the estimated cost to purchase 115 replacement units for both Villa San Dimas and Voorhis Village is $29 to $35 million.
Option 4: Purchase of Affordability Covenants
Another option to preserve the affordability of at-risk projects is to provide an incentive package to the owners eligible to opt out of affordability control in order to maintain the projects as low-income housing. Incentives could include writing down the interest rate on the remaining loan balance, and/or supplementing the Section 8 subsidy received to market levels. The feasibility of this option depends on whether the units require rehabilitation or are too highly leveraged. By providing lump sum financial incentives, an on-going rent subsidy, or reduced mortgage interest rates, the City can ensure that some or all of the assisted units remain affordable. The cost of this option is dependent on the specific situation of the current project financing.
Comparison of Options
The cost effectiveness of the preservation/replacement options mentioned above favors the transfer of ownership ($17.25 million) over 20 years of rent subsidy ($19.7 million for all 115 units) or purchasing replacement units ($29-$35 million). However, if the City wanted to subsidize only the 71 units currently receiving project-based Section 8, the rent subsidy over a 20 year period would be approximately $12 million. Purchasing affordability covenants is most similar in cost to the rent subsidy option, and is therefore, likely to be more expensive than transferring ownership.
The cost of each option also needs to be weighed against the length of the affordability. For example, the ownership transfer or replacement units would have a 55 year term of affordability as a requirement of the funding sources used, while the rent subsidy term would only be 20 years.
2008-2014 Housing Element
II-33
Housing Needs Assessment
D.	Regional Housing Needs
State law requires all regional councils of governments, including the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) to determine the existing and projected housing need for its region and determine the portion allocated to each jurisdiction within the SCAG region. This is known as the "Regional Housing Needs Assessment" (RHNA) process.
1. Existing Housing Needs
Overcrowding
The Census defines overcrowding as an average of more than one person per room in a housing unit (excluding kitchens, porches, and hallways). The incidence of overcrowded housing is a general measure of whether there is an available supply of adequately sized housing units. Table II-22 shows the incidence of overcrowding in San Dimas by tenure, as measured by the 2000 Census.
Table 11-22
Overcrowded Households 2000
Overcrowding	Households	Percent	L.A. Co. %
Owners			
Overcrowding	353	4%	14%
Severe Overcrowding	187	2%	7%
Renters			
Overcrowding	229	7%	32%
Severe Overcrowding	140	4%	22%
Total Overcrowding	582	5%	23%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000.
Note: Severe overcrowding is a subset of overcrowding.
In 2000, there were 582 households living in overcrowded conditions in San Dimas, representing 5 percent of all households. Overcrowding was significantly less prevalent in San Dimas than in the County of Los Angeles as a whole where overcrowding impacts 23 percent of households. Renter households in the City were more likely to experience overcrowded living conditions than owner households, with 6 percent of renter households overcrowded and 4 percent severely overcrowded (greater than 1.5 persons per room). Since there are almost 8,000 housing units with 3 or more bedrooms, including over 1,000 rental units, and approximately 1,600 large families in San Dimas, there is adequate housing stock to meet the demands of households with 5 or more members.
Figure 5 illustrates the geographic areas of the City where severe renter household overcrowding was the greatest. The highest levels of renter overcrowding (10-15%) were located in the Puddingstone Reservoir area, north up to Bonita Avenue. These areas also correspond to a high proportion of renter households.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-34
Housing Needs Assessment
Figure 5
City of San Dimas
SEVERE RENTER
OVERCROWDING (1.51 PERSONS OR MORE PER ROOM)
GLEN
PERCENT OVERCROWDED | None
ZZ] 0.1-4.9 ■I 5.0-9.9 ^■10.0-15.4
Citywide: 4.3%
Source:


iif-ir.			
			
fii	tnl/		
Overpayment
Overpayment remains a critical issue for low and moderate-income households, who are disproportionately affected by this burden compared to other households. Affordability problems occur when housing costs become so high in relation to income that households have to pay an excessive proportion of their income for housing. Housing overpayment occurs when a household spends more than 30 percent of its income on housing; severe overpayment refers to spending greater than 50 percent of household income on housing. Table 11-23 shows the incidence of overpayment in San Dimas.
Table 11-23
Housing Overpayment
Overpayment	Households	Percent	L.A. Co. %
Owners			
Overpayment (>30% income on housing)	2,351	30%	35%
Severe Overpayment (>50% income on housing)	810	10%	14%
Renters			
Overpayment (>30% income on housing)	1,071	33%	46%
Severe Overpayment (>50% income on housing)	481	15%	23%
Total Overpayment	3,422	35%	41%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000.
Note: Severe overpayment is a subset of overpayment.
According to the 2000 Census, 2,351 homeowners (30% of all homeowners) in San Dimas were spending more than 30 percent of their total income on housing, slightly below overpayment rates Countywide. Of those overpaying homeowners, 6 percent were extremely low income, 10 percent were very low income and 17 percent were low income. While state and federal standards measure affordability at 30 percent of income, mortgage qualification is typically measured at 33-35% gross income, indicating modest levels of overpayment are common in today's market. Severe housing overpayment in which homeowners are spending greater than half their incomes on housing affects 10 percent of San Dimas homeowners, or 810 households, somewhat less than the Countywide average of 14 percent.
At 33 percent, renters in San Dimas faced a comparable level of overpayment to owners, although well below the Countywide average of 46 percent. Of the City's 1,071 overpaying renters, 23 percent were extremely low income, 19 percent were very low income, and 23 percent were moderate income. Severe overpayment impacted 15 percent of all renters, or 481 households, which while significant, still falls below the Countywide level of 23 percent.
2008-2014 Housing Element
II-36
Housing Needs Assessment
Figure 6 illustrates the geographic areas of the City where severe renter overpayment was greatest. The small area on the western edge of the City with the greatest percentage of renter overpayment contains close to 30 percent mobile home units, with older single family units comprising the balance of the housing stock. Two other areas with relatively high levels of severe overpayment (19-28%) correspond to relatively high concentrations of senior households and modest incomes.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-37
Housing Needs Assessment
Figure 6,
City of San Dimas
SEVERE RENTER OVERPAYMENT (50%+INCOME IN RENT)
San Dimas
Res.
PERCENT OVERPAYING
ARROW
COVINA
Citywide: 15.0%
Source:
	\y\ /f	Jgf ||i
— 1	
sifesfe ||Sy	\ z J lSefei* £
GLENDORA	E	rife>eL ..,,, 'B5a : -	- ■'•	c=a _ t -.		 ~+		Tiff-	_ 1
		. 1		
	u=i3		1 1^'	i Si
	enisi			
				
I	-
ill	I
	
Table 11-24 provides a more detailed overview of the households that experienced severe housing overpayment in San Dimas. Among renters, the elderly were most impacted by severe overpayment, with 22 percent or 182 households of the City's 829 total elderly renter households spending more than half of their income on rent. In terms of magnitude, 125 small family renter households or 9 percent of small family renter households faced severe overpayment. Regardless of the type of household, any renter spending more than half of their income on housing is considered at risk of homelessness.
Among homeowners, elderly and other households experienced comparable levels of severe overpayment (16%), with both small and large families experiencing similar levels (9% and 8% respectively). Owner households that are severely overpaying are most at-risk of foreclosure, particularly in the current environment of declining home values and rising interest rates.
Table 11-24
Severe Housing Overpayment by Type and Tenure
	Elderly	Small Family	Large Family	Other	Total
Renter Households					
Total # by household type	829	1,385	337	690	3,241
% with severe cost burden	22%	9%	19%	13%	14%
Owner Households					
Total # by household type	1,898	4,738	1,214	1,138	8,988
% with severe cost burden	16%	9%	8%	16%	11%
Source: HUD, CHAS DataBook, 2000.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-39
Housing Needs Assessment
2. Five-Year Projected Housing Growth Needs
California's Housing Element law requires that each city and county develop local housing programs to meet its "fair share" of existing and future housing needs for all income groups, as determined by the jurisdiction's Council of Governments. This "fair share" allocation concept seeks to ensure that each jurisdiction accepts responsibility for the housing needs of not only its resident population, but also for the jurisdiction's projected share of regional housing growth across all income categories. Regional growth needs are defined as the number of units that would have to be added in each jurisdiction to accommodate the forecasted number of households, as well as the number of units that would have to be added to compensate for anticipated demolitions and changes to achieve an "ideal" vacancy rate.
In the six-county southern California region, which includes San Dimas, the agency responsible for assigning these regional housing needs to each jurisdiction is the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG). The regional growth allocation process begins with the State Department of Finance's projection of Statewide housing demand for a five-year planning period, which is then apportioned by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) among each of the State's official regions.
SCAG has determined the projected housing need for its region for the 2008-2014 Housing Element cycle, and has allocated this housing need to each jurisdiction by income category. This is referred to as the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) process. The RHNA represents the minimum number of housing units each community is required to provide "adequate sites" for through zoning and is one of the primary threshold criteria necessary to achieve HCD approval of the Housing Element.
In allocating the region's future housing needs to jurisdictions, SCAG is required to take the following factors into consideration:
S Market demand for housing S Employment opportunities S Availability of suitable sites and public facilities S Commuting patterns S Type and tenure of housing S Loss of units in assisted housing developments S Over-concentration of lower income households S Geological and topographical constraints
As defined by the RHNA, San Dimas' new construction need for the 2008-2014 period been established at 625 new units, distributed among the four income categories as shown in Table II-25. The City will continue to provide sites for a mix of single-family, multi-family and mixed use housing, supported by a variety of programs to enhance affordability, to accommodate its RHNA target.
2008-2014 Housing Element
11-40
Housing Needs Assessment
Table 11-25
Regional Housing Needs Assessment 2008-2014
Income Level	Percent of MFI	Units	Percent
Very Low *	0-50%	162	25.9%
Low	51-80%	101	16.1%
Moderate	81-120%	107	17.2%
Above Moderate	120%+	255	40.8%
Total		625	100%
Source: http://SCAG.ca.Rov.gov/Housing/rhna.htm
Note: 2008-2014 RHNA includes any building permits issued since 1/2006.
* An estimated half of the City's very low income housing needs (81 units) are for extremely low income households.
2008-2014 Housing Element
II-41
Housing Needs Assessment﻿III. Housing Constraints
The provision of adequate and affordable housing can be constrained by a number of factors. This section assesses the various governmental, market, infrastructure and environmental factors that may serve as a potential constraint to housing development and improvement in San Dimas.
A.	Governmental Constraints
1.	Land Use Controls
The San Dimas General Plan provides the following residential land use categories:
Single Family Estate Very Low - Provides for single-family detached residential use in hillside areas. Maximum density is 1 dwelling unit per acre.
Single Family Very Low - Provides for single-family detached residential use. Maximum density is 3 dwelling units per acre.
Single Family Low - Provides for single-family detached residential use within neighborhoods. This is most prevalent residential use in the City. Maximum density is 6 dwelling units per acre.
Residential Low/Medium - Provides for single-family detached and attached dwelling units housing including cottages, patio homes, duplexes, townhomes, and garden apartments. Maximum density is 8 dwelling units per acre.
Residential Medium - Provides for multi-family residential uses, including two-story apartments, townhouses, and mobile homes at up to 12 dwelling units per acre.
Residential High - Provides opportunities for the most intensive form of residential development, including apartments and multi-story residential developments. Maximum density is 16 dwelling units per acre.
An additional special category of residential land use is that for Mobile Homes which encourages mobile homes to be sited in areas particularly suitable for planned and integrated mobile home parks. A major purpose of this category is to encourage the preservation of existing mobile home parks at their present density. Maximum density is 5 spaces per net acre.
2008-2014 Housing Element
111-1
Housing Constraints
The City's residential development zoning standards and parking standards are summarized in Table 111-1 and Table III-2.
Table 111-1
Residential Development Standards
Development Standard	S-F*	SF-H (Hillside)	SF-DR (Downtown)	MF	MF-D (Duplex)	Mobile Home Park
Minimum Parcel Size	7,500	7,500	7,000	7,500 (SF)/ none for MF (CUP required)	7,500	20 acres (Park)/4,640 (Lot)
Lot Width (ft.)	50	140	50		60	58' (Lot)
Cul de sac frontage	35	-	20 (flag lot)	-	20 (flag lot)	
Minimum Setbacks						
Front (ft.)	20	20/15 for swing-in driveways	20	15’ min/25' average	20'	20’ (Park)/ 10'(Lot)
Side (ft.)	5/12 at driveway	10	5'/10’	Adjacent to SF: 20' for 1 story; 35' for 2 stories. Adjacent to other use: 20'	7.5 per side or 5' and 10'	5’ (Park)/ 5' driveway side and 3' patio side
Street Side (ft.)	10	10	10	25'	10'	20' (Park)
Rear (ft.)	5	none except UBC	3	20'	25' (3' accessory structures)	5'/20' street (Park)/ 5' (Site)
Maximum Height (ft.)						
Dwellings	35' or 2 stories	35' or 2 stories	35' or 2 stories	30' or 2 stories (35' or 3 stories w/ CUP)	35' or 2 stories	
Accessory Structures	1 story					
Minimum Unit Size	1,050 for 7,500 lot; 1,400 for 10,000 lot	1,600	-	-		1,000 mobile home unit
Maximum FAR	-	-	-	-	-	
Min. Lot Area/Unit (sq. ft.) Density (du/acre)	7,500 5.8	based on formula 5.8	7,000 6.2	7,500 5.8	3,750 11.6	4,640 5
Max. % Lot Coverage	35	35	35	60	-	-
‘SF-Agriculture (SF-A) allows animals on parcels of 11,000 sq. ft. or greater
2008-2014 Housing Element
III-2
Housing Constraints
Table 111-2
Residential Parking Standards
Residential Land Use	Studio	1 Bedroom	2 bedrooms	3 bedrooms	4 bedrooms	5 bedrooms
Single Family	2 garage spaces	2 garage spaces	2 garage spaces	2 garage spaces	2 garage spaces	2 garage spaces
Second Unit (with SF only)	1 covered	1 covered	1 covered	1 covered; 1 uncovered	1 covered; 1 uncovered	1 covered; 1 uncovered
Duplex	2 garage spaces	2 garage spaces	2 garage spaces	2 garage spaces	2 garage spaces	2 garage spaces
Multi-Family (+.33 guest space/unit)	2 covered	2 covered	2 covered	2 covered; 1 uncovered	2 covered; 1 uncovered	2 covered; 1 uncovered
Senior	1 covered; 1 uncovered	1 covered; 1 uncovered	1 covered; 1 uncovered	1 covered; 1 uncovered	1 covered; 1 uncovered	1 covered; 1 uncovered
Mobile Homes (+.25 guest space/unit)	2	2	2	2	2	2
San Dimas has adopted several provisions in its Zoning Ordinance that facilitate a range of residential developments types and can lower the cost of developing housing:
Specific Plans: San Dimas has adopted a number of specific plans, primarily to manage the intense pressure for single-family development the City experienced during the 1980's. Specific plans have been utilized to ensure sensitive development of the City's hillside areas. The City has also used specific plans as a tool to provide tailored standards for townhouse developments on key parcels, and standards for senior housing adjacent to medical services. The use of specific plans has allowed the City to establish flexible standards for properties with unusual characteristics.
As discussed in the Housing Resources chapter which follows, the City will utilize specific plans as a tool for rezoning several identified areas to incorporate higher density multi-family development. These specific plans will entitle and require an established minimum acreage to be developed at 30 units per acre within the plan boundaries. Allowing the high density residential acreage to "float" increases development flexibility and site options, enhancing the overall viability of development. San Dimas has recently utilized this approach in the Specific Plan for Bonita Canyon Gateway, establishing a minimum number of units to be developed at 30 units per acre (48 units) and at a minimum of 16 units per acre (72 units). The City then establishes development standards within the Specific Plan to fully accommodate the required number of units and densities. For example, the standard two stories height limit within the city's residential districts has been modified within the Gateway Specific Plan to allow up to five stories for the 30 units per acre density and up to three stories for the remaining residential and mixed use. The City used a similar approach in the recently approved Grove Station project, allowing for modifications in height, parking, and setbacks to accommodate higher densities and a mix of unit types.
2008-2014 Housing Element
III-3
Housing Constraints
Development Standards for Senior Housing: San Dimas has adopted modified development standards for senior housing set forth in Chapter 18.151 of the City's Zoning Ordinance. These zoning standards are provided as an overlay zone in most multi-family zones, including the specific plan areas. Standards that have been modified in the overlay zone include reduced setbacks, reduced unit sizes, reduced parking, and higher densities.
Development Standards for Residential Planned Development: In the 1970s, San Dimas adopted an overlay zone for single family areas to allow for clustered developments on larger sites. The base single family zoning standards still apply to the developments.
Parking Standards for Creative Growth Zone Area 3: San Dimas adopted modified parking standards for residential developments in this zone. The modified standards require the same number of parking spaces, but allow some reduced sizes for multiple family developments with congregate garage spaces, and up to 20% of the spaces to be tandem parking.
2008-2014 Housing Element
111-4
Housing Constraints
2.	Provision for a Variety of Housing Types
Housing Element law specifies that jurisdictions must identify adequate sites to be made available though appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the development of various types of housing for all economic segments of the population, including multi-family rental housing, manufactured housing, mobile homes, emergency shelters, and transitional housing. Table 111-3 summarizes the housing types permitted in each of San Dimas' single and multi-family residential zone districts, as well as the Public/Semi-Public zone (PS).
Table 111-3
Housing Types by Zoning District
Housing Types Permitted	Zoning District					
	S-F	SF-H	SF-DR	MF	MF-D	PS
Single-Family	P	P	P	P	P	
Multiple-Family						
2 units				PC	P	
3 - 4 units				PC		
5 - 9 units				PC		
10 or more units				PC		
Senior Citizen Housing Development				PC		
Manufactured Housing	P			p	P	
Second Units	P	P	P	p	P	
Care Facilities (6 or fewer persons)	P	P	P	p	P	
Care Facilities (7 or more persons)	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	
Transitional Housing						PC
Emergency Shelters						PC
Farmworker Housing	N/A					
P = Permitted Use PC = Planning Commission review subject to CUP
2008-2014 Housing Element
III-5
Housing Constraints
Second Units
The passage of AB 1866 (effective July 2003) requires local governments to use a ministerial process for second unit applications for the purpose of facilitating production of affordable housing. AB 1866 does allow cities to impose development standards on second units addressing issues such as building size, parking, height, setbacks, and lot coverage. In 1993, San Dimas adopted its first ordinance allowing second units. Since then, the City has made several amendments to the ordinance and currently allows second units by right on single and multi-family zoned properties improved with a single family dwelling with a minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet. The maximum size of the second unit is 500 square feet if attached to the single family dwelling; 600 square feet on properties sized 10,000-20,000 square feet; 700 square feet on properties sized 20,001 square feet to one acre; and 850 square feet on properties over one acre in size. Second units shall not exceed two bedrooms. One additional off-street covered parking space is required for the second unit, with an additional uncovered parking space required for the second bedroom.
Community Care Facilities
Pursuant to State law, local zoning ordinances are required to classify the use of property for the care of six or fewer disabled persons as a residential use that is to be permitted in all residential zones. Due to the unique characteristics of larger (more than six persons) community care facilities, most jurisdictions require a Use Permit to ensure neighborhood compatibility in the siting of these facilities.
The San Dimas Zoning Code Chapter 18.186 identifies "Home Care Facilities" as alcoholism or drug abuse recovery facilities; community care facilities; or family day care established within a residential dwelling. All home care facilities serving 6 or fewer residents are allowed by right in residential zones as required by State law. Home Care Facilities serving 7 or more residents are conditionally permitted in all residential zones.
Review of the California Community Care Licensing Division inventory of community care facilities identifies four adult residential facilities (age 18-59) in San Dimas, providing capacity for 24 adults requiring assistance with daily living. A licensed group home for children provides care and supervision for up to six children. The City also has 15 residential care homes for the elderly, providing 740 beds for seniors age 60+ requiring 24 hour assisted living. Twelve of these facilities are smaller group homes providing capacity for 72 seniors.
Manufactured Housing
The San Dimas Zoning Code permits manufactured housing by right in the S-F, MF and MF-D districts. The manufactured housing must be on a permanent foundation and meet all the single-family housing development standards.
2008-2014 Housing Element
III-6
housing Constraints
Accessibility Accommodations
Both the federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act impose an affirmative duty on local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e. modifications or exceptions) in their zoning and other land use regulations when such accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. For example, it may be a reasonable accommodation to allow covered ramps in the setbacks of properties that have already been developed to accommodate residents with mobility impairments.
In 2004, the City adopted Ordinance No. 1146 (Chapter 1.30 of the San Dimas Municipal Code) relating to reasonable accommodations. The ordinance codifies the City's practice of providing accommodations when persons with special needs have applied for exceptions from stated requirements of local regulations and practices. The ordinance establishes a clear and defined process for such individuals to make requests for reasonable accommodation in regard to the rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City.
The process for a zoning related reasonable accommodation starts with an application requesting a specific zoning accommodation. The Director of Community Development reviews the application, investigates the situation and makes a recommendation to the Development Plan Review Board (DPRB) within 30 days of the application. The DPRB reviews all pertinent information and may approve, approve with conditions, offer an alternate accommodation, or deny the request. The DPRB's decision can be appealed to City Council.
Accommodations are granted based on the following findings that must be incorporated in the record:
1.	Whether the request is reasonable and necessary to afford the applicant with an equal opportunity to access publicly funding buildings, facilities and program, or privately funded housing, on an equal basis with citizens who are not disabled;
2.	Whether there are preferable and feasible alternatives that may provide an equivalent level of benefit;
3.	The physical attributes of and any proposed changes to property and structures;
4.	Whether the request will impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city;
5.	Whether the request will require a fundamental alteration of the city's rules, policies, practices or procedures;
6.	If a zoning-related issue, whether the request would result in a detriment of the residential character of that neighborhood; and
7.	Any other factor(s) that may have a bearing on the request.
2008-2014 Housing Element
III-7
Housing Constraints
Emergency Shelters, Transitional Housing and Supportive Housing
An emergency shelter is a facility that provides shelter to homeless on a limited shortterm basis. Transitional housing is temporary housing (often six months to two years) for a homeless individual or family who is transitioning to permanent housing. Transitional housing often includes a supportive services component to allow individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of independent living. Supportive housing is generally defined as permanent, affordable housing with on-site services that help residents transition into stable, more productive lives. Services may include childcare, after-school tutoring, or career counseling.
The San Dimas Zoning Code does not currently include a definition of emergency shelters, transitional housing, or supportive housing. However, both emergency shelters and transitional housing are listed as conditionally permitted uses in the Public/Semi-Public zone. Due to the unique nature of these uses, the CUP process is utilized to enhance the compatibility of these uses with the surrounding neighborhood, and ensure proper licensing of the facility. Supportive housing is regulated as a multiple family residential use, subject to a Conditional Use Permit, provided the supportive services are ancillary to the primary residential use.
Pursuant to recent changes in State law (SB 2), jurisdictions with an unmet need for emergency shelters are now required to identify a zone(s) where emergency shelter will be allowed as a permitted use without a conditional use permit or other discretionary permit. The identified zone must have sufficient capacity to accommodate the shelter need, and, at a minimum, provide capacity for at least one year-round shelter. Permit processing, development and management standards for emergency shelters must be objective and facilitate the development of, or conversion to, emergency shelters. SB 2 also requires jurisdictions to regulate transitional and supportive housing as a residential use subject only to those restrictions that apply to residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
San Dimas has conducted a review of its zoning districts and has determined the Public/Semi-Public (P/SP) zone is most conducive to provision of an emergency homeless shelter. The zone allows joint use and joint development opportunities between public, semipublic and private uses that are needed for the growth and general welfare of the city as a whole. A review of potential sites with the P/SP zone identifies at least 5 parcels (of approximately 50 acres) that are underutilized, have areas that could accommodate new development, or have existing buildings that can be converted to an emergency shelter. The City has included a program within the Housing Element to modify the Zoning Ordinance to explicitly define and permit emergency shelters in the P/SP zone subject to the same development and management standards as other permitted uses in the zone. The program will also provide definitions for transitional housing and supportive housing and list these as conditionally permitted uses within the Multiple-Family Zone, consistent with regulations for multi-family development. The City's Conditional Use Permit requires findings that the proposed site and use is consistent with the General Plan and Zoning
2008-2014 Housing Element
III-8
Housing Constraints
Ordinance; along with specific considerations that the site can accommodate the use, is served by adequate streets and highways, and that the project design is compatible with the area as intended by the General Plan and Zoning Ordinances. The Conditional Use Permit is aimed to regulate the use, but not the users of the site, and will not place undue constraints on the provision of transitional and supportive housing.
For the development of emergency shelters, the City can establish standards to regulate the following:
■	Maximum number of beds/persons permitted to be served nightly;
■	Off-street parking based on demonstrated need;
■	Size and location of exterior and interior onsite waiting and client intake areas;
■	The provision of onsite management;
■	The proximity of other emergency shelters;
■	Length of stay;
■	Lighting;
■	Security during hours that the emergency shelter is in operation.
Single Room Occupancy (SRO)
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) residences are small, one room units occupied by a single individual, and may either have shared or private kitchen and bathroom facilities. SROs are usually rented on a monthly basis typically without rental deposit, and can provide an entry point into the housing market for extremely low income individuals, formerly homeless and disabled persons.
The San Dimas Zoning Code does not currently define single room occupancy (SRO) uses or specify parameters for the development of SRO residences. However, the Zoning Code currently accommodates development of SRO's in one of two ways. If the building provides units with both kitchen and bath facilities, but no bedroom, the building is considered a multiple family use. As with other multiple family uses, the building will require a Conditional Use Permit. If the building provides units with bath facilities but no bedroom or kitchen facility, the building is considered a "hotel". Hotels are defined as a building with six or more rooms intended to be used for sleeping purposes and include dormitories and fraternity or sorority houses. Hotels are allowed in the Commercial-Highway Zone with a Conditional Use Permit.
This Housing Element update includes a program to define single room occupancy (SRO) uses within the Zoning Code and allow SROs as a multiple family use, subject to a Conditional Use Permit.
Farmworker Housing
Only 27 San Dimas residents are employed in farming, fishing or forestry, representing less than 0.1 percent of the City's labor force. Given the extremely limited presence of farmworkers in the community, the City has not identified a need for specialized farmworker housing beyond overall programs for housing affordability.
2008-2014 Housing Element
111-9
Housing Constraints
3.	Site Improvements
Developers of single-family residential tracts in the City are required to install arterial and local streets: curbs, gutters, sidewalks; water lines: sewer; street lighting: and trees in the public right-of-way within and adjacent to a tract. These facilities are in most cases dedicated to the City or other agencies that are responsible for maintenance. There may be imposed as a condition of approval a requirement for public improvements installed by a developer to benefit adjacent properties by providing supplemental capacity, in which case the City enters into an agreement with the developer for reimbursement for provision of this excess capacity.
The City of San Dimas has adopted street improvement standards for both single-family and multi-family tracts that are typical for a suburban jurisdiction and for development of hillside areas. The standard public street widths, with vertical six inch curbs on both sides of the street, are:
■	60 feet with a paved area of 42 feet for neighborhood entrance, collector and local streets for residential uses;
■	54 feet with paved area specified in tentative map for loop, cul-de-sac, or local streets serving more than 24 lots having one-family or two-family uses; and
■	50 feet with paved area specified in tentative map for loop or local street serving 24 lots or less with one-family uses.
The City encourages the use of private streets or lanes within hillside developments. The standard widths for private streets are at least 12 feet when serving less than three residential lots; 16 feet when serving three to five lots; and 24 feet when serving six or more lots. Any street exceeding 100 feet in length is required to be at least 20 feet wide. The City also adopted Specific Plan No. 25 for the northern foothill area which requires curbs only where they are needed to prevent erosion, as determined by the planning director and the City Engineer. In this area, rolled curbs are the preferred road edge along paved roads.
4.	Development Fees
Building, zoning and site improvement fees can significantly add to the cost of construction, and have a negative effect on the production of low-income housing. The City views development processing as an essential City function; and, therefore, does not expect to recover all costs of development processing. The City has taken steps to set its average fees lower than other similar cities. Fees are shown in Table III-4.
2008-2014 Housing Element
111-10
Housing Constraints
Table 111-4
Residential Development Fees
Zoning	
General Plan Amendments	$363 Initial Review; Cost + $3,000 Deposit
Municipal Code Text Amendment	Cost + $3,000 Deposit
Zone Change	Cost + $3,000 Deposit
Specific Plan	Cost + $3,000 Deposit
Specific Plan Amendment	Cost + $3,000 Deposit
Conditional Use Permit	$1,038
Variance	$934
Precise Plan	$519
Minor Deviation	$182
Modification of SF Development Standards	$100
Tree Permit for:	
Existing Single Family	$0
Other Existing	$104
Development Project	$260
Annexation	Cost + $3,000 Deposit
Development Agreement	Cost + $3,000 Deposit
Subdivision	
Tentative Tract Map	$1,453 + $52/lot
Revision to Tentative Tract Map	$1,038 + $52/lot
Tentative Parcel Map	$1,298 + $21/lot
Revision to Parcel Map	$830 + $21/lot
Vesting Map	Cost + $3,000 Deposit
Lot Line Adjustment	$623
Lot Combination/Merger	$623
Certificate of Compliance	$415
Environmental	
Environmental Assessment	$208
Categorical Exemption (applicant requested filing)	$35 + County Filing Fees
Negative Declaration	$78 + County Filing Fees
EIR, Mitigation Monitoring	Actual Costs
Development Plan Review	
Exempt Development Plans	$0
Director's Review	$78
Review Board	
Single Family Residence (less than 2,500 sq.ft.)	$182
Single Family Residence (more than 2,500 sq.ft.)	$623
Multiple Family Residence	$ 156 + $21/unit
Plot Plan for Tract Maps	$78 + $21/lot
License & Permit Hearing Board	$363
Impact Fees	
School Impact Fee (paid to the school district)	$1.93/square foot
Sewer Connection Fee	$160/unit
Sewer Frontage Fee	$ 12/linear foot
Park Development Fee	$400/1 bdrm + $100/each additional bdrm; $ 150/trailer space
Quimby Fee (only for land subdivisions)	Varies based on appraised value per acre
Source: City of San Dimas Planning Department, 2007.
2008-2014 Housing Element
m-11
Housing Constraints
The Zoning, Subdivision, Environmental, Development Review and Impact fees for Phase I of the Grove Station project, currently under construction, are provided in Table 111-5. Phase I includes 38 residential condominium units, each with an average square footage of 1,000 square feet and a two car garage. The total development fees on this project run $553,328, translating to a per unit fee of $14,560. In comparison to the projected condominium sales price of approximately $300,000, development fees for Grove Station constitute only 5 percent of the unit sales price. Development fees for apartment projects are slightly lower than condominiums, with the cost of a Conditional Use Permit ($1,038) replacing the cost of the Zoning Amendments/Changes ($9,363) in this example.
Table 111-5
Summary of Development Fees - 38 unit Condominium Project
Type of Fee	Total Project Fee	Fee Per Unit
Permit/ Plan Check/ Inspection	$150,000	$3,947
Zoning Amendments/Changes	$9,363	$246
Tentative Tract Map	$3,429	$90
Development Plan Review	$1,830	$48
School Fee	$119,473	$3,144
Quimby (per State law)	$150,290	$3,955
Park Fee - Local Fee	$16,200	$426
Sewer Connection Fee	$52,744	$1,388
Utilities fees	$50,000	$1,316
	$553,328	$14,560/unit
The City's fees are not a development constraint. However, the City does allow Planning-related fees for projects with an affordability component to be reduced at the discretion of the Director of Development Services.
5.	Local Processing and Permit Procedures
The evaluation and review process required by City procedures contributes to the cost of development in that developer holding costs are incurred. This influences a developer's decision to build locally and can add to the unit's selling price.
The review process in San Dimas is governed by three primary levels of decision-making bodies: the Development Plan Review Board (DPRB); the Planning Commission (PC); and the City Council (CC). Subdivisions are also reviewed by the Subdivision Committee.
2008-2014 Housing Element
111-12
Housing Constraints
The purpose of the Development Plan Review Board (DPRB), as established in Chapter 18.12 of the San Dimas Zoning Ordinance, is to provide detailed site plan and architectural review of development proposals to ensure compliance with the General Plan and zoning ordinance. The DPRB is comprised of seven members: a City Council member; a Planning Commission member; the Director of Public Works; the City Manager; the Director of Development Services; the Chamber of Commerce president; and an appointed member of the general public. The DPRB reviews all new singlefamily, multi-family and mixed-use developments, and may act as either a final decision making body or as an advisory body to the City Council and the Planning Commission. Applicants have the option of submitting preliminary drawings to the Planning Division for informal review and comment prior to the preparation of working drawings, and initiation of the DPRB process.
Zoning Ordinance Section 18.12.060 provides the standard of review for any development plan. These standards address the site plan, overall design, architectural features, signage, and proposed lighting. The DPRB has the authority to impose conditions on a development plan to ensure conformance to the general plan, zoning code, specific plans, and applicable regulations of the Municipal Code. In approving or conditionally approving a development plan, the DPRB is required to make the following findings:
1.	The development of the site is suitable for the use or development intended;
2.	The development is arranged to avoid traffic congestion, ensure the public health, safety and general welfare, prevent adverse effects on neighboring property;
3.	The development is consistent with the General Plan and is in compliance with applicable provisions of the Zoning Code and other ordinances and regulations of the city.
The Subdivision Committee (SC) is comprised of the Director of the Development Services, the City Engineer, the Superintendent of Building and Public Safety, the Director of Parks and Recreation and any other persons necessary for consideration of a tentative tract map. The SC may review each preliminary map prior to the subdivider filing an application. Once the application is received for the tentative tract, the SC acts in an advisory capacity to the Planning Commission.
Table III-6 provides a synopsis of which decision-making bodies reviews each development type and an estimated timing of the review process. San Dimas provides concurrent reviews for developments requiring more than one review process. The City provides a concurrent SC and DPRB review for recommendation to the Planning Commission to coincide with the Planning Commission's review of the proposed tract map for a single family development. There is a 60-90 day processing time for all reviews after submittal of a complete application. For a multiple family rental project, the DPRB recommendation and the Conditional Use Permit (CUP) are prepared concurrently for Planning Commission review, with a processing time of 60 days after submittal of a complete application. If a multiple family development requires a tract
2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
111-13
Housing Constraints
map, the SC review is concurrent with the DPRB and the CUP process, but can add up to 30 more days for a total of 90 days. The City's processing and permit procedures are similar to other neighboring jurisdictions and are not a constraint to the development of housing.
The City's Conditional Use Permit requires the following findings:
1.	The site for the use is adequate to accommodate the use and all required features;
2.	The site relates to streets and highways adequate to carry the quantity and kind of traffic generated by the proposed use:
3.	The use will be arranged, designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be compatible and shall not change the essential character of the area intended in the general plan and zoning ordinances;
4.	The use provides for continued growth and orderly development and is consistent with the various elements and objectives of the general plan; and
5.	The use is in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act.
These findings focus on the site, use and relationship to the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance. The City's CUP process does not add significant uncertainty, time or cost to the development; and has not served as a constraint to the development process in San Dimas. Though the Conditional Use Permit requirement for multi-family housing does not add to the overall processing time due to concurrent processing, this Housing Element establishes a program for the City to review this requirement for multiple family projects incorporating units affordable to low and/or moderate income households, and to eliminate the CUP requirement as appropriate.
Table 111-6
Residential Development Review Process
Development Type	SC	DPRB	PC	CC	Timing (Bt)
Single Family (no tract map)		✓			45 days
Single Family (with tract map)	✓	✓	✓	✓	120 days
Multiple Family Rental		✓	✓		45 days
Multiple Family (with tract map)	✓	✓	✓	✓	120 days
Any Residential with General Plan Amendment or Zone Change		✓	✓	✓	180 days
The City of San Dimas has included a program within the Housing Element to establish a Mixed-Use and a Higher Density Residential zone (at 30 units per acre) to accommodate higher density residential and mixed use development in targeted areas of the City. The goal of these zones will be to encourage economically and
2008-2014 Housing Element
111-14
Housing Constraints
environmentally sustainable projects by creating an incentive to develop vacant and underutilized properties. The City will develop and implement specific plans as the zoning mechanism to rezone and entitle sites for higher density residential and mixed-use. Once the specific plans are adopted, proposed projects will only require review and approval from the Development Plan Review Board. This process typically takes 60 days to complete and does not require a public hearing. A Conditional Use Permit would not be required, and the project would not require a public hearing, unless a tract map is required, in which case the processing time is closer to 90 days.
6.	Building Code
In January 2008, the City adopted the new International Building Code (IBC), as required of all jurisdictions in California. The new IBC establishes construction standards necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare, and the local enforcement of this code does not unduly constrain development of housing. The new IBC brings California building codes into consistency with the rest of the country. It is expected that changes from the previous State Building Code will increase the costs of development.
San Dimas has adopted the following local amendments to the Building Code in order to protect the public health and safety from hazards indigenous to the City:
■	Due to potential fire hazards, in 1982, the City required all multi-family residential buildings in Fire Zone III to be reroofed with fire-retardant materials. These special standards are still applied to new development.
■	Due to the City's location in a special wind region, any reroofing of tile, clay or concrete interlocking tiles have additional application standards.
■	Due to potential seismic activity, the City has adopted specific standards for building diaphragms, reinforcement, footings, and chimneys.
■	The City has also adopted dampproof standards for foundation walls enclosing usable space below finished grade to prevent water damage.
2008-2014 Housing Element
111-15
Housing Constraints
B.	Market Constraints
1.	Availability of Financing
The availability of financing in a community depends on a number of factors, including the type of lending institutions active in the community, lending practices, rates and fees charged, laws and regulations governing financial institutions, and equal access to those institutions. Through analysis of Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data on the disposition of residential loan applications, an assessment can be made of the availability of residential financing within a community.
Table III-7 summarizes HMDA data for both San Dimas and Los Angeles County as a whole, providing information on the approval status of all home purchase, refinance and home improvement loan applications during 2006. Of the total of 904 applications for conventional home purchase loans in San Dimas, 65 percent were approved, 23 percent denied, and 12 percent withdrawn or incomplete. In comparison to the County-wide average, mortgage loan approval rates were slightly higher in San Dimas (65%), than the County (63%); tighter mortgage lending standards can be evidenced in the significant decline from the County's 67 percent loan approval rate in 2005. Approval rates for home refinance (61%) and home improvement loans (62%) were also higher in San Dimas than the County as a whole. Review of loan denials by census tract identifies census tract 4013.12 (west of the 57 freeway, south of Covina Blvd.) with denial rates for home purchase (28%) and refinance (24%) loans five percent above the citywide average. As for home improvement loans, census tracts 4013.02 and 4013.11 located in the southern and central areas of the City (refer to Figure 1) evidenced loan denial rates of 27-28 percent, compared to 23 percent Citywide. This data would indicate these areas could benefit from targeted outreach and marketing of the City's housing rehabilitation loan program.
2008-2014 Housing Element
111-16
Housing Constraints
Table 111-7
Status of Home Purchase Loans - 2006 San Dimas and Los Angeles County MSA
Loan Type	Loans Approved		Loans Denied		Loans Withdrawn/lncomplete	
	San Dimas	L.A. County	San Dimas	L.A. County	San Dimas	L.A. County
Home Mortgage # Applications	589		207		108	
% of Total Home Mortgages	65%	63%	23%	23%	12%	14%
Refinance # Applications	1,298		420		427	
% of Total Refinance	61%	57%	19%	23%	20%	20%
Home Improvement # Applications	236		90		56	
% of Total Home Improvement	62%	55%	23%	30%	15%	18%
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Data, 2006. Compiled by Karen Warner Associates. Note: Approved loans include: loans originated and applications approved but not accepted.
2.	Price of Land
The availability and price of land are potential constraints to the development of housing for all income levels. With the exception of hillsides, the City is nearly built out with few vacant lots remaining. Review of vacant residential land sales in San Dimas between January 2005 - June 2007 identifies fewer than ten transactions, summarized in Table 111-8. As shown in the table, most sales prices ranged from $275,000 - $800,000 per parcel, with each parcel able to accommodate only a single unit. One larger parcel, also able to accommodate only a single unit, sold for $1,250,000.
The most recent sale of a multi-family/mixed used property is for the Grove Station project site. The City's acquisition price in 2005 and 2006 was approximately $15 per square foot, translating to approximately $650,000 per acre.
In addition to raw land costs, site improvements contribute to the cost of land, as most remaining vacant parcels in the City have severe topographic constraints and necessitate significant grading to accommodate development. Infill parcels within the older, established areas of San Dimas and near the downtown don't face the same topographic constraints, can support higher densities, and are less costly to develop than the hillside areas.
2008-2014 Housing Element
111-17
Housing Constraints
Table 111-8
Vacant Residential Land Sales January 2005 - June 2007
Location	Zoning	Parcel Size (Acres)	Sale Amount	Price/ Acre
619 Fifth Street	SF-A	0.55	$407,500	$740,000
233 Rebecca	SF-H	0.95	$800,000	$840,000
1551 Calle Cristina	SF	2.21	$598,000	$270,000
2226 Kingsbridge Ct	SF-A	0.45	$335,000	$740,000
2244 Kingsbridge Ct	SF-A	0.42	$275,000	$ 655,000
1415 Manchester Rd	SF-A	0.41	$340,000	$830,000
APN 8386-005-050	SF-A	1.89	$1,250,000	$660,000
549 Puddingstone Dr.	SF-H	1.00	$350,000	$350,000
2269 Kingsbridge Ct	SF-A	0.37	$384,000	$1,040,000
Source: DataQuick Prospect Finder Farm Database.
3.	Cost of Construction
A major cost associated with the development of housing is the cost of building materials, which have risen dramatically in recent years. According to the U.S. Department of Labor, the overall cost of residential construction materials rose 22 percent between 2004-2006, with steel costs increasing 63 percent and the cost of cement increasing 27 percent. However, with the slow down in the real estate market, the price of construction materials is showing a decrease of 1-2 percent from last year. The 2 percent increase in overall construction costs experienced over the past year is primarily due to increased labor costs.'
Hard construction costs include building shell costs, on and off-site improvements, parking and all contractor costs.* 2 Construction costs for high density apartment development run around $150,000 per unit, including $10,000 per unit for structured parking. Hard construction costs for development of medium density (15 du/acre) condominiums over podium parking run approximately $200,000 per unit, including $35,000 per unit for the parking structure.
A reduction in amenities and the quality of building materials (above a minimum acceptability for health, safety, and adequate performance) can result in lower development costs. If the City moves forward with inclusionary housing in certain zones, the City could allow for affordable units to be smaller in size (maintaining the same number of bedrooms) and have different features and interior finishes than market rate units, provided all project units were comparable in construction quality and exterior design.
' www.dcd.com/pdf files/O 710trends.pdf
2 Contractor costs encompass the contractor's fee, general conditions, insurance and bonds, and construction contingency.
2008-2014 Housing Element
111-18
Housing Constraints
C.	Environmental and Infrastructure Constraints
Both the environment and infrastructure need to be considered when evaluating constraints for the housing development. San Dimas' environmental constraints are general in nature and similar to many other southern California communities: hillsides; potential fire danger; seismic activity; and high winds. The City has addressed these concerns through the adoption of specific development standards in the zoning code and/or amendments to the building code.
The City is dedicated to the process of planning for its share of regional population growth. This planning process must be done in a thoughtful and insightful manner with the main focus being good land use planning that ensures future sustainability. Good land use planning includes the consideration of local as well as regional and statewide issues for years beyond the short planning period for the Housing Element. Therefore, the availability of required infrastructure is a high priority for San Dimas.
1.	Local Public Services and Facilities
Incorporated in 1960, San Dimas is a young community with relatively new utility infrastructure and public service capacity not yet in need of repair or replacement. The City has more than adequate infrastructure capacity to accommodate its regional growth needs for 625 additional residential units during the 2008-2014 Housing Element planning period. New development will tie into existing water and sewer mains. However, most hillside sites will require the extension of water, sewer, and other utilities, or approval of on-site septic systems.
2.	Regional and State Public Services and Facilities
In addition to housing needs issues, a responsible governmental agency must address other critical regional issues such as transportation, water quality and water availability. San Dimas is particularly concerned about the availability of water and other utilities when considering increasing residential density. Currently, California is experiencing a water crisis as a result of: global warming; extended drought; the condition of infrastructure for water storage and transport; and environmental impact issues in the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta and the Colorado River. To help guarantee a sustainable future, it is incumbent upon both the State and regional water agencies to ensure the adequate provision of affordable water consistent with the proposed future growth for the Southern California region. Again, this is of utmost importance to the City of San Dimas as the ability to sustain local growth is dependent upon the availability of these public services.
2008-2014 Housing Element
111-19
Housing Constraints
,ei« or

IV. Housing Resources
California
A
This chapter describes and analyzes resources available for the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing in the City of San Dimas. The first section begins with an overview of the availability of residential sites for future housing development and the adequacy of these sites to address the City's identified share of future housing needs. The following section presents financial resources available to support in the provision of affordable housing in the community. The next section presents administrative resources available to assist in implementing the City's housing programs. The final section is an overview of energy conservation and green building resources available to the City and its residents.
A.	Availability of Sites for Housing
SCAG has determined the projected housing need for its region for the 2008-2014 Housing Element cycle, and has allocated this housing need to each jurisdiction by income category. This Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) represents the minimum number of housing units each community is required to plan for by providing "adequate sites" through the general plan and zoning. An important component of the Housing Element is the identification of adequate sites for future housing development, and evaluation of the adequacy of these sites in fulfilling the City's share of regional housing needs (RHNA). San Dimas has a RHNA allocation of 625 units distributed among the following income groups: 162 very low income; 101 low income; 107 moderate income; and 255 above moderate income units.
The City plans to fulfill its share of regional housing needs using a combination of the methods below, which are further described in the following narrative:
>	Vacant sites currently zoned for residential development;
>	Underutilized sites zoned for residential uses (built to a lesser density than allowed by Code or developed with a non-residential use);
>	Existing assisted units that will be units preserved at affordable housing costs with the City's committed assistance; and
>	Residential permits issued during the RHNA "gap period" (January 2006-July 2007).
In aggregate, the City's residential sites capacity from the above sources provides for 444 additional units, including 40 lower, 30 moderate and 335 above moderate income. Because this represents a shortfall in sites necessary to fulfill San Dimas' lower and moderate income housing needs, the City is committing to a rezoning program as provided for under Housing Element statutes,' detailed within this section.
’ AB 2348 amended Government Code sections 65583(c)(1)(A) and (B) to clarify requirements for a rezoning program within the Housing Element to address a shortfall in sites for very low and low income households.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-1
Housing Resources
1.	Vacant and Underutilized Land
The City has conducted a comprehensive review of all vacant and underutilized sites currently designated for residential and mixed-use development in San Dimas. Table IV-1 provides a summary of the realistic development potential on these sites by General Plan/Zoning category; a parcel-specific sites inventory is included in Appendix A to the Element. The location of these sites is mapped in Figure 7.
Table IV-1
Developable Available Residential Sites
General Plan Category	Zoning	Permitted Density	Vacant Acres	Underutilized Acres	Potential Dwelling Units
Single Family -Very Low Estate	SF-H	1 du/acre	2,542.6	-	103 units
Single Family -Very Low	SFA; SP3,4,5,8,11,12	3 du/acre	43.2	4	43 units
Single Family - Low	SF	6 du/acre	45.1	3.7	78 units
High Density Residential	MF	16 du/acre	-	2.3	36 units
Downtown Mixed-Use	CG-3	16 du/acre	1.8	-	20 units
TOTAL			2,649	10	280 units
Source: City of San Dimas Vacant Land Survey, July 2007.
As shown in Table IV-1, the vast majority of the City's vacant acreage falls within the Single Family - Very Low Estate category. This acreage is comprised of large, sloping sites in the northern hillsides and will accommodate from 1 unit per 40 acres to 1 unit per acre, depending on the steepness of the slope. Sites designated Single Family - Very Low are also located in the City's hillsides, but in areas with significantly lesser slopes. Most of these sites will accommodate 1-3 units per acre. Within the Single Family - Low category, several subdivisions have already received entitlements, accommodating at least 61 units.
The remaining categories summarized in Table IV-1, High Density Residential and Downtown Mixed-Use, are comprised of relatively flat sites which can readily accommodate densities of 16 units per acre. The High Density sites consist of several smaller contiguous parcels, and are currently underutilized with primarily older singlefamily residential uses. These parcels are located in within a Redevelopment Project Area, enabling the Agency to assist in consolidating the parcels into a single, 2.3 acre site. The 1.8 acres of Downtown Mixed-Use consists of a single, vacant parcel, located adjacent to the 110 unit Grove Station project, currently under construction at a density of 22 units per acre on 5 acres.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-2
Housing Resources
In total, 280 units can be accommodated on sites currently designated for residential or mixed use. Of these sites, the High Density Residential and Downtown Mixed-Use sites provide densities appropriate to support moderate income development, whereas the remaining single-family sites support housing for above-moderate income households. As documented in the Housing Needs Assessment, median rents for one and two bedroom units are within the affordable range for a moderate income household. Since the City's very low and low income RHNA need (at the required "default density" of 30 units per acre) cannot be accommodated within the City's currently designated residential sites, as part of the Housing Element update, San Dimas has identified additional properties suitable for rezoning.
2.	Sites for Rezoning
Pursuant to AB 2348, a rezoning program to provide adequate sites to address a RHNA shortfall must adhere to the following parameters:
>	Sites must be rezoned to accommodate 100% of the RHNA shortfall for very low and low income units;
>	Rezoned sites for lower income households must accommodate residential uses "by right";
>	Rezoned sites must be able to accommodate a minimum of 16 units; and
>	At least 50 percent of sites rezoned to address the lower income housing shortfall need to be accommodated on sites designated for exclusively residential use.
The following describes San Dimas' rezoning program structured to fulfill the parameters of AB 2348 and address the City's shortfall of 223 lower income and 38 moderate income units.
When evaluating the adequacy of sites to address the affordability targets established by the RHNA, Housing Element statutes now provide for the use of "default densities" to assess affordability. Based on its population and location within Los Angeles County, San Dimas falls within the default density of 30 units per acre for providing sites affordable to very low and low income households. This default density is significantly greater than the City's current High Density and Downtown Mixed-Use land use categories of 16 units per acre. However, San Dimas is committed to addressing the affordable housing needs of the community, and has reviewed sites that might accommodate the default density of 30 units per acre through a rezoning effort. The City also reviewed sites to accommodate development of moderate income housing at the High Density land use of 16 units per acre. The final sites for rezoning were selected based on several factors: current land use; feasibility of higher density residential development; proximity to compatible uses; community context; and location within a Redevelopment Project Area.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-4
Housing Resources
Table IV-2 provides a summary of the sites to be redesignated at 30 units per acre to accommodate the City's lower income RHNA targets. These sites encompass 27.6 acres, of which at least 7.4 will be designated for exclusively residential use. Also noted in the table is one site which has been rezoned to accommodate moderate income RHNA targets at a minimum of 16 units per acre. All sites are located within Redevelopment Project Areas, providing opportunities for the City and its Redevelopment Agency to assist in site assembly and encourage development of units affordable to lower and moderate income households through mandatory on-site inclusionary requirements2, financial assistance, and other negotiated incentives. Figure 8 depicts the general location of sites to be rezoned, with a detailed description of site characteristics and realistic development potential provided in Appendix A.
The City will use specific plans as the tool for "rezoning," creating an entitlement within each plan area for a required number of acres to be designated for exclusively residential at 30 units per acre. The City recently approved a Specific Plan for the first site, Bonita Canyon Gateway, and has also begun the planning process for a Specific Plan for the greater Downtown area.
Each Specific Plan will incorporate multi-family development standards appropriate to support 30 units per acre densities, and will eliminate the need for a separate Conditional Use Permit. The City anticipates that development standards such as height, parking and setbacks, will need to be changed to accommodate the density of 30 units per acre. The City's recent experience with the Grove Station project included increasing the maximum height (allowing a three story and a five story building), revising parking standards (allowing tandem parking), and modifying setbacks to accommodate a variety of housing types (live/work units, at-grade townhouses, flats, podium townhouses, and lofts) at an overall density of 22 units per acre.
The first site, Bonita Canyon Gateway, on the northwest corner of Bonita Avenue and San Dimas Canyon Road is an 8.5 acre vacant shopping center that was zoned Neighborhood Commercial. On May 27, 2008 the City rezoned the site to Specific Plan No. 26. The Specific Plan designates one separate lot of 1.6 acres as exclusively residential at a density of 30 units per acre, requiring 48 units. The specific plan also permits an additional 72 units as part of a mixed-use development encompassing 3.3 acres, a density of approximately 21 units per acre. The Redevelopment Agency is in discussions with the developer regarding the mix of affordability for the project.
The second site, the Bonita School District Office property totaling 7.43 acres, is located on the northwest corner of San Dimas Avenue and Allen Avenue adjacent to the 210 freeway. The site houses the District's offices, bus yard and kitchen, as well as other educational system uses. The proposed rezoning to Mixed-Use with a Multiple-Family zoned residential portion at 30 units per acre will allow flexibility for the City and property owner to analyze the best location for 2.5 acres of exclusively residential use.
2 In exchange for the increase in economic value gained from the rezoning, the Housing Element establishes a program action to evaluate increasing the inclusionary requirement from 15 to 20 percent.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-5
Housing Resources
The Specific Plan for the site will include a requirement that a minimum of 2.5 acres of the property be used for residential use at 30 units per acre, yielding 75 units. The remaining portion of the site would accommodate a mixed-use project with lower density residential, commercial, office or public/semi-public uses. The School District is interested in rezoning the site and has had preliminary discussions with the City. The City will initiate and prepare the specific plan.
The third set of sites total 11.69 acres and are comprised of the properties east of the Grove Station project, west of Walnut Avenue, north of Arrow I lighway, and south of the railroad. Many of these properties are underutilized and all are currently zoned for industrial use. The proposed rezoning to Mixed-Use with a Multiple-Family zoned residential portion at 30 units per acre would provide flexibility for the City and property owners to analyze the best location for 3.3 acres of residential use. The implementation process will include a requirement that a minimum of 3.3 acres of the property be used for exclusively residential use at the default density of 30 units per acre. This area has been designated by the City Council as a possible location for a Gold Line station, making this area ideally suited to transit oriented development, and yielding 100 units on 3.3 acres of Multiple-Family designated property. Of the eight parcels, most are close to an acre in size or larger, with just one '/2 acre site. As a means of encouraging consolidation of smaller parcels, the Downtown Specific Plan will require a minimum one acre lot size within this area to achieve maximum 30 unit per acre densities. The Redevelopment Agency will also assist with parcel assembly to facilitate the revitalization of this underutilized area.
In addition to rezoning three sites to accommodate residential development at 30 units per acre, the City has rezoned one additional site at a minimum density of 16 units per acre. This site is included in the recently adopted Bonita Canyon Gateway Specific Plan No. 26. The Plan provides zoning accommodating up to 72 units (a density of 21 units per acre). This site is also reflected in Table IV-2. These units will be used to address the remaining 38 units of the City's moderate income housing growth needs.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-6
Housing Resources
SITES FOR REZONING
Figure 8
S' .-ilk
5 <	£
til.
O. *
i"-'
School District 2.5 acres
Bonita Canyon Gateway 1.6 acres
»1
“-1 *"
. Car
E Arrow Hw.y
East of Grove Station 3.3 acres
*
50 p Rose Ct
WTerr^ebr » «	.
22JS'
-e* • »	IU
Cusfcrtitr OdLi. CSylik Map Protfxfc






Table IV-2
Residential Sites for Rezoning
REZONING TO 30 UNITS/ACRE						
Assessors' Parcel Number	Description	Proposed Zoning Designation	Acreage		RDA ’roject Area	Unit Yield
			Total	Residential		
8390-013-010 through -012	Bonita Canyon Gateway	Multiple-Family (30)	8.5	1.6	Y	48
8390-012-900	Bonita School District Office 115 W. Allen Ave	Mixed- Use/Multiple-Family (30)	7.43	2.5	Y	75
Various	East of Grove Station, west of Walnut Ave., north of Arrow Highway, south of railroad	Mixed- Use/Multiple-Family (30)	11.69	3.3	Y	100
TOTAL (a minimum of)				7.4		223
REZONING TO 16 UNITS/ACRE						
8390-013-010 through -012	Bonita Canyon Gateway	Multiple-Family (16)	8.5	3.3	Y	72*
TOTAL (a minimum of)				3.3		72
* The 3.3 acres at Bonita Canyon Center was approved with zoning to accommodate 72 units (21 units/acre).
As part of the Housing Element sites analysis, the City has also selected several properties to consider for longer-term future residential development as part of the 2008 General Plan update, as shown in Table IV-3. The intent is to analyze the first two properties in the development of a revised Creative Growth Zone for the Bonita Avenue corridor, providing additional opportunities for residential development at densities up to 16 units per acre. The third site involves the revision of the existing downtown zoning to provide a minimum of 30 additional units above either existing commercial or new commercial/office projects. This revision will be incorporated as part of the Downtown Specific Plan. The City's rezoning effort will analyze the most appropriate portions of the downtown commercial core to permit these residential units and the development standard changes necessary to provide sufficient sites to address the moderate income RHNA target. The properties listed in Table IV-3 will be further evaluated as part of these planning processes, potentially providing an additional 88-107 multi-family units at densities appropriate for moderate income households. These sites are not used to address the moderate income RHNA target.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-8
Housing Resources
Table IV-3
Potential Future Residential Sites
Assessors' Parcel Number	Description	Proposed Zoning Designation	Property Size Acres	RDA	Unit Yield Range 12-16 du/acre
8386-006-010 & 025-029	Henkels & McCoy 155 N. Eucla	Multiple-Family	2.3	Y	28-37
8386-015-014,015, 019-024	General Pump -Barricade and Flasher East of Eucla, west of Acacia	Multiple-Family	2.5	Y	30-40
Various	Downtown Residential above Commercial	Creative Growth	N/A	Y	30
TOTAL					88-107
Committed Assistance
Government Code Section 65583.1(c) permits jurisdictions to rely on existing units to fulfill up to 25 percent of their residential sites requirement (RHNA) for a specific income category in the Housing Element, pursuant to specified criteria. The following activities may be eligible:
>	Substantial rehabilitation of substandard rental housing
>	Conversion of multi-family rental units from non-affordable to affordable
>	Preservation of at-risk housing
To qualify, a community must provide "committed assistance" to specified projects within the first two years of the planning period through a legally enforceable agreement. Units must be provided at affordable rent levels to very low and/or low income households, with affordability terms ranging from 20 - 55 years, depending on the activity.
The City of San Dimas has committed to providing financial assistance towards the preservation of at-risk housing, and is seeking to apply credits towards the City's RHNA obligations (refer to Appendix A - Adequate Sites Program Alternative Checklist). As presented in Table V-2 in the Housing Plan, San Dimas has fulfilled a portion of its regional share for very low (2 units) and low income (2 units) households during the prior planning period, rendering the City eligible to utilize the alternative sites program.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-9
Housing Resources
Preservation of At-Risk Housing
Villa San Dimas is a Section 223(a)(7)/221 (d)(3)M family apartment development with a project-based Section 8 contract for 50 two-, three- and four-bedroom units subject to annual renewals by HUD. The City and San Dimas Redevelopment Agency are committed to ensuring that this at-risk project remains affordable to lower income residents and will provide funds for acquisition and/or rehabilitation in order to preserve the 50 units for at least 40 years, pursuant to Housing Element statutes. Units in Villa San Dimas are decent, safe and sanitary, though they could benefit from modernization and refurbishment. The City Attorney contacted the for-profit owners during preparation of the Housing Element. The owners indicated they have extended HUD assistance through June 2008 and anticipate assistance through at least December 2008. Excepting the manager's unit, all units are currently affordable to very low (50% AMI) households.
On July 10, 2007 the San Dimas Redevelopment Agency held a public hearing, adopting an Implementation Plan for expenditure of redevelopment funds through 2014/15, including the housing set-aside funds. The project was also identified as a preservation project at public meetings for the Housing Element conducted before a joint study session of the Planning Commission and City Council, as well as separate meetings with the Planning Commission and the City Council. The affordable housing component of the Implementation Plan identified Villa San Dimas as project "at-risk" of losing affordability within the next five years, and allocated at least $2 million to ensure that the 50 units remain affordable to lower income households. The funds are allocated in the 2009/2010 Fiscal Year of the Agency's redevelopment housing set-aside fund cash flow. It is anticipated that preservation of Villa San Dimas will involve substantial rehabilitation of the existing units. The funds, leveraged with other available financing, would be committed to the project by March 2010 and are sufficient for the preservation project, as compared to assistance provided for similar projects in other cities.
Program 7 in the Housing Element obligates the Agency to provide committed assistance for preservation of Villa San Dimas. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65583.1[c], the City will report to the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) on the status of preservation of Villa San Dimas no later than July 1, 2010. If the City has not entered into an enforceable agreement of committed assistance for the units specified in this program, it will amend the Housing Element to identify additional appropriately zoned and suitable sites.
Since Villa San Dimas currently serves very low income residents, the project's preservation will be applied to the very low income group RHNA target of 162 units. Though the City's assistance will provide affordability for 50 units, Housing Element regulations (Section 65583.1(c)(1)) allow only 25 percent of the income category to be met through existing housing. Therefore, of the 50 affordable units, only 40 units will be used to address the City's very low income new construction housing need.
2008-2014 Housing Element
iv-io
Housing Resources
4.	Residential Development Potential Compared with San Dimas' Regional Housing Needs
As defined by the RHNA, San Dimas' new construction need for the 2008-2014 period is 625 new units, distributed among four income categories. The following is a summary of the City of San Dimas' plan to provide adequate sites to meet the RHNA. Table IV-4 then compares the RHNA with the City's provision of adequate sites.
Vacant and Underutilized Sites: The City's current zoning for vacant and underutilized sites allows development of 280 units, of which 224 address the above moderate income housing need and 56 address the moderate income housing need (at 16 units per acre).
Rezoning: The City will rezone at least 7.4 acres of the three sites identified in Table IV-2 as residential at the 30 unit per acre default density. This rezoning will accommodate development of 223 units to address the City's very low and low income housing development need. In terms of moderate income needs, the City recently approved a Specific Plan for Bonita Canyon Center designating 3.3 acres at 16 units per acre to accommodate up to 72 residential units (the Plan also includes 1.6 acres designated at 30 units per acre to address lower income needs). The City will also evaluate rezoning additional sites at 12-16 units per acre as part of the General Plan update, Creative Growth Zone revision and Downtown Specific Plan. This potential additional rezoning, which could accommodate between 88-107 units at densities appropriate for moderate income development, is not used to address the RHNA.
Committed Assistance: The City will provide financial assistance to 50 at-risk units at Villa San Dimas, of which 40 units can be applied towards addressing the City's very low income new construction housing need.
Residential Building Permits and Approved Projects: Housing units receiving building permits during the 2006-2007 RHNA "gap period" can be credited towards the RHNA. Between January 1, 2006 and July 31, 2007, 14 units have been issued building permits in San Dimas, including three moderate income (second units). The City has also entered into a development agreement with William Fox Homes for the development of 110 ownership units at Grove Station, 10 of which will be restricted as affordable to moderate income households; Phase 1 is expected to be completed in 2009.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-11
housing Resources
Table IV-4
Comparison of Regional Growth Need and Residential Sites
Income Group	Total RHNA	Approved Projects and Building Permits Issued (1/2006 -7/2007)*	Site Inventory Feasible Units Capacity**	Total Unit Capacity
Very Low	162	0	263	263
Low	101	0		
Moderate	107	13	128	141
Above Moderate	255	111	224	335
Total	625	124	615	739
* Includes 13 permits issued since January 1, 2006 and Grove Station Project with 110 units
“ Includes vacant and underutilized land (Table IV-1); projects with development agreements; committed assistance to Villa San Dimas; and sites to be rezoned (Table IV-2).
5.	Availability of Infrastructure and Public Services
Incorporated in 1960, San Dimas is a younger community with the necessary infrastructure in place to support future development in the established areas of San Dimas and near the downtown. The utility infrastructure is relatively new with a public service capacity not yet in need of repair or replacement. However, most hillside sites will require the extension of water, sewer, and other utilities, or approval of on-site septic systems.
SB 1087, effective January 2006, requires water and sewer providers to grant priority for service allocations to proposed developments that include units affordable to lower income households. Pursuant to these statutes, upon adoption of its Housing Element, San Dimas will immediately deliver the Element to local water and sewer providers, along with a summary of its regional housing needs allocation.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-12
Housing Resources
B.	Financial Resources
There are a variety of potential funding sources available for housing activities in San Dimas. Due to both the high cost of developing and preserving housing and limitations on both the amount and uses of funds, a variety of funding sources may be required. Table IV-7 lists the potential funding sources that are available for housing activities. They are divided into five categories including: federal, state, county, local, and private resources.
The primary source of funds for affordable housing activities in San Dimas is derived from the Redevelopment Agency housing set-aside fund. As required by California Redevelopment Law, the San Dimas Redevelopment Agency sets aside 20 percent of all tax increment revenue generated from the redevelopment project area for the purpose of increasing and improving the community's supply of housing for low- and moderate income households. These set-aside funds are placed in a separate Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Fund. Interest earned on money in the Fund, and repayments from loans, advances or grants are returned to the Fund and used to assist other affordable housing projects and programs.
The Agency recently updated the Affordable Housing Component to the AB 1290 Implementation Plan (July 2007). This Plan specifies anticipated annual contributions to the redevelopment set-aside fund of between $1.13 - $1.29 million during the 2008-2014 period, for a total contribution of approximately $7.2 million. In addition, in the beginning of fiscal year 2008/09, the Agency is anticipated to have a set-aside fund balance of approximately $2.5 million. During the 2008-2014 period, the Plan allocates approximately $5.9 million for affordable housing projects, including preservation of Villa San Dimas; $808,000 for rehabilitation loans and grants; $350,000 for Monte Vista Place expenses; and $1.8 million for bond debt service and administration.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-13
Housing Resources
Table IV-5
Financial Resources Available for Housing Activities
Program Name	Description	Eligible Activities
1. Federal Programs		
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)	As a participating City in Urban LA County, grants are allocated directly to the City on a formula basis for housing and community development activities primarily benefiting low and moderate income households. San	Dimas	expects to	receive approximately $200,000 in CDBG funds from LACDC on an annual basis during the Housing Element time frame.	■	Acquisition ■	Rehabilitation *	Homebuyer Assistance ■	Economic Development *	Homeless Assistance *	Public Services
HOME	Funding used to support a variety of County housing programs that the City can access for specific projects. Funds are used to assist low income (80% MFI) households.	■	New Construction *	Acquisition *	Rehabilitation ■	Homebuyer Assistance *	Rental Assistance
Section 8 Rental Assistance	Rental assistance payments to owners of private market rate units on behalf of low-income (50% MFI) tenants. Administered by the Housing Authority of the County of Los Angeles. Approximately 42 San Dimas households currently receive assistance.	■ Rental Assistance
Section 202	Grants to non-profit developers of supportive housing for the elderly.	■ Acquisition *	Rehabilitation *	New Construction
Section 811	Grants to non-profit developers of supportive housing for persons with disabilities, including group homes, independent	living	facilities	and intermediate care facilities.	■	Acquisition *	Rehabilitation ■	New Construction *	Rental Assistance
2. State Programs		
Low-income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC)	Tax credits are available to persons and corporations that invest in low-income rental housing. Proceeds from the sale are typically used to create housing.	* New Construction
Multi-Family Housing Program (MHP)	Deferred payment loans to local governments, non-profit and for-profit developers	for	new construction, rehabilitation	and	preservation	of permanent and transitional rental housing for lower income households. Two funding rounds annually through 2009. Usually coupled with bonds.	■	New Construction ■	Rehabilitation * Preservation ■	Conversion of nonresidential to rental ■	Social services coordination within project
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-14
Housing Resources
Financial Resources Available for Housing Activities
Program Name	| Description		Eligible Activities
Multi-family Housing Program - Supportive Housing	Deferred payment loans for rental housing with supportive services for the disabled who are homeless or at risk of homelessness.	Two funding rounds annually through 2009. Can be coupled with either low income housing tax credits or bonds.	■	New Construction ■	Rehabilitation ■	Preservation *	Conversion of nonresidential to rental *	Social services coordination within project
Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods (BEGIN)	Grants to cities to provide downpayment assistance (up to $30,000) to low and moderate income first-time homebuyers of new homes in projects with affordability enhanced by local regulatory incentives or barrier reductions. One funding round annually through 2009.	■ Homebuyer Assistance
CalHome	Grants to cities and non-profit developers to offer homebuyer assistance, including downpayment assistance, rehabilitation, acquisition/rehabilitation, and homebuyer counseling. Loans to developers for property acquisition, site development, predevelopment and construction period expenses for homeownership projects. One funding round annually through 2011.	■	Predevelopment, site development, site acquisition ■	Rehabilitation ■	Acquisition/rehab ■	Downpayment assistance ■	Mortgage financing ■	Homebuyer counseling
Transit-Oriented Development Program	Funding for housing and related infrastructure near transit stations. One funding round annually through 2009.	■	Capital improvements required for qualified housing developments * Capital improvements enhancing pedestrian or bike access from qualified housing development to nearest transit station ■	Land acquisition
Affordable Housing Innovation Fund	Funding for pilot programs to demonstrate innovative, cost-saving ways to create or preserve affordable housing	■ Regulations pending
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-15
Housing Resources
Financial Resources Available for Housing Activities
Program Name	Description	Eligible Activities
Infill Incentive Grant Program	Funding of public infrastructure (water, sewer, traffic, parks, site clean-up, etc) to facilitate infill housing development. One funding round annually.	*	Development of parks and open space ■	Water, sewer, or other utility service improvments ■	Streets, roads, parking structures, transit linkages, transit shelters *	Traffic mitigation features ■	Sidewalks and streetscape improvements
CalHFA Residential Development Loan Program	Low interest, short term loans to local governments for affordable infill, owner-occupied housing developments. Links with CalHFA's Downpayment Assistance Program to provide subordinate loans to first-time buyers. Two funding rounds per year.	*	Site acquisition *	Pre-development costs
CalHFA Homebuyer's Downpayment Assistance Program	CalHFA makes below market loans to firsttime homebuyers of up to 3% of sales price.	Program operates through participating lenders who originate loans for CalHFA. Funds available upon request to qualified borrowers.	■ Homebuyer Assistance
3. County Programs		
City of Industry Funds	Industry funds are redevelopment tax increment funds administered by the Housing Authority of the County of Los Angeles (HACoLA). Loans for rental housing, special needs housing, and for-sale housing (acquisition and permanent financing). One funding round annually.	■	Acquisition ■	Rehabilitation ■	New Construction ■	Homebuyer Assistance
Southern California Home Financing Authority	Loans to first-time homebuyers in the County, provided through participating lenders	■ First-Time Homebuyer Assistance
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-16
Housing Resources
4. Local Programs		
Redevelopment Housing Fund	State law requires that 20% of Redevelopment Agency funds be set aside for a wide range of affordable housing activities governed by State law. The San Dimas Implementation Plan estimates $1.1 - $1.3 million will be contributed to the Low/Mod Housing Fund annually.	*	Acquisition *	Rehabilitation *	New Construction
Tax Exempt Housing Revenue Bond	The City can support low-income housing by issuing housing mortgage revenue bonds requiring the developer to lease a fixed percentage of the units to low-income families at specified rental rates. The bond amount is allocated at the State level and issued at the local level.	■ New Construction *	Rehabilitation •	Acquisition
5. Private Resources/Financing Programs		
Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae)	Fixed rate mortgages issued by private mortgage insurers.	■ Homebuyer Assistance
	Mortgages which fund the purchase and rehabilitation of a home.	
	Low Down-Payment Mortgages for Single-Family Homes in under served low-income and minority cities.	
Federal Home Loan Bank Affordable Housing Program	Direct Subsidies to non-profit and for profit developers and public agencies for affordable low-income ownership and rental projects.	■ New Construction
Savings Association Mortgage Company Inc.	Pooling process to fund loans for affordable ownership and rental housing projects. Non-profit and for profit developers contact member institutions.	■ New construction of rentals, cooperatives, self help housing, homeless shelters, and group homes
Freddie Mac	HomeWorks-1s' and 2nd mortgages that include rehabilitation loan; City provides gap financing for rehabilitation component. Households earning up to 80% MFI qualify.	■ Home Buyer Assistance combined with Rehabilitation
Source: Karen Warner Associates
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-17
Housing Resources
C.	Administrative Resources
Described below are several non-profit agencies that are currently active and have completed projects in Los Angeles County. These agencies serve as resources in meeting the housing needs of the City, and are integral in implementing activities for acquisition/rehabilitation, preservation of assisted housing, and development of affordable housing.
Habitat for Humanity: Habitat is a non-profit, Christian organization that builds and repairs homes for sale to very low income families with the help of volunteers and homeowner/partner families. Habitat homes are sold to partner families at no profit with affordable, no interest loans. The local affiliate, Pomona Valley Habitat for Humanity City, has built or renovated 34 homes for very low income families.
Jamboree Housing Corporation (JHC): JHC is a non-profit developer that has developed and implemented numerous affordable housing projects throughout Southern California as well as the State. Jamboree has also established an in-house social services division to assist residents in maintaining self-sufficiency. "Housing with a HEART" (Helping Educate, Activate and Respond Together) now operates at most Jamboree-owned properties.
Mercy Housing California: Mercy Housing has offices in Los Angeles, San Francisco and Sacramento. Mercy Housing serves more than 10,000 people at about 100 properties. Residents range from families to people with special needs to seniors.
National Community Renaissance (previously Southern California Housing Development Corporation): National CORE is a nonprofit 501 (c)3 developer with inhouse capacity to construct and renovate large scale developments. Its mission is to create affordable housing communities that contribute to neighborhood vitality. The company owns and manages more than 4,500 multifamily units throughout Southern California and serves more than 10,000 residents. As part of its inclusive approach to improving quality of life in Southern California communities, it staffs community resource centers at all its properties. These centers are supported and administered by the Hope Through Housing Foundation.
2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
IV-18
Housing Resources
D.	Opportunities for Energy Conservation
Conventional building construction, use and demolition along with the manufacturing of building materials have multiple impacts on our environment. In the United States, the building industry accounts for:
S 65% of electricity consumption S 30% of greenhouse gas emissions S 30% of raw materials use S 30% of landfill waste
■S 12% of potable water consumption
Interest in addressing these impacts at all levels of government has been growing. In 2004, the State of California adopted legislation requiring LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) certification for new and renovated public buildings. Some local jurisdictions have not only adopted similar standards for their public buildings, but have also recently required LEED certification for larger commercial and residential developments. For example, the City of Pasadena requires the LEED certified level for commercial construction of 25,000+ square feet and residential buildings with 4+ stories. Other Southland cities that have adopted similar requirements are Calabasas, Santa Monica, Long Beach, and Los Angeles.
However, LEED certification building standards are just one piece of a coordinated green building program. Why would a city adopt a more comprehensive green building program? Most local building standards already consider energy and stormwater issues. In addition, many jurisdictions have programs related to recycling, water conservation, stormwater management, land use, and public health. However, these programs are often overlapping and uncoordinated. One of the primary goals behind establishing a green building program is to create a holistic, integrated design approach to green building.
A green building program considers a broad range of issues including community and site design, energy efficiency, water conservation, resource-efficient material selection, indoor environmental quality, construction management, and building maintenance. The end result will be buildings that minimize the use of resources; are healthier for people; and reduce harm to the environment.
Both the public and private sectors currently offer grants, refunds, and other funding for green building. In addition, developments built to green standards assist both the owners and tenants with energy and maintenance costs over time.
Other efforts by cities related to energy conservation include: providing information regarding energy efficient techniques for rehabilitation; referrals for residents and businesses to energy conservation programs; and local incentives for building green.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-19
Housing Resources
The following presents a variety of ways in which San Dimas can promote energy conservation:
>	Advertise utility rebate programs and energy audits available through Edison and Southern California Gas, particularly connected to housing rehabilitation programs. Lower-income households are also eligible for State sponsored energy and weatherization programs.
>	Develop green (energy-efficient and environmentally-sensitive) building standards for public buildings.
>	Provide incentives, such as expedited plan check, for private developments that are building green
>	Support the elimination of contamination in older buildings (lead-based paint, asbestos, etc.) during rehabilitation and code inspections.
>	Allow higher densities and mixed use development within walking distance of commercial, thereby reducing vehicular trips and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
>	Promote funding opportunities for private green buildings, including available rebates and funding available through the California Energy Commission for installation of solar panels.
>	Provide resource materials and training opportunities regarding green building and energy conservation.
>	Apply green building criteria to rehabilitation of single and multi family buildings.
Global Green, a leader in the green building field, has designed a step-by-step guide for local governments interested in creating a green building program. The steps are outlined as follows:
1.	Establish Your Baseline - what are current local policies, ordinances, and environmental programs; identify gaps
2.	Analyze Building Trends - what are past trends, planned city and major private projects, and projected growth
3.	Review Existing Guidelines - do they fit with local climate, city procedures, local building practice, and address local priorities
4.	Conduct Outreach - form city staff team and citizen committee; convene groups; and identify issues and priorities
5.	Establish Framework - identify priority sectors; determine phasing; set incentives; and determine administration
6.	Implementation - adopt policy; prepare and provide resources and materials; hold workshops and trainings; identify additional staff needs
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-20
Housing Resources
The City of San Dimas is embarking on a General Plan update and will integrate sustainability guidelines into the Land Use, Conservation, and Circulation Elements. The City is integrating housing into downtown development, as shown with the Grove Station project currently under construction. During the 2008-2014 timeframe of this Housing Element, the City anticipates a decision by LA Metro regarding placement of a Metro Gold Line station in the downtown area. The City is incorporating this possibility into the General Plan update by considering development standards for transit oriented development(s) near the Gold Line site. In addition, to further green building goals, residential and mixed-use developments receiving Redevelopment Agency assistance may be required to include sustainable design features to the extent financially feasible, such as:
>	Energy and water reduction strategies
>	Building design that maximizes sunlight for heat and light, and maximizes air flow for natural cooling
>	Solid waste reduction technologies
>	Storm water mitigation
>	Gray water recycling
Southern California Edison Energy Efficiency Programs (www.sce.com)
Southern California Edison (SCE) offers a Multi-Family Energy Efficiency Rebate Program that provides property owners and managers incentives on a broad list of energy efficiency improvements in lighting, HVAC, insulation and window categories. Edison's refrigerator and freezer recycling program provides cash rebates and free pick up of old appliances as an encouragement to residents to replace old appliances with new energy-efficient ones.
The following three programs are offered by Edison to help low income customers reduce energy costs and control their energy use:
■	Energy Management Assistance Program - Pays for the cost of purchasing and installing energy efficient appliances and equipment
■	California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) - Offers very low income customers a discount of 20% or more off their monthly electric bill. The Family Electric Rate Assistance (FERA) program also offers reduced rates for lower income families.
■	Energy Assistance Fund - Assists income qualified customers with their electric bill once in a 12 month period
Southern California Gas Company Energy Efficiency Programs (www.socalgas.com)
The Southern California Gas Company offers several energy efficiency programs, including home energy rebates for energy efficient appliances; multi-family rebates for
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-21
Housing Resources
energy saving improvements; and home energy and water efficiency kits. Similar to Edison, several programs are available to assist lower income customers with energy bills:
■	California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) - Offers very low income customers a discount of 20% or more off their monthly gas bill.
■	No-Cost Energy Saving Home Improvements - Service provides free weatherization for the homes or apartments of lower income families.
■	One-Time Bill Assistance - Up to $100 in one-time assistance on the gas bill.
■	Medical Baseline Allowance - Households with a seriously disabled member, or person with life-threatening illness, may qualify for additional gas at a reduced rate schedule.
2008-2014 Housing Element
IV-22
Housing Resources﻿V. Housing Plan
Sections II, III and IV of the Housing Element establish the housing needs, opportunities and constraints in San Dimas. This final Housing Plan section begins by evaluating accomplishments under the City's adopted 2000 Housing Element (2002) Revision and then presents San Dimas' Housing Plan for the 2008-2014 period. This Plan sets forth the City's goals, policies and programs to address identified housing needs.
A. Evaluation of Accomplishments Under Adopted Housing Element
Under State Housing Element law, communities are required to assess the achievements under their adopted housing programs as part of the five-year update to their housing elements. These results should be quantified where possible (e.g. the number of units rehabilitated), but may be qualitative where necessary (e.g. mitigation of governmental constraints). The results should then be compared with what was projected or planned in the earlier element. Where significant shortfalls exist between what was planned and what was achieved, the reasons for such differences must be discussed.
The City of San Dimas 2000-2005 Housing Element sets forth a series of housing programs with related objectives for the following areas:
S New Construction for all income groups S Residential Rehabilitation V Conservation of Existing Housing
This section reviews the City's progress to date in implementing these housing programs and their continued appropriateness for the 2008-2014 Housing Element. Table V-1 summarizes the City's housing program accomplishments, followed by a review of its quantified objectives. The results of this analysis will provide the basis for developing the comprehensive housing program strategy presented in Part C of this section.
2008-2014 Housing Element
v-1
Housing Plan
Table V-1
Review of Accomplishments under 2000 Housing Element
EXISTING PROGRAMS	
Policy/Program	Accomplishments
1.	Housing Code Enforcement and Abatement Action: Provide minimum reauirements for the protection, safety, and welfare of the general public through inspections of residential properties. Goal: Conduct 250 inspections over five years (50 annually).	Progress:	Since 2002. over 250 insDections of notentiallv substandard residences have been conducted; no substandard structures have been identified. Effectiveness: The Citv met its annual insDection goal. Droviding an average of 50 housing inspections per year. Appropriateness: As the Citv's housing stock ages, housing code enforcement will continue to be an important part of the preservation of the City's housing stock. This program will be continued in the updated Housing Element.
2. Rehabilitation Assistance Action: Assist lower income (80% AMI) home owners rehabilitate their homes. Goal: Provide grants ($3,000) and loans ($10,000) to upgrade 350 homes over five years (70 annually).	Progress:	Since 2002. 471 home owners (107 extremelv low income, 195 very low income; and 169 low income) have received loans or grants to rehabilitate their homes. Effectiveness: The Citv exceeded its overall housing rehabilitation goal, providing an average of 78 households with assistance per year. The program is in high demand. The City limits the assistance in order to make the funds go further. However, the City also recognizes that as the housing stock ages, more extensive and costly rehabilitation may be needed. Appropriateness: The Program has been successful in providing funding to preserve the City's aging housing stock. No changes to the basic program are planned, but staff is considering extending funds to households earning moderate incomes. Also, the City has obtained additional funding from the State for more substantial rehabilitation services.
3. Condominium and Mobile Home Park Conversion Ordinance Action: ImDose evaluation criteria adoDted in 1981 ordinance for conversion of apartments and mobile home parks to condominium ownership units. Goal: Reduce the imDact of Dotential conversion on current residents who may be required to relocate.	Progress: No conversions of mobile home Darks or condominium conversions have been filed. Effectiveness:	Since the Citv adopted the ordinance, no conversions have been filed. Appropriateness: This ordinance provides noticing reauirements to reduce the impact of conversion on the current residents, particularly those of low and moderate income. Implementation of this program will continue.
4. Mobile Home Park Housing Action: Imolement State regulations for Citv review of potential Mobile Home Park closures. Enforce the City's Mobile Home Accord to regulate space rents. Goal: Preserve existing mobile home Darks and maintain affordability.	Progress: No mobile home Dark units have been lost, and snace rent increases have been regulated, meeting the City's goal of preserving existing mobile home parks. The City renewed the Accord in 2005. The City continues ownership of Charter Oaks Mobile Home Park and maintains affordability for the senior residents. Effectiveness: The Citv's Mobile Home Accord has been an effective mechanism to stabilize and establish maximum rent charges and provides a fair method for resolving disputes. Appropriateness:	This program maintains affordable housing supply, especially for seniors, and remains appropriate to the Housing Element. The City anticipates renewing the current Accord which expires in 2010.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-2
Housing Plan
Table V-1
Review of Accomplishments under 2000 Housing Element (cont'd)
EXISTING PROGRAMS (cont'd)	
Policy/Program	Accomplishments
5. Section 8 Rental Assistance Action: Promote rental assistance through the County Housing Authority Section 8 program. Goal: Preserve 50 existing Section 8 units at Villa San Dimas and promote County Housing Authority's rental subsidy assistance.	Progress: 50 units at Villa San Dimas have continued to receive Section 8 rental subsidies on an annual basis. In addition, 42 lower income households in San Dimas receive Section 8 vouchers, including 25 elderly and 17 family households. Effectiveness: The Section 8 program is effective in providing needed rental assistance to lower income households, although limited Section 8 funding restricts the number of residents that can be assisted. Continuation of Section 8 funding for Villa San Dimas after 12/07 is unknown at this time. Appropriateness: The Section 8 program provides decent and safe living conditions to those who may not otherwise be able to afford it and remains appropriate to the Element. The City is currently evaluating preservation options for the 50 units at Villa San Dimas and will break this out as a separate program in the updated Element.
6. Youth Employment Service Action: Assist homeowners who don't aualifv under CDBG with the cost of housing maintenance through a youth employment program component. Goal: Program to be initiated lulv 1,2001 with goals established at that time.	Progress: This program was never implemented. Effectiveness: The Youth Emolovment Service Program was never implemented due to the costs and lack of appropriate funds. Appropriateness: This program is no longer being considered for implementation.
7. Neighborhood Beautification Action: Continue to provide clean-uo and minor repairs in targeted neighborhoods. Goal: Provide targeted clean-uo and assist 50 dwelling units over five years.	Progress: The program was implemented between 1992-1997 with neighborhood priorities established on an annual basis. The program was not continued between 2000-2005. Effectiveness: In the oast, this program provided neighborhood participation, revitalization and strengthened pride of ownership, but was discontinued due to inadequate funding. Appropriateness: As the Citv's housing stock ages, neighborhood beautification can become an important tool to maintaining the City's housing and neighborhoods. The identification of program funding and target neighborhoods is an appropriate goal for the updated Housing Element.
8. Historic Preservation Action: Imolement special guidelines for rehabilitation of historic residences. Goal: Preserve approximately 700 dwelling units and use guidelines for rehabilitation program.	Progress: Citv has adopted and implemented the "San Dimas Design Guidelines - Town Core" affecting approximately 700 dwelling units and all new development in the area. Effectiveness: The guidelines are useful to meet historic criteria for rehabilitation and to ensure that new development fits within the Town Core context. Appropriateness:	The Historic Preservation guidelines were adopted and are being implemented. It is no longer necessary to include this as a separate program in the updated Housing Element.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-3
Housing Plan
Table V-1
Review of Accomplishments under 2000 Housing Element (cont'd)
EXISTING PROGRAMS (cont'd)	
Policy/Program	Accomplishments
9.	20% Set-Aside Action: Use redeveloDment tax increment housing set-aside funds (20% set-aside) for affordable housing, with a priority for housing rehabilitation and preservation of affordable units. Goal: Allocate funds to Citv's affordable housing programs.	Progress: The RedeveloDment Agencv has set-aside 20% housing funds since 1996. From 2000-2005, approximately $3.5 million was deposited into the Affordable Housing Fund. Projects are being considered by the Agency to use the set-aside funds generated. Effectiveness: The RedeveloDment Agencv has successful^ set-aside housing funds. This is a major revenue source to increase the supply of affordable housing and opportunities for lower income households. ADDrooriateness: Housing Set-Aside funds are San Dimas' Drimarv source of funds to support the variety of affordable housing programs set forth in the Housing Element. These funds have been used for four primary goals: rehabilitation grants and loans; firsttime home buyer loans; new development; and to leverage with other housing resources. In the updated Housing Element, the funds will be focused on new development and preservation activities. While these funds are further discussed in the Element's Resources chapter, a separate program is not necessary.
70.	Senior Shared Housing, now known as SHARES (Senior Housing Alternatives, Resources, Education and Support) Action: Continue to suDDort senior home sharing and provide referral and case management for additional housing options available to seniors. Goal: Deoendent on Drogram demand.	Progress:	Since August 2002. 3.456 seniors have received assistance, referrals and/or case management services with 138 clients participating in the Shared Housing Program. Effectiveness: The Drogram has been effective in Droviding a variety of services, including shared housing for 138 seniors. ADDrooriateness:	The Drogram Dromotes indeoendent living through house sharing along with related services. As more residents age in their own homes, shared housing can provide a unique option for the provider as well as the seeker. This program is appropriate to continue in the updated Housing Element.
NEW PROGRAMS	
Policy/Program	Accomplishments
1. Acquisition and Rehabilitation Action:	Exoand the Citv rehabilitation program to include both (1) rehabilitation of rental units and (2) acquisition, rehabilitation, and sale of rental units to income qualified homebuyers. Goal: Rehabilitate 7 dwelling units.	Progress: No rental units were rehabilitated. One single familv property was purchased for the purpose of rehabilitating and offering as an affordable unit. However, the property was not rehabilitated because of budget constraints and is still owned by the City. Effectiveness: Rehabilitation of rental units has not been a feasible program, since owners have not wanted to restrict their rents as required by the funding. Due to the substantial cost of rehabilitating the single-family property, the City did not pursue the rehabilitation. ADDrooriateness: Due to limited resources, the Citv will focus instead on conserving rental units in at-risk projects, establishing a first-time homebuyer program for the Grove Station development, and facilitating development on new mixed-use and higher density housing sites.
2008-2014 Housing Element	v-4	Housing Plan
Table V-1
Review of Accomplishments under 2000 Housing Element (cont'd)
NEW PROGRAMS (cont'd)	
Policy/Program	Accomplishments
2. Parking Standards Action: Modifv oarking standards for non-elderly affordable housing meeting certain criteria. Goal: AdoDt standards bv December 2001.	Progress: Parking standards in the Creative Growth Zone - Area 3 (Downtown Redevelopment Area) were revised to allow tandem parking and reduce stall sizes for congregate parking. Effectiveness: Modified oarking standards positively impacted the East Commercial Street (Grove Station) project. Of the 60 one-bedroom units, 20% will have tandem parking. Parking stall widths were also reduced. Appropriateness:	The updated Housing Element includes a program for establishment of Mixed-Use and Higher Density Residential Zones. As part of this program, provisions for modified parking will be included for housing meeting certain development and affordability criteria.
3. Senior Housing Standards Action:	Eliminate minimum dwelling unit standards for senior housing. Goal: To be adopted bv December 2001.	Progress: Implementation of this program is pending based on staff availability. Development of the Monte Vista senior apartments provided practical experience for the City to review senior housing standards. Effectiveness: This program has not vet been implemented, although the City has not received any proposals for development of senior housing. Appropriateness:	This program remains appropriate to the updated Housing Element
4. Identification of Sites for Affordable Housing Action: Identify one or more sites in the Housing Element to accommodate low to moderate income housing development. Goal: Identify site(s) bv December 2001 and designate appropriate zoning by December 2003 for sufficient sites to accommodate at least 16 very low income, 12 low income households, and 18 moderate income households.	Progress: The Citv evaluated the four sites identified in the Housing Element for affordable housing. The City rezoned two sites, totaling 5.25 acres, assembled multiple parcels and provided financial assistance to support development of Grove Station a mixed-use project with 110 for-sale residential units, including 10 for moderate income households. In 2004, the City analyzed the cost effectiveness of expanding the Charter Oak Mobile Home Park onto an adjacent vacant site; the development costs of the property were determined to be too excessive to justify acquisition for 10 units of affordable housing. The land preparation costs were estimated at approximately $690,000 for grading, retaining walls, sewer, and paving, not including the cost of land acquisition or the cost of sound attenuation walls adjacent to the freeway (estimated to be at least $500,000). The owner of the Johnstone Building was not interested in working with the City to adaptively reuse the property to provide residential units, though the City was prepared to provide funds for the renovation. Effectiveness:	This program was effective with significant development occurring in the downtown area due to the City's rezoning and financial assistance. AoDrooriateness: A orogram to Drovide an uodated inventory of sites available for housing remains appropriate for the City and will be included in the updated Housing Element. City incentives to create affordability will continue to be a separate program in the updated Housing Element.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-5
Housing Plan
Table V-1
Review of Accomplishments under 2000 Housing Element (cont'd)
NEW PROGRAMS (cont'd)	
Policy/Program	Accomplishments
5. Reduce the Cost-Impact of the City's Development Permit Process Action: Provide exoedited Dermit review of affordable housing projects; and subsidize permit fees as needed. Goal:	Provide exoedited review for all affordable projects; and provide financing as needed.	Progress: The Citv Drovided Drioritv review to both Monte Vista and Grove Station, both projects with affordable housing. Payment or reduction of fees was not used for any projects. Effectiveness: The Drioritv review was effective. Due to the State's prevailing wage law, reduction of fees will be offered on a project-by project basis. ADDrooriateness: Both exoedited review of affordable housing and reduction of fees remain appropriate for the Housing Element.
6. First-Time Homebuyer Assistance Action: Continue imolementation of Citv's homebuyer programs, including use of Federal, State, and County programs. Goal: Assist 70 homebuvers over 5 vears (15 annually).	Progress: Since 2002. onlv one moderate income homebuver loan has been assisted. Effectiveness: Given the escalation in for-sale housing prices, the high cost of the assistance for a single household made this program ineffective for the City. AoDroDriateness: The Citv is designing a homebuver Drogram to use in conjunction with the new moderate income units at Grove Station. The City will evaluate the cost effectiveness of expanding the program to assist buyers of existing housing.
7. Expansion of Mobile Home Opportunities Action: Acauire DroDertv adiacent to Charter Oak Mobile Home Park to expand the Mobile Home Park, if feasible. Goal: Negotiate with owner to acauire site by June 2002. Make 12 additional spaces available by January 2003.	Progress: The cost of the Charter Oaks exnansion was not warranted to create additional spaces for 10-12 mobile homes. The acquisition price of the land was high (an unwilling seller), especially when added to cost of the necessary site improvements. Development of the site required building a new sound wall adjacent to the freeway (at least $500,000) and more grading than originally expected. Effectiveness: The Citv did not imolement due to costs and there are no other sites providing similar opportunities for expansion. ADDroDriateness: The Citv is no longer considering expansion of the Charter Oak Mobile Home Park.
8. Preserve 50 Low Income Rental Units at Villa San Dimas Action:	Work with existing owner or potential buyer to achieve preservation of affordable units. Goal: Maintain affordabilitv of 50 units.	Progress: HUD's Section 8 agreement was annuallv renewed during the Housing Element time period. Effectiveness: HUD's rental assistance must be renewed annuallv. This brings uncertainty and risk for conversion of the units to market rate. ADDrooriateness:	The Redevelooment Agencv has included funding for preservation of Villa San Dimas as part of its 2007 Implementation Plan. It is the City's goal to preserve this at-risk project to avoid loss of affordable housing, and it remains an appropriate program for the Housing Element.
2008-2014 Housing Element	v-6	Housing Plan
Table V-1
Review of Accomplishments under 2000 Housing Element (cont'd)
NEW PROGRAMS (cont'd)	
Policy/Program	Accomplishments
9. Facilitate Infill and Mixed-Use Development in the Downtown Area Action: Offer financial, zoning and regulatory incentives. Goal: Identify oDDortunities for development of housing with up to 8 very low income and 10 low income households.	Progress: The Citv provided financial, zoning and regulatory incentives for two mixed-use developments, Monte Vista Apartments and Grove Station, in the downtown area. Monte Vista provides 12 senior apartments for 2 very low, 2 low, and 8 moderate income households. Grove Station has a total of 110 for-sale units including 10 units for moderate income households. Effectiveness: Though the Citv did not achieve the full number and level of affordable units expressed in the goal, each project provides a base for future negotiations of new development. Appropriateness: The creation of new Mixed-Use and Higher Density Zones is appropriate for the updated Housing Element. The City anticipates that development of additional projects in the downtown area will require financial, zoning and regulatory incentives.
10. Monitor Application of Design Review Process Action: Monitor design review of affordable housing projects, evaluating potential disproportionate costs and/or delays. Goal:	Assure affordable projects are not faced with disproportionate costs or delays in project approvals	Progress: This program was applied to the Monte Vista and Grove Station projects. The City and Redevelopment Agency acted as a partner in the Monte Vista and Grove Station projects and considered impacts of all design requirements. Effectiveness: This program was effective in ensuring the Citv's design review didn't negatively impact production of affordable housing. Appropriateness: This program is appropriate to continue in the updated Housing Element. The City maintains quality design standards and an efficient design review process for all projects where all projects and persons involved are treated equally.
11. Homeless and Transitional Housing Facilities Action: Inventory sites that permit homeless and transitional housing facilities; identify support services and emergency shelters in the area to determine need for local facility. Goal:	Complete survey, analysis and rezoning of appropriate sites by June 2003. Identify at least one site each for homeless and transitional housing facilities.	Progress: Homeless and Transitional Housing land uses have been determined to fall under "Community care facilities, including resident schools" as a conditionally permitted use in the City's Public/Semi-public zoning designation. The Housing Department provides referrals to area shelters and is involved in the area's Winter Shelter Program. The City provides funds for emergency food distribution and temporary shelter to San Dimas residents through a local non-profit organization. The City participates in the San Gabriel Valley Council of Governments which is working to coordinate a multi-jurisdictional approach to meeting the housing needs of the homeless in the area. The City also participates in the East San Gabriel Valley Consortium on Homelessness. Effectiveness: While the Citv has in place zoning to accommodate homeless and transitional housing facilities, no shelters were proposed during the planning period. The City has been effective in provision of homeless services and referrals. Appropriateness: The Citv will implement a program to allow emergency shelters by-right in the PS zone in the upcoming Housing Element. The City will also continue to provide information and referral to meet the needs of homeless individuals and people at-risk of becoming homeless.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-7
Housing Plan
Table V-1
Review of Accomplishments under 2000 Housing Element (cont'd)
ADDITIONAL PROGRAMS	
Policy/Program	Accomplishments
1. CalHome Single Family Owner Occupied Substantial Rehab Loan Program Action: Assist eligible homeowners correct existing code violations, health and safety issues and/or address deferred maintenance on their property with this low interest deferred loan program. Goal: Provide 20-30 loans thru 2010 with loans up to $40,000.	Progress: The Citv aDDlied for and received funds from the State HCD to establish this new loan program for substantial rehabilitation. The City is currently finalizing program guidelines and loan documents for final review and approval by HCD. Effectiveness: Program start date anticiDated FY 2008 Appropriateness: This new program will provide a greater amount of funds per unit to assist lower-income homeowners in complying with Code Enforcement and maintenance of their homes through attractive financing options.
2. Lead-Based Paint/Hazard Assessment Project Action: Direct CDBG monies to provide eligible households lead-based paint assessments and assistance to eliminate lead hazards. Goal: Provide lead assessments and assistance (up to $5,000) to 50 homes.	Progress: Since 2002. 105 units have had lead-based oaint hazards assessed and/or eliminated. This program is operated concurrently with the City's Rehabilitation programs Effectiveness:	This program has exceeded the projected production standard. Appropriateness: This program provides funds to remediate lead hazards and educate the public about lead-based paint hazards. The community has been highly supportive of the program, especially for households with children.
Source: City of San Dimas Planning Department and Redevelopment Department
Summary of Housing Element Accomplishments
Since adoption of the Housing Element in 2000, the City of San Dimas has made significant progress in achieving its housing goals. Major accomplishments include the following:
>	Providing housing rehabilitation assistance to over 471 lower income homeowners, including 107 extremely low income (under 30% AMI) households.
>	Providing Code Enforcement inspections to over 250 residences.
>	Renewing the Mobile Home Accord in 2005 which serves to stabilize and establish maximum rent charges and provides a method for resolving disputes for the five mobile home parks in San Dimas, affecting over 900 mobile home units.
>	Retaining ownership of the Charter Oaks Mobile Home Park and maintaining affordability for the senior residents.
>	Adopting an ordinance requiring special guidelines for both new development and rehabilitation of historic residences in the Town Core.
>	Assisting over 3,500 seniors with assistance, referrals, and/or case management services, with 138 participating in the senior Shared Housing Program.
>	Modifying parking and set-back standards for non-senior affordable housing, used by the mixed income Grove Station project.
>	Facilitating mixed-use development in the downtown area using financial, zoning, and regulatory incentives, resulting in completion of the Monte Vista Senior Apartments, with 12 affordable units, and approval of the Grove Station mixed-
2008-2014 Housing Element
v-8
Housing Plan
use project with 110 for-sale units, including 10 affordable to moderate income households.
>	Determining that the Public/Semi-Public zone is appropriate for homeless emergency shelters and transitional housing.
>	Provision of funds for emergency food distribution and temporary shelter, and referrals to area shelters.
Table V-2 summarizes the quantified objectives contained in the City's 2000 Housing Element, and compares the City's progress in fulfilling these objectives.
Table V-2
Summary of Quantified Objectives: 2000 Housing Element
Income Level	New Construction		Rehabilitation		Conservation	
	Goal*	Progress	Goal**	Progress	Goal***	Progress
Very Low	16	2	153	302****	500	500
Low	12	2	104	169	450	450
Moderate	18	11	0		0	
Above Moderate	45	168	0		0	
Totals	91	183	257	471	950	950
* Reflects RHNA
** Reflects rehabilitation to create 7 new affordable units and rehabilitation of 250 existing homes
*“ Reflects preservation of mobile home units and 50 assisted units at Villa San Dimas
““Reflects 107 extremely low income (0-30% AMI) and 195 very low income (31-50% AMI) households
As illustrated in Table V-2, the City issued 171 residential building permits and completed the 12 unit Monte Vista senior apartments between January 1998 and December 2005. This was almost double the number of regional housing production needs, or "RHNA" allocation for that period. Of the residential permits issued, 132 were for single-family homes, 36 were for detached condominiums, and 3 were second units (second unit rents are at a level affordable to moderate income households). The detached condominiums are counted as above moderate income units in Table V-2, though some condominiums may be affordable to moderate income households. The Monte Vista Apartments, assisted with redevelopment housing set-aside funds, provide rental units for 2 very low, 2 low and 8 moderate income seniors for a period of 50 years. Given the current housing market, rental housing affordable to low and for-sale housing affordable to moderate income households will not be produced without some level of subsidy and/or development incentive. It is therefore critical for the City's updated Housing Element to establish financial and regulatory programs to better facilitate the production of housing not provided for in the market.
In terms of housing rehabilitation, the City has provided loan ($10,000) and grant ($3,000) assistance to an average of 75 single family owner-occupied households annually, exceeding its annual goals. The City is working with the State Housing and Community Development Department to establish a new loan program with up to
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-9
Housing Plan
$40,000 per housing unit. The City also began an acquisition/rehabilitation program, acquiring one single family property with the intent of rehabilitating the property and selling it to a first-time homebuyer. However, the City found that the costs to substantially rehabilitate the property were prohibitive and has discontinued the program.
Finally, the City continued its conservation efforts by renewing the Mobile Home Accord which assists residents of over 900 mobile homes in the City by establishing
mavimiim rzzinF rkarnoc f’/'A rocirlonfc f I IOAII I IUI I I 1VIIL	LC/ IC.JIUVIIIJ/
nnrJ nrm/irlmn cii ivj pn v icjii igj
f'lir ma	rnr zz-i
■ ci i i iiicuiuu ivy icautvc
rlirru 1r UI3[JU tea.
This Accord assists many senior residents of mobile home parks. The City also retained ownership and affordability of one mobile home park with 186 spaces. In addition, the Villa San Dimas project continued to receive federally funded project-based Section 8 rental assistance for 50 units. During the next Housing Element cycle, the City is dedicated to preserve this at-risk project. Preservation of at-risk housing is now eligible for RHNA credit.

2008-2014 Housing Element
V-10
Housing Plan
B.
Goals and Policies
This section of the Housing Element sets forth the goals and policies the City intends to implement to address San Dimas' housing needs.
EXISTING HOUSING
CjCJAL I
Conserve and Improve Existing Housing in San Dimas
POLICIES
Policy 1.1: Preserve the character, scale and quality of established residential neighborhoods.
Policy 1.2: Provide rehabilitation and home improvement assistance to lower income households and evaluate increasing assistance amounts and expansion to moderate income households.
Policy 1.3: Undertake comprehensive code enforcement throughout the City and target beautification efforts in older neighborhoods to improve the quality of life and condition of housing within these neighborhoods.
Policy 1.4: Work with property owners, tenants, and non-profit purchasers to facilitate preservation of assisted rental housing at-risk of conversion to market rents.
Policy 1.5: Encourage retention and affordability of mobile homes and continue to work with mobile home park owners and residents through the Mobile Home Accord.
Policy 1.6: Continue to promote rental assistance opportunities for San Dimas residents.
ADEQUATE HOUSING SITES
rnA i
Provide Adequate Housing Sites to Accommodate Regional Housing Needs
POLICIES
Policy 2.1: Facilitate the development of mixed-use and higher density residential projects in appropriate areas by establishing mixed-use and higher density zoning regulations.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-11
Housing Plan
Policy 2.2: Continue to encourage design consistent with the General Plan and appropriate to the community context.
Policy 2.3: Maintain an up-to-date inventory of potential sites available for future development and provide the inventory to the development community.
Policy 2.4: Take advantage of existing infrastructure and public improvements to provide additional rental housing by allowing second units in residential
__:~kl___I____l~
I ItMgl IUUI IIUUU5
DEVELOPMENT AND PROVISION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GOAL 3
Assist in Development and Provision of Affordable Housing
POLICIES
Policy 3.1: Encourage the production of housing that meets all economic segments of the community, including lower, moderate, and upper income households, to maintain a balanced community.
Policy 3.2: Provide financial and/or regulatory incentives to facilitate the development of affordable housing.
Policy 3.3: Support collaborative partnerships with non-profit organizations, affordable housing builders, and for-profit developers to provide greater access to affordable housing funds.
Policy 3.4: Consider inclusionary housing as a tool, where feasible, to integrate affordable units within market rate developments.
Policy 3.5: Establish a homebuyer assistance program to assist low to moderate income households.
Policy 3.6: Pursue federal, state and county funding sources as a means to leverage local funds and maximize assistance for affordable housing.
Policy 3.7: Encourage use of sustainable and green building design in new and existing housing.
Policy 3.8: Continue regional conservation efforts including stormwater runoff, and energy and water reduction strategies.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-12
Housing Plan
REMOVE CONSTRAINTS
GOAL 4
Remove Governmental Constraints
POLICIES
Policy 4.1: Offer financial and/or regulatory incentives, including density bonuses, where feasible to offset or reduce the costs of developing affordable housing.
Policy 4.2: Evaluate development regulations to reduce limitations to the provision of affordable housing.
Policy 4.3: Review and modify residential standards to better facilitate development of affordable housing.
EQUAL HOUSING
GOAL 5
Provide Equal Housing Opportunity
POLICIES
Policy 5.1: Continue to support fair housing laws prohibiting arbitrary discrimination in the building, financing, selling or renting of housing on the basis of race, religion, family status, national origin, physically disability or other such factors.
Policy 5.2: Continue to promote fair housing services and tenant/landlord mediation to City residents.
Policy 5.3: Support the regional efforts to address the needs of the homeless in San Gabriel Valley.
Policy 5.4: Continue to promote social service delivery to the homeless and at-risk populations. Provide funding to support the services as available.
Policy 5.5: Continue to address the special needs of seniors through provision of shared housing, housing referral, case management, and assistance programs.
Policy 5.6: Continue to address the special needs of persons with disabilities through implementation of the City's reasonable accommodations ordinance.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-13
Housing Plan
c.
Housing Programs
The goals and policies contained in the Housing Element address San Dimas' identified housing needs, and are implemented through a series of housing programs offered through the Planning Department and Redevelopment Agency. Housing programs define the specific actions the City will undertake to achieve the stated goals and policies, and are organized around the City's five housing goals.
The City's Housing Element programs encompass existing programs; programs revised in response to the review of program accomplishments; and several new programs added to address unmet housing needs. The Housing Program Summary Table V-3 located at the end of this section specifies the following for each program: 2008-2014 objectives; funding sources; agency responsible for implementation; and policy addressed. Table V-4 provides a numeric summary of these objectives.
Housing Element statutes now require an analysis of the needs of extremely low income (<30% AMI) households, and programs to assist in the creation of housing for this population. The San Dimas Housing Element sets forth several programs which help to address the needs of extremely low income households, including: Single-Family Rehabilitation (Program 3); Section 8 Rental Assistance (Program 8); Facilitate Infill and Mixed-Use Development (Program 12); Zoning Ordinance Revision (Program 17); and Homeless Assistance (Program 24).
EXISTING AFFORDABLE HOUSING
1.	Housing Code Enforcement and Abatement: The City has adopted the Uniform Housing Code and will continue its existing program to inspect potentially substandard residences and abate those needing to be brought into code compliance. The Code Enforcement program combines a pro-active canvassing of the City to identify substandard housing and a re-active complaint driven inspection process. The City provides information about the on-going rehabilitation loan and grant program to those cited for code violations. The City's goal is code compliance and vacation of substandard housing is not anticipated. With two-thirds of the City's housing stock reaching 30 years of age by 2010, code enforcement linked to the City's rehabilitation program will become even more integral to the maintenance of the housing stock.
2008-2014 Objective: Conduct 50 inspections of potentially substandard residences annuaiiy to provide minimum requirements for the protection, safety, and welfare of the general public as part of the City's on-going program. Inform violators of available rehabilitation assistance to correct code deficiencies.
2.	Neighborhood Beautification:	During the 1990s, the City provided
neighborhood clean-up along with funds for minor housing repairs within targeted neighborhoods. The program provides an effective tool to stimulate neighborhood
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-14
Housing Plan
participation and revitalization, and will be re-initiated in certain neighborhoods with older housing stock, as surveyed in 2001.
2008-2014 Objective: Re-establish the Neighborhood Beautification program in areas with older' housing stock, and coordinate the program with Code Enforcement and Housing Rehabilitation.
3.	Single-Family Rehabilitation: The City's current CDBG funded Single-Family Rehabilitation Program provides for $3,000 grants and $10,000 deferred loans to lower income households. The program is closely coordinated with Code Enforcement efforts, and also provides for energy efficiency improvements. The City is also considering extending rehabilitation assistance to moderate income households using Redevelopment Set-Aside funds.
2008-2014 Objective: Assist 70 lower income households with grants and loans on an annual basis, with a projected income mix of half extremely low and very low income households and half low income households, for a total assistance goal of 420 households. Assess the use of funds to assist moderate income households with rehabilitation by 2009. Continue to market the program with brochures available at public facilities, on the City's website and on the City's public access station.
4.	Single-Family Substantial Rehabilitation: The City is initiating a new substantial rehabilitation program funded by CalHome funds. This program will provide rehabilitation loans of up to $40,000 for lower income single-family homeowners. As the City's housing stock ages, many homes will require repair or replacement of primary systems such as electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning,, and roofing, exceeding the loan limits under the City's current rehabilitation program.
2008-2014 Objective: Assist 20 lower income households (from 2008-2010) through the CalHome substantial rehabilitation program. Evaluate the potential for continuation of this program beyond 2010.
5.	Lead-Based Paint Hazard Assessment and Abatement: The City provides funds for the assessment and abatement of lead-based paint hazards for lower income eligible households. The $5,000 grant is primarily used in conjunction with the City's single family rehabilitation program when testing indicates the need for abatement. Eligible households can also apply for lead-based paint hazard assessment and abatement separately from the rehabilitation program, though this is less likely to occur. The City provides information about this program in conjunction with the Single-Family Rehabilitation Programs. The City markets the program through brochures available at City facilities, on the City's website and through the City's public access television station.
2008-2014 Objective: Assist 10 lower income households annually to assess and abate lead-based paint hazards. Continue to market the program with
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-15
Housing Plan
brochures available at public facilities, on the City's website and on the City's public access station.
6.	Mobile Home Park Preservation and Affordability: The City has over 900 mobile home units within five mobile home parks and has been concerned about retaining affordability of the park space rents. The City purchased one park, Charter Oaks Mobile Home Park, with 186 spaces for seniors, in 1998. The City established a new space rental credit program in April 2008, providing greater affordability for lower inrnmp rpcirjpntc of ("hfrrfpp O.^kc. Mnhilp Hnmp P.ork Thp City aRn crp.^tprl .9 Mnhilp
r IVUIIV
V*UW \_l VUIVU VI
I I I	I I I V I V JIM VI ■	I - ■ lur IV I	V* ■	I T I \_Z	I I KS I I IV I Ul l\.
Home Accord with the owners of five mobile home parks in 2000, establishing
maximum rent charges and providing a fair method for resolving disputes. The current Accord, executed in 2005, is set to expire in 2010. In addition, the City has adopted an ordinance affecting the conversion of both mobile home parks and apartments to condominium ownership units. The ordinance establishes specific noticing requirements to reduce the impact of conversion on current residents, particularly those of low and moderate income.
2008-2014 Objective: Retain affordability of the Charter Oaks Mobile Home Park; continue the new space rental credit program at Charter Oaks Mobile Home Park assisting at least 5 lower income residents annually; and evaluate effectiveness of the program annually. Renew the Mobile Home Accord to provide stability in space rents. Continue to implement the conversion ordinance to provide tenant protections.
7.	Preservation of Villa San Dimas - Committed Assistance: The City/Agency, as detailed in the Resources chapter of the Element, has committed financial assistance for the acquisition and/or rehabilitation of Villa San Dimas in FY 2009/2010. The City will work with agencies interested in purchasing and rehabilitating Villa San Dimas. The City's assistance will be leveraged with outside sources. This assistance will require affordability and occupancy restrictions on the 50 very low income family units for a minimum of 40 years. The City's committed assistance is structured to allow the City to receive RHNA credit for 25 percent of its very low income RHNA needs or 40 units.
A second at risk development, Voorhis Village (65 units), is operated as a non-profit cooperative with a total of 21 units receiving project-based Section 8. The owners have not indicated an interest in prepaying the HUD loan at this time. However, the City will continue to monitor Voorhis Village and contact the property owners within one year of
r rl h J h t\/
Ull V/ I UM I I I V J
ovmrsfirm
V— ZX I 1 V*. Ul V-f I I
rlsitoc
V4 VI V-V- kJ
I kJ V^VJ kJ kJ
tho Cit\/
the
affordable housing.
V« kJ I I
2008-2014 Objective: By March 2010, work with priority purchasers and enter into a legally enforceable agreement for up to $2 million in committed assistance to preserve the 50 very low income units at-risk of conversion at Villa San Dimas. Report to HCD on the status of preservation no later than July 1, 2010, and to the extent an agreement is not in place, amend the Housing Element as necessary to identify additional sites. Contact the owners of Voorhis Village to
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-16
Housing Plan
initiate discussions regarding the City's desire to preserve as long term affordable housing by 2011.
8. Section 8 Rental Assistance: The City will continue to advertise opportunities for residents to participate in Housing Authority of the County of Los Angeles' (HACoLA) Section 8 rental assistance program. This program provides rental subsidies to very low income households, including families, seniors and the disabled. The Section 8 program offers a voucher that pays the difference between the current fair
morlzot rent	sjc oct^Klich^ri H\/
.....  ■ • •* "iv yi i » i • x y	v J ihm i iui i v \-i ks j
IUI IW V
l-ll
ID and \A/hat a tenant can	tn na\/ /i (■
/ u—v« a ■ \~a	» » i ■ v* V. a-*	i i UAl i <	a ■	a-* a a a \-a vv/ # kA j y a • v
of household income). The voucher allows a tenant to choose housing that costs above the payment standard, providing the tenant pays the extra cost. This program assists extremely low and very low income households.

2008-2014 Objective: Continue to participate in the Section 8 program administered by HACoLA and advertise to income eligible residents; encourage landlords to register units with the Housing Authority and undergo education on the Section 8 program.
PROVISION OF ADEQUATE SITES
9. Rezoning to Accommodate Higher Densities and Mixed Use: The City will rezone vacant and underutilized sites to facilitate the development of affordable and mixed income housing at 30 units per acre. The City has identified at least 27.6 acres to be rezoned, of which at least 7.4 acres will be designated as exclusively residential use at 30 units per acre. Residential sites to be rezoned will be selected from sites listed in the Sites for Rezoning parcel listing (Appendix A), will be suitable for residential use, have the capacity for at least 16 units on site, and will be available for development in the planning period where water and sewer services can be provided. These sites will provide the opportunity to develop at least 223 units at a density of at least 30 units per acre, providing suitable sites for development of housing affordable to lower income households. The City will also rezone a site to accommodate at least 38 units at a minimum density of 16 units per acre, providing a suitable site for development of housing affordable to moderate income households. These sites will be rezoned through development of a Specific Plan for each area, to be initiated by the City of San Dimas.
Bonita Canyon Gateway Specific Plan No. 26 was recently adopted, providing 48 units at 30 units per acre and up to 72 units at 16 units per acre. Work is beginning on the Downtown Specific Plan with completion by June 2009. The City will initiate the School District Site Specific Plan process with completion by June 2010.
The new Mixed-Use zone will provide for the development of commercial and higher density residential uses (up to 30 units per acre) in the downtown, encouraging economically and environmentally sustainable projects. The new Multiple-Family (30) zone will implement a new Very High Density Residential land use designation and will set forth development standards which allow achievement of at least 30 units per acre.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-17
Housing Plan
Residential development within these two zones will be permitted by right, but will undergo Design Plan Review to ensure development quality and compatibility. Both zones will provide modified parking standards for residential development.
As part of this rezoning effort, the City will also review the existing Noise Ordinance to determine appropriate standards. The City will make any revisions necessary to allow development of sites necessary to meet the City's regional housing need.
-------	— - - -	■	X. X. «.« » X- •

[?P7r>no Sit Idsict "7 A ^rroc fn arrnmmnrlofo 999 Inn/ar
IWZ-'_/IIV Ul IVUJl Z . I UVI V J IC' UCCVZ I I I I I IC/VJU 1C	I VZ V V V. I
income housing units at a minimum density of 30 units per acre; establish appropriate standards for the new Mixed-Use and Multiple-Family (30) zones; rezone to accommodate the City's remaining moderate income housing development need; and review the existing Noise Ordinance to ensure consistency. Complete rezoning by November 2010.
10. Residential and Mixed-Use Sites Inventory: As part of this Housing Element update, the City performed a parcel-specific vacant sites analysis. In addition, the City has identified key development opportunity sites for rezoning to higher density residential and mixed-use. Developers have expressed interest in developing on several of these sites with the City's support. An inventory of suitable residential sites provides essential information about the City's interest to developers. The Inventory will be available at the Redevelopment Agency's counter and by request on the City's website.
2008-2014 Objective: Maintain a current inventory of vacant .residential sites and potential mixed-use infill sites and provide to interested developers in conjunction with information on available development incentives.
11. Second Units: A second unit is a self-contained living unit with cooking, eating, sleeping, and full sanitation facilities, either attached to or detached from the primary residential unit on a single lot. Second units provide housing for either persons related to the primary resident on the property or to those that qualify in the categories of low or very low income households.
Chapter 18.38 of the City's Zoning Code allows second units by right on single and multi-family zoned properties improved with a single family dwelling with a minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet. The maximum size of the second unit is 500 square feet if attached to the single family dwelling; 600 square feet on properties sized 10,000-
90 nOO cnnaro foot* "7OO cnmro •foot	nrnnorfioc civorl 90 OO1 cmiaro -foot fr\ rvrio orrcv
' .........	UUI k, lk-k,q Z <ZkZ	V I W t \_z I I J_Z I V_Z [JV.1 llkz J	CJ ^\J f\J\J I JCjUUl C. ICCl LV_Z \J lie Clk_,l
i-Vikzw
and 850 square feet on properties over one acre in size. Second units shall not exceed two bedrooms. One additional off-street covered parking space is required for the second unit, with an additional uncovered parking space required for the second bedroom.
2008-2014 Objective: Continue implementation of the City's second unit ordinance.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-18
Housing Plan
ASSIST IN DEVELOPMENT AND PROVISION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
12.	Facilitate Infill and Mixed-Use Development: The City and its Redevelopment Agency play an important role in the provision of quality, affordable housing through land assembly and write-downs; direct financial assistance; and regulatory incentives (density bonus and other development incentives). This program will assist extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households.
The Redevelopment Agency entered an agreement in 2005 with William Fox Homes to develop Grove Station, a mixed-use project on a 5.25 acre site. The project will include a commercial component with 9,900 square feet and a residential component with 110 for-sale units, of which 10 will be affordable to moderate income households. Development of Grove Station required changes in land use, zoning and development standards, in addition to the financial assistance provided. With the planned designation of several sites for higher density and mixed-use housing in the greater Downtown, the City and its Redevelopment Agency will play an active role in facilitating their development.
The Agency will assist with site acquisition for the downtown sites as a means of encouraging consolidation of smaller parcels. The Agency's Implementation Plan allocates $5.9 million in order to financially participate in affordable housing development, providing housing for lower income households. The Agency will promote this assistance in conjunction with the Residential and Mixed-Use Sites Inventory (Program 10).
2008-2014 Objective: Provide regulatory and financial assistance, where feasible, for the development of affordable housing, with an emphasis on housing in the redevelopment area. Provide project by project financial analysis to guarantee appropriate use of funds.
13.	Inclusionary Housing: Pursuant to Redevelopment law, all housing projects within Redevelopment Project Areas generate a 15 percent low and moderate income inclusionary housing requirement. Of the 15 percent, 40 percent (or 6% of the total units) must be affordable to very low income households. The City expects that, as sites are zoned to allow mixed-use and higher densities, developers may request funds from the Agency in order to provide affordable housing on-site. In exchange for providing increased densities through the new Mixed-Use and Higher Density Residential Zones, the City is considering imposing an additional 5 percent inclusionary requirement on housing developments within the Redevelopment Project Areas.
2008-2014 Objective: Evaluate the economic impacts of implementing a 20 percent inclusionary requirement within the Redevelopment Project Areas. To the extent the increased inclusionary obligation is not anticipated to deter development, implement as Redevelopment Agency policy.
2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
V-19
Housing Plan
14. Homebuyer Assistance: The City previously implemented a homebuyer program to assist new buyers acquire existing housing in the City. However, due to the increasing cost of single-family homes in the area, the program faltered during the last five years. The City is providing funds for the 10 moderate income homebuyers in the Grove Station development and is currently designing the program for those acquisitions. The City intends to assess the potential use of similar assistance for the acquisition of existing housing.
tn/ift-WiA
w vz ■ ~r
Clhior'thw
r V.
irlo h
. .nmohi ivor sjccict^nr'o	1 mnrlarato inmmo
I kJ LU I I W LL7 I W III VI <, I U Ik, I I IVV/I I I V,
buyers in the Grove Station project. Assess the use of funds for a similar program to assist homebuyers purchase existing housing in the City.
15. Energy Conservation through Green Building: The City is concerned about the continued availability of all resources for the development of affordable housing. One opportunity for energy conservation, as required by Government Code Section 65583(a)(7), is encouraging "green buildings" which are structures that are designed, renovated, re-used or operated in a manner that enhances resource efficiency and sustainability. These structures reduce water consumption, improve energy efficiency and lessen a building's overall environmental impact.
To further green building goals, residential and mixed-use developments receiving Redevelopment Agency assistance will be encouraged to include sustainable design features to the extent financially feasible, such as:
>	Energy and water reduction strategies
>	Building design that maximizes sunlight for heat and light, and maximizes air flow for natural cooling
>	Solid waste reduction technologies
>	Storm water mitigation
2008-2014 Objective: Develop education materials on green building and provide to homeowners and builders in San Dimas. The City will provide this information at the City's Planning counter in City Hall, on the City's website, and through the Redevelopment Agency. Consider implementing requirements for green building design in Agency-assisted new construction.
REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
16. Reduce the Cost-Impact of the City's Development Permit Process: The City collects various fees from development to cover the costs of processing permits and providing services and facilities. While almost all these fees are assessed on a pro rata share system, they often contribute to the cost of housing and constrain the development of lower priced units. The reduction, deferral or waiver of City fees can lower residential construction costs.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-20
Housing Plan
The City's Development Services Department may provide planning fee reductions, deferrals or waivers for affordable housing developments. Fee reduction is decided on a project by project basis and is not automatically provided to all affordable housing projects.	.
The City has provided expedited review to affordable housing projects and will continue this practice. While the City does require a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) for multifamily development, the CUP is processed concurrently with other planning approvals, typically within a 6 - 8 week time frame. Nonetheless, the City will evaluate elimination of the current CUP requirement for projects with an affordable housing component.
2008-2014 Objective: Continue provision of planning fee reductions, deferrals or waivers, and expedited review for affordable housing projects. Evaluate elimination of the current Conditional Use Permit requirement for affordable housing, and revise the City's zoning requirements as appropriate.
17. Zoning Ordinance Revision: As part of the Housing Element's Governmental Constraints analysis, a revision to the San Dimas Zoning Code was identified as appropriate to better facilitate the provision of emergency shelters, transitional housing and supportive housing in the City. The revised code will identify emergency shelters as a permitted use in the Public/Semi-Public Zone, consistent with SB 2 (Government Code Section 65583(a)(4)(A)). The revised code will define and establish parameters for both transitional and supportive housing within the multiple-family residential zone.
While the City's zoning ordinance currently provides for emergency shelters within the Public/Semi-Public zone subject to a Conditional Use Permit (CUP), SB 2 now requires the ability to site an emergency shelter without a CUP. Therefore, the City will revise the Zoning Code with specific written, objective standards for emergency shelters as permitted under SB 2:
>	The maximum number of beds/persons permitted to be served nightly;
>	Off-street parking based on demonstrated need, but not to exceed parking requirements for other residential or commercial uses in the same zone;
>	The size/location of exterior and interior onsite waiting and client intake areas;
>	The provision of onsite management;
>	The proximity of other emergency shelters, provided that emergency shelters are not required to be more than 300 feet apart;
>	The length of stay;
>	Lighting;
>	Security during hours that the emergency shelter is in operation.
2008-2014 Objective: Amend the zoning ordinance by June 2009 to provide for emergency homeless shelters assisting extremely low income households as a permitted use in the Public/Semi-Public zone. Develop objective standards to regulate emergency shelters as provided for under SB 2. Amend the zoning
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-21
Housing Plan
ordinance by November 2009 to provide for transitional and supportive housing in the Multiple-Family Zone, assisting extremely low income households.
18.	Senior Housing Standards: The City established development standards for senior housing set forth in Chapter 18.151 of the City's Zoning Ordinance. The City will eliminate minimum dwelling unit standards for senior housing. Other development standards will also be analyzed and revised or eliminated as needed to better facilitate senior housing development.
2008-2014 Objective: Amend the zoning ordinance to modify or eliminate development standards for senior housing. This program will assist very low, low and moderate income senior households.
19.	Multiple-Family Development Standards: The City will review all standards for multi-family development and modify standards to better facilitate development. The Multiple-Family (MF) zone dates back to the 1960's with very few revisions occurring through the years. The City will analyze the entire Code section and make necessary revisions and modifications to MF zone in an attempt to make it more current. This program will include an analysis of the Conditional Use Permit requirement for multifamily projects incorporating units affordable to low and/or moderate income households, (including transitional and supportive housing) eliminating the CUP requirement as appropriate. Single Room Occupancy uses will be defined and permitted as a multiple-family use, subject to a Conditional Use Permit.
2008-2014 Objective: Amend the zoning ordinance to modify development standards for multi-family housing.
20.	Monitor Application of Design Review Process: The City maintains quality design standards and an efficient design review process for all projects where all projects and persons involved are treated equally. As with all City processes, the City constantly self evaluates the impacts and benefits of this process. For affordable housing projects, the City assesses any disproportionate costs and/or delays caused by the design review process.
2008-2014 Objective: Continue evaluation of the impact of the City's design review procedures on affordable housing, and modify as appropriate.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-22
Housing Plan
EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY
21.	Fair Housing: The City promotes fair housing and refers residents to various agencies that provide the following services:
>	Fair Housing Community Education
>	Fair Housing Enforcement
>	Tenant Legal Assistance
>	Housing Dispute Evaluation and Resolution
>	Mediation Program
The City provides brochures regarding fair housing services at the City's public facilities, and provides special announcements at least every six months on the City's website and on the City's public access channel.
2008-2014 Objective: Continue to promote fair housing practices, referring residents to agencies providing fair housing services. This program primarily assists lower income households.
22.	Senior Housing Alternatives, Resources, Education and Support (SHARES):
The City has expanded the Shared Housing Program to include assistance, referrals and/or case management services to seniors. As the City's population ages, the SHARES program is becoming more important. Shared housing opportunities promote independent living for both the provider and the seeker. Sharing a home provides additional income for the provider, an affordable rent for the seeker, and the potential for deeper relationships for both.
2008-2014 Objective:	Continue to implement . the SHARES program,
encompassing both services and roommate matching for seniors. Assist 600 seniors annually, with at least 50 participants at any time in the shared housing program. This program assists lower income households.
23.	Accessible Housing: The City adopted an ordinance in 2005 related to the granting of reasonable accommodations to disabled individuals. This ordinance establishes the process for requesting and granting reasonable accommodations for residential and non-residential buildings in the City.
2008-2014 Objective: Continue to implement the Reasonable Accommodations ordinance. Periodically analyze the City's process to determine any constraints to the development, maintenance, and improvement of housing for persons with disabilities and take measures to remove those constraints.
24.	Homeless Assistance: The City is participating in the Homelessness and Homeless Services Study sponsored by the San Gabriel Valley Council of Governments. The goal of this regional study is to coordinate the efforts of local jurisdictions to assist the homeless and work together to provide services as appropriate. The study will
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-23
Housing Plan
assess the number of homeless in the area and the services available, and provide recommendations for future efforts to address the needs of the homeless. The City also participates in the East San Gabriel Valley Consortium on Homelessness, a group of stakeholders involved in the provision of services to the homeless in the East San Gabriel Valley.
In addition, the City provides funds to a local non-profit group offering services to the area's homeless and at-risk population. The City also promotes and makes referrals to various services agencies in the area. The City promotes services for the homeless on the City's website and through brochures available at the Senior Center, City Hall, and Library. The City also works closely with the Sheriff's Department at the San Dimas Station to update referrals for the homeless.
2008-2014 Objective: Continue participation in the San Gabriel Valley Council of Government's efforts to address the needs of the extremely low income homeless in the area. Continue allocation of funds for social services aiding the homeless.
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-24
Housing Plan
Table V-3
2008-2014 Housing Program Summary
Housing rrogram	Program Goal	2008-2014 Objective	Funding Source	Responsible Agency	Time Frame	Policy
EXISTING AFFORDABLE HOUSING						
1. Housing Code Enforcement and Abatement	Bring all housing into code compliance.	Conduct 50 inspections annually. Provide referrals to Single-Family Rehabilitation (Program 3).	General Revenue	Building and Safety; Code Enforcement	2008-2014	1.1; 1.3
2. Neighborhood Beautification	Improve quality of life and housing conditions in neighborhoods with older housing stock	Conduct improvement activities within targeted areas.	RDA Set-Aside	Redevelopment Agency: Housing	2008-2014	1.1; 1.3
3. Single-Family Rehabilitation	Provide financial assistance to extremely low, very low and low income home owners for home repairs.	Assist 70 households annually, or 420 over the 2008-2014 period. Evaluate extending to moderate income.	CDBG; RDA Set-Aside	Redevelopment Agency: Housing	2008-2014; Evaluate income thresholds by 2009.	1.2
4. Single-Family Owner-Occupied Substantial Rehabilitation	Provide financial assistance to low income households for substantial home repairs.	Assist 20 households between 2008 and 2010.	CalHome	Redevelopment Agency: Housing	2008-2010	1.2
5. Lead-Based Paint Hazard Assessment and Abatement	Provide financial assistance to low income households for assessment and abatement.	Assist 10 homes annually or 60 homes over the 2008-2014 period. Continue to market program in conjunction with the Single-Family Rehab Program (Program 3).	CDBG	Redevelopment Agency: Housing	2008-2014	1.2
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-25
Housing Plan
Table V-3
2008-2014 Housing Program Summary (cont'd)
Housing Program	Program Goal	2008-2014 Objective	Funding Source	Responsible Agency	Time Frame	Policy
EXISTING AFFORDABLE HOUSING (cont'd)						
6. Mobile Home Park Preservation and Affordability	Preserve mobile home parks and retain rent affordability for lower income households.	Renew the Mobile Home Accord; continue affordability of Charter Oaks Mobile Home Park; and continue new space rent credit program for Charter Oaks at least 5 lower income residents annually.	Department Budget	Redevelopment Agency: Housing	2008-2014; Renew Accord by December 2010. Evaluate space rent credit program annually.	1.5
7. Preservation of Assisted Rental Housing	Preserve the existing housing stock affordable to very low income households at-risk of conversion to market rents.	Commit funding to preserve Villa San Dimas. Initiate discussions with Voorhis Village.	RDA Set-Aside; Section 8	Redevelopment Agency: Housing	Commit funds to Villa San Dimas by March 2010. Contact Voorhis Village by 2011.	1.4
8. Section 8 Rental Assistance	Provide rental assistance to extremely low and very low income households.	Continue participation and coordination with HACoLA; encourage landlords to register units; advertise program to residents.	HUD Section 8	HACoLA	2008-2014	1.6
2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
V-26
HOUSING PLAN
Table V-3
2008-2014 Housing Program Summary (cont'd)
Housing Program	Program Goal	2008-2014 Objective	Funding Source	Responsible Agency	Time Frame	Policy
PROVISION or ADEQUATE SITES						
9. Rezoning to Accommodate Higher Density Residential and Mixed-Use	Create additional opportunities for mixed-use and higher density residential development, providing sites at 16 units per acre for moderate income housing development and sites at 30 units per acre for lower income housing development.	Rezone at least 7.4 acres at 30 units/acre to accommodate 223 units; establish appropriate standards for the new Mixed-Use and Multiple-Family (30) zones; rezone to provide at least 38 units at a min of 16 units per acre; and review the existing Noise Ordinance to ensure consistency.	Department Budget	Planning Department	Complete rezoning by November 2010.	2.1; 2.2
10. Residential and Mixed-Use Sites Inventory	Identify sufficient sites for housing to meet RHNA for all income levels.	Maintain current inventory of sites, and provide to developers along with information on incentives (Program 12).	Department Budget	Planning Department	2008-2014	2.3
11. Second Units	Provide additional sites for rental housing within existing neighborhoods assisting moderate income households.	Continue to implement City's ordinance to accommodate second units.	Department Budget	Planning Department	2008-2014	2.4
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-27
Housing plan
Table V-3
2008-2014 Housing Program Summary (cont'd)
Housing Program	Program Goal	2008-2014 Objective	Funding Source	Responsible Agency	Time Frame	Policy
ASSIST IN DEVELOPMENT AND PROVISION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING						
12. Facilitate Infill and Mixed-Use Development	Provide financial and regulatory assistance in support of extremely low, very low, low and moderate income housing.	Assist in development of 110 new affordable units. Market in conjunction with Housing Site Inventory (Program 10).	RDA Set-Aside	Redevelopment Agency; Planning Department	2008-2014	3.1; 3.2; 3.3; 3.6
13. Inclusionary Housing	Provide additional affordable housing in new residential developments for very low, low and moderate income households.	Evaluate economic impacts of implementing a 20% inclusionary requirement for multiple-family residential development in redevelopment project areas.	Department Budget	Redevelopment Agency; Planning Department	June 2009	3.4
14. Homebuyer Assistance	Provide assistance to moderate income households purchasing at Grove Station; evaluate provision of funds to buyers of existing housing in the City.	Develop homebuyer program for 10 Grove Station units; expand the program to purchasers of existing housing.	RDA Set-Aside	Redevelopment Agency: Housing	2008-2014; Develop guidelines by 2008.	3.5; 3.6
REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS						
15. Green Building	Promote energy conservation and sustainable design in new and existing development	Adopt Citywide Green Building program. Require in Agency-assisted projects.	Department Budgets	Planning Department- Redevelopment Agency	2008-2014; Adopt Green Building Program in 2008/09.	3.7; 3.8
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-28
Housing Plan
Table V-3
2008-2014 Housing Program Summary (cont'd)
Housing Program	Program Goal	2008-2014 Objective	Funding Source	Responsible Agency	Time Frame	Policy
REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS (cont'd						
16. Reduce the Cost-Impact of the City's Development Permit Process	Provide fee reduction, deferral or waiver to reduce cost of providing affordable housing. Provide expedited process to affordable housing projects	Evaluate affordable projects to assess applicability of fee reduction, deferral or waiver, and expedited project review. Evaluate elimination of CUP requirement for affordable housing.	Department Budget	Planning Department	2008-2014; CUP evaluation by 2009.	4.1; 4.2
17. Zoning Ordinance Revision	Provide appropriate zoning to facilitate the provision of emergency shelters, transitional housing and supportive housing for extremely low and very low income homeless.	Amend the Zoning Code to allow emergency shelters as a permitted use in the P/SP zones subject to reasonable development standards. Amend the Zoning Code to define and permit transitional housing and supportive housing in the MF zone.	Department Budget	Planning Department	November 2009	4.2
18. Revise Senior Housing Standards	Review and modify senior housing development standards.	Amend the Zoning Code as necessary.	Department Budget	Planning Department	November 2010	4.2; 4.3
19. Revise Multi-Family Development Standards	Review and modify multifamily housing development standards if necessary.	Amend the Zoning Code as necessary	Department Budget	Planning Department	November 2010	4.2; 4.3
2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
V-29
Housing Plan
Table V-3
2008-2014 Housing Program Summary (cont'd)
Housing Program	Program Goal	2008-2014 Objective	Funding Source	Responsible Agency	Time Frame	Policy
REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS (cont'd			I			
20. Monitor Application of Design Review Process	Evaluate potential negative impact of the design review process on affordable housing projects.	Review on a project-by-project basis	Department Budget	Planning Department- Redevelopment Agency	2008-2014	4.2
EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY						
21. Fair Housing	Promote fair housing practices, assisting lower income households.	Continue referrals to various fair housing agencies; provide fair housing materials to residents.	CDBG; RDA Set-Aside	Redevelopment Agency: Housing	2008-2014	5.1; 5.2
22. Senior Housing Alternatives, Resources, Education and Support (SHARES)	Provide specialized housing services to seniors, including home sharing, assisting lower income households.	Serve 600 seniors annually, including 50 home sharing participants.	CDBG; RDA Set-Aside	Redevelopment Agency	2008-2014	5.5
23. Accessible Housing	Provide accessible housing to persons with disabilities.	Continue implementatio n of reasonable accommodatio ns ordinance; continue to review ordinances for constraints to accessible housing.	CDBG; RDA Set-Aside	Redevelopment Agency: Housing; Planning Department	2008-2014	5.6
24. Homeless Assistance	Coordinate efforts with other San Gabriel Valley cities to assist the extremely low income homeless	Continue participation in SGVCOG Homeless Study; and allocate funds to homeless service providers.	Department Budget; General Fund	Planning Department; Redevelopment Agency: Housing	2008-2014	5.3; 5.4
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-30
Housing Plan
Table V-4
2008-2014 Summary of Quantified Objectives
Income Level	New Construction*	Rehabilitation	Conservation**
	Goal	Goal	Goal
Extremely Low	81	100	
Very Low	81	110	455
Low	101	230	455
Moderate	107	0	0
Above Moderate	255	0	0
Totals	625	440	910
* Reflects RHNA
** Reflects preservation of 10 assisted units at Villa San Dimas not meeting committed assistance definition, and 900 mobile home park units
2008-2014 Housing Element
V-31
Housing Plan
APPENDIX A
r
Residential Sites Inventory
Available Residential Property Table Sites for Rezoning Table Residential Sites for Rezoning Methodology Adequate Sites Program Alternative Checklist
City of San Dimas
Available Residential Property
APN#	Site Address	Existing Gen Plan	Existing Zoning	Property Size Acres	Number of New Units Status
Single Family -	■ Very Low Estate				
8665002015	Terrebonne	Single Family-Very Low Estate	SF-H	5.6	1 Vacant
8382011017	De Anza Heights Dr.	Single Family-Very Low Estate	SF-H(PH)	1.3	1 Vacant
8382011019	De Anza Heights Dr.	Single Family-Very Low Estate	SF-H(PH)	1.1	1 Vacant
8382011022	De Anza Heights Dr.	Single Family-Very Low Estate	SF-H(PH)	6.2	2 Vacant
8382011023	S. Walnut Ave.	Single Family-Very Low Estate	SF-H(PH)	1.9	1 Vacant
8382011031	S. Walnut Ave.	Single Family-Very Low Estate	SF-H(PH)	2.8	1 Vacant
8382011046	De Anza Heights Dr.	Single Family-Very Low Estate	SF-H(PH)	1.7	1 Vacant
8382011050	De Anza Heights Dr.	Single Family-Very Low Estate	SF-H(PH)	1.0	1 Vacant
8382012020	S. Walnut Ave.	Single Family-Very Low Estate	SF-H(PH)	1.0	1 Vacant
Various	Northern Foothills	Single Family-Very Low Estate	SP-25	2520.0	93 Vacant
				2542.6	103 All acres vacant
Single Family •	■ Very Low				
8385020041	S. Valley Center	Single Family-Very Low	SFA-16000	0.4	1 Vacant
8385020042	S. Valley Center	Single Family-Very Low	SFA-16000	0.4	.1 Vacant
8385020043	S. Valley Center	Single Family-Very Low	SFA-16000	0.5	1 Vacant
8392015020	Chaparral- Cody	Single Family-Very Low	SFA-16000	0.5	1 Vacant
8392015041	W. Gladstone	Single Family-Very Low	SFA-16000	0.9	1 Vacant
8661017011	Cherokee Ct.	Single Family-Very Low	SFA-16000	1.0	2 Vacant
8392018013	613 W. Ghent	Single Family-Very Low	SFA-16000	0.8	1 Vacant'
8665005006	1400 N. Shilmar	Single Family-Very Low	SFA-20000	1.1	1 Vacant
8448038032	1514 Calle Cristina	Single Family-Very Low	SP-11	2.2	1 Vacant
8448038035	1532 Calle Cristina	Single Family-Very Low	SP-11	1.4	1 Vacant
8448038040	Calle Cristina	Single Family-Very Low	SP-11	3.0	1 Vacant
8448038045	Paseo Lucinda	Single Family-Very Low	SP-11	1.0	1 Vacant
8448038047	1609 Calle Cristina	Single Family-Very Low	SP-11	0.9	1 Vacant
8448038051	Calle Cristina	Single Family-Very Low	SP-11	1.0	1 Vacant
8448038053	1551 Calle Cristina	Single Family-Very Low	SP-11	1.8	1 Vacant
8448056015	1049 Via Romales	Single Family-Very Low	SP12	1.0	1 Vacant
8448056002	1042 Via Romales	Single Family-Very Low	SP-12	0.7	1 Vacant
8448056006	1018 Via Romales	Single Family-Very Low	SP-12	1.2	1 Vacant
8448056014	1043 Via Romales	Single Family-Very Low	SP-12	1.9	1 Vacant
8386005050	526 Gladstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-3	4.0	3 One house
8386001077	330 W. Gladstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-3	2.4	1 Vacant
8386050064	619 W. Gladstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-3	0.5	1 Vacant
8386050067	607 W. Gladstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-3	0.4	1 Vacant
8448031023	Calle Canela	Single Family-Very Low	SP-5	1.2	1 Vacant
8448031022	Calle Canela	Single Family-Very Low	SP-5	1.4	1 Vacant
8448031024	Calle Canela	Single Family-Very Low	SP-5	1.5	1 Vacant
8448031025	Calle Canela	Single Family-Very Low	SP-5	1.0	1 Vacant
8448031039	210 Calle Colorado	Single Family-Very Low	SP-5	0.6	1 Vacant
8448031040	121 Calle Colorado	Single Family-Very Low	SP-5	0.4	1 Vacant
8448031063	108 Calle Colorado	Single Family-Very Low	SP-5	1.1	1 Vacant
8382017004	Puddingstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-8	1.2	1 Vacant
8382017009	Puddingstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-8	1.1	1 Vacant
1 of2
City of San Dimas
Available Residential Property
APN#	Site Address	Existing Gen Plan	Existing Zoning	Property Size Acres	Number of New Units Status
8382017011	Puddingstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-8	1.1	1 Vacant
8382017018	Puddingstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-8	0.9	1 Vacant
8382017019	Puddingstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-8	1.0	1 Vacant
8382017024	Puddingstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-8	0.9	1 Vacant
8382017025	Puddingstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-8	2.0	1 Vacant
8382018011	Puddingstone	Single Family-Very Low	SP-8	1.0	1 Vacant
8382018040	Rebecca	Single Family-Very Low	SP-8	1.2	1 Vacant
8382018041	Rebecca	Single Family-Very Low	SP-8	0.9	1 Vacant
				47 1	43 43.1 acres vacant; 4 acres underutilized
Single Family - Low					
8426021006 & 8385016004	End of Valley Ctr.	Single Family-Low	SP-4	19.0	18 For sale
8661009025	220 W. Baseline	Single Family-Low	SF-16000	4.9	7 Vacant
8390021048-053	217 W. Commercial	Single Family-Low	SF-7000	0.8	5 Vacant
8386001021-027	Paseo Aldeano	Single Family-Low	SF7500	1.2	7 Vacant
8383012019	309 N. Lone Hill	Single Family-Low	SF-7500	7.8	18 Vacant
8386023039 & 043	814 W. Gladstone	Single Family-Low	SFt7500	.1.3	5 Vacant
8665003001	1426 N. Cataract	Single Family-Low	SFA 16000	6.2	7 Vacant
8392050029	405 W. Gladstone	Single Family-Low	SFA 16000	3.7	3 One house
8382013041 et.al	Puddingstone "	Single Family-Low	SFA-10000	1.5	5
8392006075	N. Walnut/Allen	Single Family-Low	SFA-20000	0.5	1 Vacant
8426033015	Edinburgh	Single Family-Low	SP-4	1.0	1 Vacant
8392006077	N. Walnut/Allen	Single Family-Low		1.0	1 Vacant
				48.8	78 45.1 acres vacant; 3.7 acres underutilized
High Density Residential					
8392011068	922 N. San Dimas Av	High	MF(16)	0.8	Underutilized
8392011027	912 N. San Dimas Av	High	MF(16)	0.3	Underutilized
8392011028	904 N. San Dimas Av	High	MF(16)	0.1	Underutilized
8392011029	902 N. San Dimas Av	High	MF(16)	0.1	Underutilized
8392011030	121 East Allen Av	High	MF(16)	0.2	Underutilized
8392011069	129 East Allen Av	High	MF(16)	0.3	Underutilized
8392011032	133 East Allen Av	High	MF(16)	0.2	Underutilized
8392011047	915 Sedona Ct	High	MF(16)	0.2	Underutilized
				2.3	36 All acres underutilized
Downtown Mixed-Use					
8390019036	SWC San Dimas Ave./Commercial	Downtown Mixed Use	CG-3	1.8	20
				1.8	20 All acres vacant
			TOTAL	2642.6	
<
2 of 2
SITES FOR REZONING
Existing
APN #	Site Address	Gen Plan
Existing Property Zoning Size Acres
Required Acres 30 units/acre
Number
of New Units Status
Comments
Canyon Center Site		Specific Plan	
83913010-0120	Bonita Canyon Gateway	Commercial	No. 26	8.5
1.6
48 Vacant Shopping Center
1.6 acres @ 30 units/acre; another 72 units @ min 16 units/acre
Bonita School District Office 2	8390012900	115 W. Allen Ave.
Commercial
PS
7.43
2.5	75 Offices, Bus Yard, District Kitchen 2.5 acres @ 30 units/acre
Site East of Grove Station, West of Walnut, North of Arrow Highway, South of Railroad						
3	8390018023	Downtown Mixed Use	CG-3	0.51		Gas Station
4	8390018040	Commercial	M-1	1.97		Industrial Bldgs.
5	8390018048 & 027	Commercial	M-1	2.16		Self Storage
6	8390018045	Commercial	M-1	0.90		Industrial Bldgs.
7	8390018046	Commercial	M-1	0.95		Industrial Bldgs.
8	8390018028	Industrial	M-1	0.83		Kennel
9	8390018036-037	Industrial	M-1	2.19		Office Bldg.
10	• 8390018907-909	Public/Semi-Public	M-1	2.18		City Yard
				11.69	3.3	100
	TOTAL			27.62	7.4	223
3.3 acres @ 30 units/acre
Bonita High School District Office Site (APN 8390-012-900).
This 7.43 property is located on the northwest corner of San Dimas Avenue and Allen Avenue. It is adjacent (south) of the 210 Freeway at the San Dimas Avenue Freeway exit. The property is currently home to the Bonita School District offices and facilities, the district bus yard and central kitchen food preparation facility. The majority of buildings on the property are over 30 years old. The property is zoned Public/Semi-Public and has a Commercial General Plan designation.
This property was chosen because a majority of the property is underutilized and transition to a mixed use with a mandatory residential component could spur property development. A significant portion of the property is taken up by typical industrial uses such as the bus yard and central kitchen. The site is located within a Redevelopment Project Area, enabling the Agency to work with the developer on an affordable housing component.
The rezoning shall take place as a specific plan, prepared by the City, that will entitle a minimum of 2.5 acres at 30 dwelling units per acre (75 units) somewhere on the property. The balance of the property will complete the mixed use project with lower density residential, commercial, office or public/semi-public use. By allowing the 2.5 acres to be floating, there will be a greater amount of development flexibility that will serve to improve the residential development ability of the property.
Residential Sites for Rezoning Methodology
Bonita Canyon Gateway (Former Canyon Center) Site.
The City Council approved Specific Plan No. 26 for this 8.5 acre property on May 27, 2008. The Specific Plan creates one 1.6 acre parcel zoned for 30 units per acre (48 units) with an additional 72 units on 3.3 acres (a density of 21 units per acre) and a 3.6 acre commercial project. The property is located in the Redevelopment Project Area and the Agency is in discussion with the developer regarding the mix of affordability for the project.
TEEOWE WT EBE El©„
IN THE CITY OF SAN DIMAS, COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES, STATE OF CALIF
Properties East of Grove Station.
There are eight sites immediately east of the Grove Station project, west of Walnut Avenue, north of Arrow Highway, and east of San Dimas Avenue that are underutilized and are proposed for rezoning. These sites comprise 10.45 acres. The majority of the property is currently zoned Light Manufacturing (M-1), with one 0.51 parcel zoned Create Growth Zone - Area 3. Each of the eight sites is owned separately, including one publicly owned site. The City has designated by the City Council as a possible location for a Gold Line station.
The City would rezone through a specific plan process, requiring and providing entitlements for at least 3.3 acres of the property to be designated for exclusively residential use at 30 dwelling units per acre (111 units). The remaining portion of the site could be developed as office, commercial, or mixed-use. Since the site is adjacent to the Grove Station mixed-use project and has the potential as a transit oriented development, a specific plan would provide a flexible zoning tool for development of the site. Since the property is located in the Redevelopment Project Area, there is the ability for property consolidation to encourage development and provide incentives for affordable housing.
The following table addresses the existing land use of each lot in the area:
APN	Current Use	Acreage	Year Built	Condition
8390-018-023	M&N Dairy and Gas Station	0.51	1967	This property is underutilized. As a corner location, it is an entry into the downtown area and warrants a total site rebuild.
8390-018-040	San Dimas Arrow Business Park	1.97	1980	This 2 acre industrial property is underutilized. Buildings are in very poor condition and the site has a deficiency of parking. A total site rebuild is warranted.
8390-018-048 & 8390-018-027	San Dimas Storage Center	2.16	1978	This 2.1 acre industrial property is underutilized and an older one story self storage. The higher and better use for this property would be a mixed use transit oriented development because of its locating in the planning area. Relocation of the storage facility may be warranted.
8390-018-045	135 East Arrow Hwy.	0,90	1980	There is an auto repair facility on this property. It is underutilized as a .9 acre property with very limited existing development and less than 10% lot coverage.
8390-018-046	207 East Arrow Hwy.	0.95	1967	There is an industrial use on this property. It is underutilized as a .95 acre property with very limited existing development and has less that 1.0% lot coverage.
8390-018-028	213-219 East Arrow Hwy.	0.83	1895	A dog kennel is located on this property and the house on the 219 property is historic. The historic house may warrant preservation, or relocation, but the balance of the property would lend itself to mixed use development.
8390-018-036	279 East Arrow Hwy. Jacobs Engineering.	1.7	1988	There are approved plans to change this industrial building into an office building. This site will be part of the mixed-used zone, but not used for housing. It is a 1.7 acre property.
8390-018-907,908 & 909	301 South Walnut (City Yard)	2.18	1970’s	The 2 acre City Yard property is adjacent to the railroad and has driveway access to Walnut Avenue. The property is underutilized as an industrial use in an area with the potential for more dense development. The facility is older and could be located at many other industrial locations in the city.
STATE OF CALIFORNIA-BUSINESS TRANSPORTATION AND HOUSING AGENCY	'	ARNOl D SCHWAR7FNFGGFR Gnvsmnr
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT Division of Housing Policy Development
1800
TS16'
£00 Third Street, Suite 430 Box 952053 .ramento, CA 94252-2053 '16) 323-3177
FAX (916) 327-2643
Adequate Sites Program Alternative Checklist
Government Code Section 65583.1 (c)
(Chapter 796, Statutes of 1998 [AB 438])
As provided for in Government Code Section 65583.1(c), local governments can rely on existing housing units to address up to 25 percent of their adequate sites requirement by counting existing units made available or preserved through the provision of “committed assistance" to low- and
S very low-income households at affordable housing costs or affordable rents. The following is a checklist intended to provide guidance in determining whether the provisions of Government Code
Section 65583.1(c) can be used to address the adequate sites program requirement. A “yes” answer to the questions below means the alternative site program option(s) may be applicable to your community.
HE
Page #
65583.1(c)(4) Is the local government providing, or will it provide “committed assistance” within the first 2 years of the planning period? See the definition of “committed assistance” on page 4.	El Yes □ No	IV-10
65583.1(c)(1)(A) Has the local government identified the specific source of “committed assistance” funds?	El Yes □ No	IV-10
Specify the amount and date when funds will be dedicated through a (legally enforceable agreement).	$	2,000,000 date:	March 2010		
65583.1(c)(3) Has at least some portion of the regional share housing need for very low-income (VL) or low-income (L) households been met in the current or previous planning period? Specify the number of affordable units permitted/constructed in the previous period. Specify the number affordable units permitted/constructed in the current period and document how affordability was established.	El Yes □ No 2 VL; 2 L	V-10
		
		
65583.1(c)(1)(B) Indicate the total number of units to be assisted with committed assistance funds and specify funding source.	40	IV-10
	RDA Set-Aside	
65583.1(c)(1)(B) Will the funds be sufficient to develop the identified units at affordable costs or rents?	El Yes □ No	IV-10
65583.1(c)(1)(C) Do the identified units meet the substantial rehabilitation, conversion, or preservation requirements as defined? Which option? Preservation	El Yes n No	IV-10
Note: If you cannot answer “yes” to all of the general requirements questions listed above, your jurisdiction is not eligible to utilize the alternate adequate sites program provisions set forth in Government Code Section 65583.1(c).		
Adequate Sites Program Alternative Checklist
Page 2
he
Page #
SUBSTANTIAL REHABILITA TION (65583.1(c)(2)(A))		
Include reference to specific program action in the housing element.		
65583.1(c)(2)(A) Will the rehabilitation result in a net increase in the number of housing units available and affordable to very low- and lower-income households?	□	Yes □	No	
If so, how many units?	#	of VLI units #	of LI units		
65583.1 (c)(2)(A)(i) (I) Are units at imminent risk of loss to affordable housing stock?	□Yes □ No	
65583.1 (c)(2)(A)(i) (II) Is the local government providing relocation assistance consistent with Health and Safety Code Section 17975, including rent and moving expenses equivalent to four (4) months, to those occupants permanently or temporary displaced?	□	Yes □	No	
65583.1 (c)(2)(A)(i) (III) Will tenants will have the right to reoccupy units?	□Yes □ No	
65583.1 (c)(2)(A)(i) (IV) Have the units been determined to be unfit for human habitation due the at least four (4) of the followinq violations? (a)	Termination, extended interruption or serious defects of gas, water or electric utility systems provided such interruptions or termination is not caused by the tenant's failure to pay such gas, water Or electric bills. (b)	Serious defects or lack of adequate space and water heating. (c)	Serious rodent, vermin or insect infestation. (d)	Severe deterioration, rendering significant portions of the structure unsafe or unsanitary. (e)	Inadequate numbers of garbage receptacles or service. - (f)	Unsanitary conditions affecting a significant portion of the structure as a result of faulty plumbing or sewage disposal. (g)	Inoperable hallway lighting.	□Yes □ No	
65583.1 (c)(2)(A)(ii) Will affordability and occupancy restrictions be maintained for at least 20 years?	□	Yes □	No	
65583.1 (c)(2)(A)(iii) Note: Prior to occupancy of the rehabilitated units, the local government must issue a certificate that finds the units comply with all local and State building and health and safety requirements.		
		
CONVERSION OF MULTIFAMILY RENTAL UNITS OF 4 OR MORE FROM NON-AFFORDABLE TO AFFORDABLE (65583.1(c)(2)(B))		
Include reference to specific program description in the housing element.		
65583.1 (c)(2)(B)(i) Will the acquired units be made affordable to low- or very low-income households?	□Yes □ No	
Adequate Sites Program Alternative Checklist
Page 3
HE
Page #
65583.1 (c)(2)(B)(ii) Were the units affordable to very low- or low-income households at the time they were identified for acquisition?	□	Yes □	No	
65583.1 (c)(2)(B)(iii) If the acquisition results in the displacement of very low- or low-income households, is the local government providing relocation assistance consistent with Health and Safety Code Section 17975, including rent and moving expenses equivalent to four (4) months, to those occupants permanently or temporary displaced? No Displacement Anticipated	□Yes □ No	
eccoo d/-\/o\/d\/:..\ UUUOO. 1	vj Will units be decent, safe, and sanitary upon occupancy?	□	Yes □	No	
65583.1 (c)(2)(B)(v) Will affordability and occupancy restrictions be maintained at least 55 years?	□	Yes □	No	
		
PRESERVATION OF AFFORDABLE UNITS (65583.1(c)(2)(C))		
Include reference to specific program action in housing element.	Program 7	V-17
65583.1 (c)(2)(C)(i) Will affordability and occupancy restrictions be maintained for at least 40 years?	El Yes □ No	IV-10
65583.1 (c)(2)(C)(ii) Are the units located within an “assisted housing development” as defined in Government Code Section 65863.10(a)(3)? See definition on payc -t.	El Yes □ No	IV-10
65583.1 (c)(2)(C)(iii) Did the city/county, via the public hearing process, find that the units are eligible and are reasonably expected to convert to market rate during the next 5 years, due to termination of subsidies, prepayment, or expiration of use?	ElYes □ No	IV-10
65583.1 (c)(2)(C)(iv) Will units be decent, safe, and sanitary upon occupancy?	ElYes □ No	IV-10
65583.1 (c)(2)(C)(v) Were the units affordable to very low- and low-income households at the time the units were identified for preservation?	ElYes □ No	IV-10
NOTE:
•	By no later than July 1st of the third year of the planning period, local governments must report on the status of its program implementation for substantial rehabilitation, conversion, and/or preservation (of affordability) as described above (Government Code 65583.1(c)(7)).
•	The report must specify and identify those units for which committed assistance has been provided or which have been made available to low- and very low-income households and document how each unit complies with the substantial rehabilitation, conversion, and/or preservation provisions.
•	If the local government has not entered into an enforceable agreement of committed assistance for all units specified in the identified program(s), by the July 1st due date, it must amend its element to identify additional appropriately zoned and suitable sites, sufficient to accommodate the number of units for which committed assistance was not provided. This follow-up action must be taken no later than July 1st of the fourth year of the planning period.
•	If a local government fails to amend its element to identify adequate sites to address any shortfall, or fails to complete the rehabilitation, acquisition, purchase of affordability covenants, or the preservation of any housing unit within two years after committed assistance was provided to that unit, the local government cannot use the alternate adequate sites program provisions of
Government Code Section 65583.1(c)(1) in it next housing element update, beyond the number of units actually provided or preserved due to committed assistance.
DEFINITIONS:
Committed Assistance: When a local government has entered into a legally enforceable agreement during the first two years of the housing element planning period obligating funds for affordable units available for occupancy within two years of the agreement.
Assisted Housing Development: A multifamily rental housing development that receives
governmental assistance under any of the following programs:
(A)	New construction, substantial rehabilitation, moderate rehabilitation, property disposition, and loan management set-aside programs, or any other program providing project-based assistance, under Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended (42 U.S.C. Sec. 1437f).
(B)	The following federal programs:
(i)	The Below-Market-lnterest-Rate Program under Section 221(d)(3) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. Sec. 17151(d)(3) and (5)).
(ii)	Section 236 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. Sec.1715z-1).
(iii)	Section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C. Sec. 1701 q).
(C)	Programs for rent supplement assistance under Section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965, as amended (12 U.S.C. Sec. 1701s).
(D)	Programs under Sections 514, 515, 516, 533, and 538 of the Housing Act of 1949, as amended (42 U.S.C. Sec. 1485).
(E)	Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code.
(F)	Section 142(d) of the Internal Revenue Code (tax-exempt private.activity mortgage revenue bonds).
(G)	Section 147 of the Internal Revenue Code (Section 501(c)(3) bonds).
(H)	Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (Community Development Block Grant Program).
(I)	Title II of the Cranston-Gonzales National Affordable Housing Act of 1990, as amended (HOME Investment Partnership Program).
(J)	Titles IV and V of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act of 1987, as amended, including the Department of Housing and Urban Development's Supportive Housing Program, Shelter Plus Care program, and surplus federal property disposition program.
(K)	Grants and loans made by the Department of Housing and Community Development, including the Rental Housing Construction Program, CHRP-R, and other rental housing finance programs.
(L)	Chapter 1138 of the Statutes of 1987.
(M)	The following assistance provided by counties or cities in exchange for restrictions on the maximum rents that may be charged for units within a multifamily rental housing development and on the maximum tenant income as a condition of eligibility for occupancy of the unit subject to the rent restriction, as reflected by a recorded agreement with a county or city:
(i)	Loans or grants provided using tax increment financing pursuant to the Community Redevelopment Law (Part 1 (commencing with Section 33000) of Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code).
(ii)	Local housing trust funds, as referred to in paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Section 50843 of the Health and Safety Code.
(iii)	The sale or lease of public property at or below market rates.
(iv)	The granting of density bonuses, or concessions or incentives, including fee waivers, parking variances, or amendments to general plans, zoning, or redevelopment project area plans, pursuant to Chapter 4.3 (commencing with Section 65915).
Assistance pursuant to this subparagraph shall not include the use of tenant-based Housing Choice Vouchers (Section 8(o)) of the United States Housing Act of 1937, 42 U.S.C. Sec. 1437f(o), excluding subparagraph (13) relating to project-based assistance). Restrictions shall not include any rent control or rent stabilization ordinance imposed by a county, city, or city and county.
Appendix B
Public Participation
Public Hearing Notices Housing Element Notification List San Dimas Survey Instrument and Results County Survey Instrument and Results
yITY OF SAN DIMAS CITY COUNCIL
SUBJECT:
LOCATION:
REQUEST:
ENVIRONMENTAL:
APPLICANT:
General Rian Amendment'08^-01
PUBLIC
HEARING
Location:
HEARlNQqAte AND TIME:
City df San Dimas
City Hall.,6ouncU;^hamb;ers
24$
S§ri;Simps- ^lifofnia^Ws
Tuesday,;Rebnjary26,2008at’7:00 P.M.?
ivu ,iu.	u iai ijr ,.a.i i iiri lyijiii ic vi iwU 01 ijl

an analysis of existing housing stock and programs; the document also recommends new

recommendations to ensure .related to housing;

A copy of the Draft Housing Element is on file in the Planning Division at City Hall and is also auailahlo at tho Ran nima£ /i ihra~.	^tJCityO^nditT^Sl^m. If yOU WOUld like itpOfe
information about the prggg^ed pr^ect;p^ojtg«thei^!i<^heahng, please contacUhe Planning
The.City ipre^esling ydufparlicii^tioh ih this pdblic hearingprocess. if>ydiLare;urtabie dr do not desire 'toattend; you also/havethe ppportunity tosubmitwritten comments in favor of or in opposition tothisproject. Correspondence should be- addressed to the City df San Dimas,. Rlannihg Division,-=245 EastBohitaAyehue, Sain- Dirnasi <iA 91773i.
If you challenge the action taken on this ;prdfeiSiihddurt; 'you mdy be limited to raising only/ those issues you or someone else raised at the:public hdaHhg ^scri^d in np^^ gr in “"***"-------------------Division at, or prior to, this public hearing.
INLAND VALLEY tjAlLV^BLILLETlN. Jlgjiiiuily.thu Piojjniss BPIlptjnl
•204 I E. 4th Slieui Oftioyo.,- CA 91ZG4
O « ».
f;<:2

£ 'tt .71M C
.■
PROOF OF PU B Lie AT ION 1201 $.5C.CiP. I
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Oourity of Los APOOles
i.flill h "iij.tiiari 01 thu Uait&rSt'fatuS, I firn C'Ztii.ihc ol eiynioL'n yynrs; ,anp ript.o patty to pt
imlaijisjoil in 1haiuiMjvO’dWiWad iiiUt.tarj l ariLthV pr^i'isilibs'ey'll:;»!. lha••pn'nte't of'- INLAND' V^t'LEV' li'A’lLV iiULLS-l'irl, ;t nawspapet tpjiuiitj'rnf
p)iprp<i'afiii p'ubllbhud Sally tqilihe City o| ^yiviiipf.,•''Gbti.nty, 61 Lo's^AiiguLiS'; apd .which no'yjtd,K>pet ptis .b.een aSjud{|Bti ri Yiov/speper, or5
KiS'.S'ui$<drtQr; ’Go'ur.rpf tha.-. 'Giniiity dl 'Los Arigulos/Si'afe.oLfealitornin? jn fli« :diifu:til->Jvina. I S,: V.g'iS, OScPre .N6;-'Pomp'Gi6C>6: flfyi wjflpii.M.iyh«cij ttis aniiii^o'ii1!5 »t.rbTpiiSt«S-ii'iipy; iititibutin, publishedi In BPgFTeautqf'SnV.L’ii'ti'fP . issp^;OT^Pifl Piixy!ippppF_Sii(L:'noVlriany supplyiiient?’ ijlafou! oti thu lottbwItia'doi'usS to wit:''
S/'iS/QB'
diretsiij uiwee penalty oLpariury thai.-tho > Ii»ti!j01_nt),Bi..tti.it! itHii cpitaC,!,.
©fetettrutf tit ©ijj.nti<i, 3at/8flfnttrillrip,Gp,?ICahl'3rn!a.; nw *■ - Ts,diw.'n(ppmAOC./ ~'aa os
SlQftSlUP}
•EPMIRO^I^ii3‘Xu‘:^p5ii3liru' g'roi^satl
■jDIiptn^ .tio&JrP/.yt 'jtoiidf ~ ^onillne.^5 gt Olydfi’^nolio’oS'Cotiii; ;if* j*oui,twould^iTKe ifrigr£>U,(1X5?*tnXnt>QP) ’Gpon*'.	~4
.•.p'r^lett^prUrp
fe|cbsl‘tdi>rt|0ctUlhCriPlort«l1nB"D»*Jytfn^9»
,W^?«W4'onO&r^^^5(nr«riQabon
(Space below lot use of County Claik onlyl
DA
JMI 2H’aO8"'1S
[in Of Ml M^41. E-
f VALLE?
jlleM:
r.-x'' •"-■•	: J"”	•
|ogress; Bulletin}
thStreet 91764
•■ ;A ’-.'^S’GEN EMl^RL^N®^
STATE OF CALIFORNIA County of Los Angeles
:l =;'anfsa>cJ11zert of ‘<‘t'ft e<Wiii t ed-tS fate s;tT?am eyer.ih e •'age■..ofieighf een,.y.eers;. and .'inoti^piarty to or 1ntetesi^8Ttt';t'he-.a^oVd^fintitie4|(Wgx<er, I arri jhd jjpnncipQl clerk of the printer of INLAND VALLEY DAILY BULLETIN n newspaper nf geneHI circulation printed and published daffy for the City tjf Pomona, County of Los Angeles and^which newspaper has been adjudged o newspaper of general circulation by the Superior Court of the County of Los Angeles', State of California on the date of June 15, 1945, Decree No. Porno C 606 ''Th'e/hpticu, Qf.yyhich.rthe annexed.is.y.true.prinfed; copy, has been published in each regular and entire 4jfsu'ekqi«8a(c^h'oyy^0apec>and, notffn.an.y.ssupplement Thereof on.the' following'.dates-,yt.o- vwt:-i; 1	■
ayM/o#:,
l declare under penalty of perjury that the irirogofng ;s true and co-rect.
,. ‘ ... •/.■' '• • •
........ / ....................................,...._
Executed at Ontario, SayBernardiho Co. California this Z21 day of	20.

-fh-
signature
. r o fs i ng >oh I v&t h osexy ss u e's<y qu'1;'opU sb rhedo'e. i‘el se£f 6 ised'^St tMlie£ "ijyjblj.c^he^ln^ide^cribe.d
Notification List for Public Meetings on San Dimas 2008-2014 Housing Element
San Dimas Chamber of Commerce	246 E. Bonita Avenue	San Dimas	91773
Citrus Valley Association of Realtors	655 W. Arrow Highway	San Dimas	91773
Villa San Dimas	249 S. Acacia Street	San Dimas	91773
Voorhis Village	505 N. San Dimas Canyon Road	San Dimas	91773
Senior Apartments (owners/tenant associations)			
Sunnyside	251 S. Walnut	San Dimas	91773
Monte Vista	105 N. Monte Vista	San Dimas	91773
Mobile Home Parks (owners/tenant associations)			
Charter Oak	801 W. Covina Blvd	San Dimas	91773
Cienega Valley Estates	1245 Cienega	San Dimas	91773
Lone Hill Manor	1205 W. Cypress Ave	San Dimas	91773
Mobileland	1635 W. Covina Ave.	San Dimas	91773
San Dimas Royal	1630 W. Covina Ave.	San Dimas	91773
Meals on Wheels	P.O. Box 7821	La Verne	91750
Food Bank Beta Center			
Food Bank Local	110 E. Third St	San Dimas	91773
San Gabriel Valley Center in El Monte	11411 Valley Blvd.	El Monte	
East San Gabriel Valley Consortium for the Homeless			
West Covina Access Center	415 S. Glendora Ave., #F	West Covina	91790
Inland Valley Hope Partners	1735 N. Park Avenue	Pomona	91768
Catholic Charities	315 N. Park Avenue	Pomona	91768
Vineyard Christian Fellowship	100 E. Foorhill Boulvard	San Dimas	91773
Pomona Neighborhood Center	999 W. Holt Avenue, Suite D	Pomona	91768
Salvation Army	490 E. La Verne Avenue	Pomona	91767
American Red Cross	675 N. Park Avenue	Pomona	91768
Pomona Access Social Services Center (PASS)	502 W. Holt Avenue	Pomona	91768
Glendora Welfare Association	114 N. Glendora Avenue, Suite 218	Glendora	91741
Prototypes - Women's Center	845 E. Arrow Highway	Pomona	91767
Military and Verterans Affairs	1427 W. Covina Parkway, Suite 100	West Covina	91790
William Fox Group			
Pomona Valley Habitat for Humanity	2111 Bonita Ave.	La Verne	91750
San Dimas Sheriffs Station			
Jamboree Housing Corporation	17701 Cowan Ave., Suite 100	Irvine	92614
Mercy Housing	1500 South Grand Ave., Suite 100	Los Angeles	90015
Southern California Development Corporation (SoCal Housing)	9065 Haven Ave., Suite 100	Rancho Cucamonga	91730
Other San Dimas Commissions (Senior Citizen; DPRB) Adjacent Communities
City of Claremont City of Glendora City of La Verne County of Los Angeles
3/27/2008
EBS
WaLIFQRNia51™
CITY OF SAN DIMAS 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
HOUSING NEEDS SURVEY
The City of San Dimas is starting a new planning process to update its General Plan Housing Element. The Housing Element will set forth San Dimas’ strategy for the 2008-2014 period to address the existing and projected housing needs of all economic segments of the community. The first step in this process is to ask you, the resident, what you see as the community’s most important housing needs.
Thank you for taking the time to complete the following short survey to help us in understanding the community’s housing needs and preferences, and in helping to shape the City’s Housing Element. When you are finished with the survey, please click the “Submit” Button at the bottom of the page to send your responses to the Community Development Department. All responses are kept completely confidential, and are only reported in the aggregate.
The City sincerely appreciates your assistance. Feel free to contact Craig Hensley at chensley@ci.san-dimas.ca.us or (909) 394-6253 with any questions or comments.
(Survey responses are indicated for the 25 residents who completed the survey).
1.	Do you currently live within the City of San Dimas?
25 Yes
_______ No If NO, please do not complete survey. Thank you for your time.
2.	What type of housing unit do you live in?
19 Single-family home	5 Townhome/Condominium
______ Duplex/Triplex	______ Mobile Home
1 Apartment	______ Second Unit
3.	Do you own or rent the unit in which you live?
22 Own	3 Rent
______ Own mobilehome, but pay mobilehome park space rent
______ Rent a mobilehome unit
4.	a) How long have you lived in San Dimas?	Avq 12 years
b) How long have you lived in your current residence? Avg 11 years
1
Please check the appropriate box below for each category showing what you think are the
greatest housing needs in San Dimas. P	ease provide your input for all items.				
HOUSING NEEDS CATEGORY	Average Response	High (4)	Medium (3)	Low (2)	No Such Need (J)
MAINTENANCE OF HOUSING CONDITIONS					
Property Maintenance/ Code Enforcement	3.48				
Rehabilitation Assistance for Single-Family Homes	3.08				
Rehabilitation Assistance for Mobile Homes	2.04				
Rehabilitation Assistance for Apartments	2.33				
Acquisition and Rehabilitation of Older Apartments with Affordability Covenants	2.52				
Improvements for Handicapped Accessibility	2.67				
Other					
					
MAINTENANCE OF HOUSING AFFORDABILITY					
Preservation of Existing Affordable Rental Housing from Conversion to Market Rents	2.68				
Maintenance of Affordable Mobile Home Park Rents	2.56				
First-Time Homebuyer Assistance	3.20				
Rental Assistance	2.44				
Other					
					
DEVELOPMENT OF NEW HOUSING					
Provision of housing for the local workforce	2.84				
Provision of new housing near downtown/close to services	2.76				
Revitalization of older commercial and industrial properties through introduction of housing	3.04				
Provision of second units	2.04				
Other					
Additional Comments Regarding Housing Needs and Preferences:
The San Dimas Community Development Department thanks you for your participation in this important survey!
2
This form is to be used to set CDBG priorities for the next five years based on the Resident Survey, City Staff Input, and available funding. The information will be used for the 2008-2013 Consolidated Plan. Please submit one form by November 1, 2007 to Danielle Garcia at Danielle.Garcia@lacdc.org. Ms. Garcia can be reached at (323) 890-
7188 if you have any questions._____________________________________________________________________________________________
CITY ASSIGNED PRIORITY RATINGS INSTRUCTIONS: Rate the need level for each of the following items in the table below and check or fill in the box that best applies. Use the range 1-4, based on the following criteria:
“High” Priority (4): Activities to address this need will be supported by the city with CDBG funds during the five-year period. “Medium” Priority (3): If CDBG funds are available, activities to address this need may be funded by the city during the five-year period. Also, the city may take other actions to find other sources of funds for this activity.
“Low” Priority (2): The city will not support activities to address this need during the next five years with CDBG funds, but may use other funding to address this need if funds are available.
“No Such Need”(1): The city finds there is no need or that this need is already substantially addressed, The city will not support activities with any funding during the next five years.
SUITABLE LIVING ENVIRONMENT									
Community Services Anti-Crime Programs Childcare Services Educational Services Health Services Senior Activities Youth Services	1 □ □ □ □ □ □	2 □ ■ □ □ □ □	3 ■ □ ■ ■ □ ■	4 □ □ □ □ ■ □	Community Facilities Childcare Centers Community Centers Healthcare Facilities Park & Recreational Facilities Senior Centers Youth Centers	1 □ □ □ □ □ □	2 ■ ■ □ □ ■ □	3 □ □ ■ ■ □ ■	4 □ □ d □ □
Infrastructure	1	2	3	4	Neighborhood Services	1	2	3	4
Drainage Improvements	□	■	□	□	Code Enforcement	□	□	■	□
Sidewalk Improvements	□	□	■	□	Graffiti Removal	□	□	■	□
Street/Alley Improvements	□	□	■	□	Parking Facilities	□	■	□	□
Street Lighting	□	□	■	□	Trash & Debris Removal	□	□	■	□
Water/Sewer Improvements	□	□	■	□	Tree Planting	□	■	□	□
Special Needs Services	1	2	3	4
Accessibility Improvements	□	■	□	□
Disabled Centers & Services	□	■	□	□
Domestic Violence Services	□	□	■	□
HIV/AIDS Centers & Services	□	■	□	□
Homeless Shelters & Services	□	■	□	□
Mental Health Services	□	■	□	□
Neglected/Abused Children Centers & Services	□	□	■	□
Substance Abuse Services	□	■	□	□
DECENT HOUSING					CREATING ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES				
Housing	1	2	3	4	Businesses & Jobs	1	2	3	4
Affordable for Sale Housing	□	□	■	□	Employment Training	□	■	□	□
Affordable Rental Housing	□	□	■	□	Commercial/lndustrial Improvements	□	■	□	□
Disabled Housing	□	□	■	□	Job Creation/Retention	□	■	□	9
Fair Housing	□	■	□	□	Small Business Assistance	□	□	■	□
Homeownership Assistance	□	□	■	□	Store Front Improvements	□	□	■	□
Residential Rehabilitation	□	□	□	■	Business District Revitalization	□	□	■	□
Senior Housing	□	□	■	□					﻿II.
LAND USE ELEMENT
of San Dimas
General Plan
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
INTRODUCTION
According to the State Office of Planning and Research, the land use element has the broadest scope of the seven mandatory elements. In theory, it plays the central role of correlating all land use issues into a set of coherent development policies. Its goals, objectives, policies, and programs relate directly to the other elements. In practice, it is the most visible and often used element in the local general plan. Although all general plan elements carry equal weight, the land use element is often perceived as being most representative of the “the general plan.”
The intent of the Land Use Element is to establish a pattern for compatible land uses
which reflect existing conditions, approved land use, open space areas, and to guide future development. By law, the element must set clear standards for the “density of population” and the “intensity of development” for each proposed land use category. The Land Use Element, which has the broadest scope of the seven required elements, provides a compos-
ite discussion of the issues which are addressed in the other elements through text, diagrams and a land use map. This element is
nro-aniTpd ns fnllnu/c-
•	Findings
•	Development Policies
•	Land Use Definitions and Intensity
•	Land Use and Zoning Consistency Matrix
•	Relation to Other General Plan Elements
II-l
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
FINDINGS---------------------
The following findings summarize land use conditions and issues. These have been identified through community attitude survey, interviews, review of existing documents, community workshops, and work sessions with the General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC). These findings form the basis for this element’s goals, objectives, plan proposals, and implementation measures.
General Plan Development Potentials and Opportunities;
Community Design;
Historic Preservation;
Community Services; and Regional Plans.
These findings form the basis for the goals, objectives, plan proposals, and implementation of land use policy.
General Plan Development Potentials and Opportunities
This sub-section summarizes the Land Use findings by category. They include:
•	Current Land Use
•	Residential
•	Commercial
•	Neighborhood Commercial
•	Administrative Professional
•	Light Industrial
•	Public/Semi-Public
•	Open Space
•	Vacant Land and Underutilized Sites
•	Redevelopment
•	Specific Plans
•	Transit Nodes
II-2
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Current Land Use Overview
The City encompasses approximately 9,270 acres of land. Almosthalf, or 42% is contained in permanent open space as a part of the Angeles National Forest and County Regional Parks.
There is a significant parcel of unincorporated Los Angeles County land that includes the Pacific Coast Baptist Bible College property and adjacent residential area to the west. This parcel is approximately 276 acres. With this parcel the total acreage of the City is approximately 9,546 acres.
San Dimas’ current land use conditions are presented in terms of single family and multifamily residential, commercial, administra-tive/professional, light industrial, public/semi-public, vacant, and open space categories.
Residential
Residential land use in San Dimas encompasses the largest single land use category. There are approximately 3217 acres devoted to single family residential uses and 217 acres devoted to multi-family uses. This represents 37 % of the current total acreage of the City.
The issues and opportunities for residential development are discussed in the following categories:
II-3
General Plan Land Use Element
® Residential density
•	Town core residential (MF-D area)
•	Hillside residential development
•	Equestrian/large estate development
•	Mobile Homes
•	Northern Foothills
Residential Densities:
After analysis of the residential densities in the City, it became apparent that an adjustment to the density categories would be required to facilitate better development within the City. Greater flexibility, especially in the low to moderate residential density categories, would be required to responsibly meet the future development needs.
Town Core Residential (MF-D):
The Town Core Residential area is basically the area north of Bonita, First Street north to Fifth Street, and west of San Dimas Avenue. These are areas currently identified in the zoning maOp as MF-D (Multiple Family Duplex). These areas have been of concern in regards to the determination of proper density and development of second units. The issues regarding the MF-D areas focused on the development of second units on small lots, and the ability to maintain the older historic identity of some of these residences. Various options are presented in the implementation section, ranging from unrestrictive development of second units to maintaining a single family residential neighborhood.
11-4
General Plan Land Use Element
City of San Dimas
. mamiMa—mb—w——
Hillside Residential Development:
The community-wide meetings, the community attitude survey, and the General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC) all indicated a strong desire to maintain the rural atmosphere of the City of San Dimas. The undeveloped hillsides of San Dimas were mentioned as a major element that contributes to this image. There is an opportunity to maintain these hillsides, especially in the northern portions of the City, and still have reasonable residential development occurring there.
Northern Foothills:
The steepness and visual prominence of the Northern Foothills area create a unique challenge to the management of future development and the protection of the area’s sensitive environment. The steep slopes are exposed to the south, southwest, and southeast, and are highly visible throughout the City of San Dimas and beyond. Of the 33 undeveloped properties within the Northern Foothills area, only two had average slopes less than 30 percent. Even at low, rural densities, significant grading would be required for residences and access roads. Grading at a 2:1 or even 1.5:1 slope ratio will result in extended benches before a daylight line can be reached.
In the past, the adopted objectives for hillside residential areas spoke to preservation of the natural landscape, while providing for rural residential development. The problem is that a policy of preserving the natural landscape could not be literally applied to the Northern Foothills area because any development within the rugged Northern Foothills would result in loss of the natural landscape and habitat. In addition, policies that are
I
II-5
Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
appropriate to other hillside areas within San Dimas cannot adequately address the unique needs and challenges of the Northern Foothills planning area. Thus, the General Plan should provide for a specific and separate policy direction for the Northern Foothills.
The guiding principle for managing environmental values and future development within the Northern Foothills area is to protect the area’s natural environment and existing resources, and to ensure that the design/layout of future hillside developments (1) preserve sensitive resources in place, (2) adapt to the natural hillside topography and maximizes view opportunities to, as well as from the development. Overall, the strategy emphasizes fitting projects into their hillside setting rather than altering the hillside to fit the project. Thus, although individual property rights within the Northern Foothills Area must be recognized, the priority between development and natural resource values should be given to protecting the resource.
Equestrian/Residential Development:
The concept of equestrian/residential development was given support by the GPAC. This area basically is the area north of Gladstone Street and south of the 30 Freeway. If this area is properly planned, it would enhance the City’s rural image. Specific lot sizes and a comprehensive circulation plan would be required to mitigate the issues in this area.
Mobile Homes: Mobile homes in the City of San Dimas are a major affordable housing resource. There was strong support to preserve mobile homes as affordable housing stock, and to foster ownership opportunities for renters of mobile homes. There are opportunities to upgrade some
Z/-5A
dry of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
mobile home parks, especially the edge conditions visible from the public right-of-way where proper landscaping and screening would be required to visually improve , the neighborhood.
Commercial
i
A
A retail analysis in the City of San Dimas was undertaken by, an economic and financial consulting firm. Their findings are summarized in the following categories:
•	Demand for Neighborhood Shopping Space in San Dimas
•	Existing Inventory of Neighborhood Shopping Space
•	Net Demand for New Neighborhood Shopping Space
•	Assessment of Puddingstone Shopping Center and Canyon Center
•	Overview of Strip Commercial Re-Use Potential
Demand for Neighborhood Shopping Space in
San Dimas:
In projecting demand for retail space in San Dimas, neighborhood projects, community retail, and free-standing retail space were analyzed. Based on industry standard sales

11-6
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
per square foot requirements, the projected the demand for retail space in San Dimas for the following categories of use are as follows:
-	Apparel
-	General Merchandise
-Drug
-	Food
-	Package Liquor
-	Eating & Drinking
Fast Food Dinner Restaurants
-	Home Furnishings & Appliances
-	Building Materials & Farm Implements
-	Other Retail
Typically, retail projects are not built solely on the basis of maintaining healthy sales per square foot figures; rather, availability of land and funds are often more important considerations for a developer. Consequently, retail space developed in an area can often exceed market demand projects by 40%. The space gets leased, and the primary ones impacted by low sales per square foot are the tenants. Listed below are the resulting square footage figures for 1990 and 1994, referred to as “Market” and “Development”:
II-7
City of San D imas
General Plan Land Use Element
	Market		Development	
Tvne of Location	1990	1994	1990	1224
Community	311,071	363,023	435,499	508,232
Neighborhood	253,052	294,042	354,273	411,659
Ereestandina	238.875	283.991	334,42,5	397.587
TOTAL:	802,998	941,056	1,124,197	1,317,478
Source: EDCON, May 1990
Table II-1 Commercial Market & Development Analysis
Existing Inventory of Neighborhood Shop-
ping Space in San Dimas:
There are nine (9) neighborhood shopping complexes in San Dimas, encompassing 1,321,816 square feet of land (30 acres). The gross leasable area (GLA) of building space thereon is 308,350 square feet. The occupied space is roughly 80% of the total, or 246,680 square feet. In reality, however, the new San Dimas Plaza project functions as both a neighborhood and community project. It has a Ralph’s supermarket, for example, which is typical of major neighborhood centers. The San Dimas Plaza project encompasses 1,046,237 square feet of land (24 acres). The gross leasable area thereon is 219,425 square feet. The vacancy rate is about 10%, or 21, 943. The occupied space is approximately 197,482 square feet. If this is added to the occupied neighborhood space of 246,680 square feet, the combined total is 444,162 square feet.
II-8
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Net Demand for New Neighborhood Shop-
ping Space:
The inventory figures exceed the “Market” demand levels for both 1990 and 1994; also exceeded are the “Development” levels. On a “big picture” basis there is an oversupply of neighborhood retail space in San Dimas, and this condition will remain through the mid-1990’s. Depending on the perspective taken, whether discussing “Market” absorption levels, or “Development” levels, the oversupply ranges from 191,110 square feet in 1990 to 32,503 square feet in 1994.
Assessment ofPuddingstone Shopping Center
and San Dimas Canyon Center:
Puddingstone Shopping Center occupies a 5.3 acre parcel of property, fronting on Bonita Avenue and across the street from City Hall. There is 55,500 square feet of gross leasable area in the center. Occupants include a market and a drug store. Included in the building space totals are separate buildings housing Winchell’s and Taco Bell.
San Dimas Canyon Center incorporates a 8.4 acre site. The gross leasable area is 84,400 square feet. Roughly 20,000 square feet of the space is vacant. One of the major tenants is a movie theater.
II-9
City of San Punas
General Plan Land Use Element
Both of these centers are not needed for neighborhood retail purposes. The Puddingstone Center is more centrally located, and has some of the right retail mixes. The buildings need a face lift, however. The study recommended that San Dimas Canyon should not be redeveloped as a neighborhood center. If all of the site is to remain commercial, then, a major single-user like K-Mart should be contacted for possible occupancy. Another option would be to reduce the amount of commercial space to one (1) or two (2) acres near the corner of Bonita and San Dimas Canyon, with the remainder of the site developed as multiple-family residential.
Overview of Downtown and Strip Commer-
cial Re-use Potential:
A part of the San Dimas character is the downtown uses along Bonita Avenue, in the Frontier Village. While attractive visually, and appealing from a character perspective, these types of theme developments are difficult to make work. One needs to provide smaller store spaces, and be willing to have an ongoing rental program underway. The critical mass is important: What is the purpose of the area; then, who are the tenants that will help promote that theme? In other areas of the community such as Foothill Boulevard, redevelopment of strip commercial should concentrate on office use. With the development of major areas in the community like the San Dimas Corporate Center, demand for smaller office spaces also increase.
11-10
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Neighborhood Commercial
The City has debated the appropriateness of smaller neighborhood commercial establishments, “Mom & Pop shops”, to service the existing neighborhoods within the City of San Dimas. There is strong support to maintain these existing neighborhood facilities, within walking distance, in existing neighborhoods to provide small goods and services to the nearby residents.
Administrative/Professional
The City has approximately 39 acres of admin-istrative/professional land uses. These parcels are spread throughout the City and not concentrated in any one area.
There was confirmation by the community workshops and the GPAC that administrative/ professional uses would be appropriate for the Foothill Boulevard corridor, thereby upgrading the general image of this area. These administrative/professional uses would also be quite appropriate within the expanded Civic Center area.
Light Industrial
There are approximately 287 acres of light industrial land uses in the City. These light industrial uses are located adjacent to the Foothill Freeway corridor along Cienega Avenue, Arrow Highway, and Allen Avenue.
II-11
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Many of these industrial uses are in close proximity to the Southern Pacific Railroad and Atchison, Topeka and SantaFe Railroad (A.T. & S.F.) lines.
The City has a number of very good examples of light industrial or business parks. These facilities are clean and non-polluting, creating a high-quality environment with landscaping and good architectural features. The mostrecent example is the Lone Hill Business Park on Lone Hill, south of Gladstone (Specific Plan 18). Opportunities for new Business Park and Industrial include Specific Plan 24 and Specific Plan 23. Specific Plan 24, south of Gladstone, east of Lone Hill, and west of the Foot-hill Freeway, is one of the remaining areas suitable for a business park. This site has good access and would be compatible with the adjacent uses. Specific Plan 23 consists of three parcels adj acent to downtown and the railroad. It is planned for light industrial, which would buffer the low to medium residential uses to the north from the railroad. The Specific Plan calls for stringent guidelines for parking, landscaping, time of use, and height restrictions.
U«B
_________ ^nmi DnKlJn TTozic’
UM11V kJVUil'l UUI1V VOtO
This category includes all publicly owned lands, such as City buildings, churches, senior centers, and public schools.
11-12
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Major opportunities in the public/semi-public areas include:
•	Joint use and joint development opportunities with the school districts for parklands; and
•	Expansion of the Civic Center uses easterly to form a Civic Center Complex.
Park/School Facilities:
The joint use and joint development potentials with the school districts offers a major opportunity for the City to offer additional park and recreation services without purchasing additional land, and utilizing land that would ordinarily not be used during the non-school hours. A detailed analysis of parks and school facilities are found in the Open Space Element.
Open Space
This category includes all City and County parks, Los Angeles County Flood Control lands, United States Forest Service lands, and golf courses. There are approximately 3776 acres of open space. Of this amount, there are 177 acres of City parks, 1280 acres of Angeles National Forest, and 1756 acres of two Regional County Parks and the remainder in natural open space.
Vacant Lands and Underutilized Sites
Exhibit II-1 shows the locations of the current vacant and potential infill sites.
11-13
,{jtT or

^aLIFORHia
INFILL & VACANT PARCEL
GENERAL
PLAN
LEGEND
"L'L-hL .'«#•
caLIFQRHia
.cjTT or
GENERAL
PLAN
-
REDEVELOPMENT
AREAS
11-15
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
As part of updating the Land Use Element, a general survey of vacant and underutilized land was completed by City staff in January 1990. Exhibit II-1 shows the general location of all the sites included in the survey. Altogether, there were 62 vacant sites and 18
UliUtiUUliZ.tU diltzd.
xnuiu axu axniuoi x,uz*r
vacant acres in the City. More than one-half of the vacant acreage is designated as single family residential. The January 1990 survey indicates that there were slightly more than 70 underutilized acres with about one-half designated for single family residential uses.
Redevelopment
The City has one redevelopment project area. As illustrated in Exhibit 13-2. This area incorporates several specific plans and zoning categories. The largest category within the project area is the creative growth zone which has four subareas. The redevelopment area includes two commercial shopping areas, Downtown, specific plan areas for a business park and light industrial uses. Within the redevelopment area, the City has designated zones for "Creative Growth". The purpose of the Creative Growth zone is to promote amenities beyond those expected under conventional planning and development through commitment to an architectural theme of “Early California Village.” These areas are depicted in Exhibit II-2:
• Creative Growth Area 1 - Regional Commercial,
11-16
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
•	Creative Growth Area 2 - Frontier Village,
•	Creative Growth Area 3 - General Commercial, and
•	Creative Growth Area 4 - Commer-cial/Light Industrial.
Creative Growth Area 1 - Regional Commercial is bounded by the Foothill Freeway Corridor to the west, the railroad tracks to the north, Eucla Avenue to the east, Cienega Avenue to the south, and includes the intersection of Arrow Highway and Bonita Avenue. This area had been the focus of major redevelopment activity in the 1980s.
Creative Growth Area 2 - Frontier Village is bounded by Eucla Avenue on the west, the residential neighborhoods to the north and south, and Walnut Avenue to the east. Area 2 - Frontier Village also includes the historic downtown area. In the 1970's, this area underwent facade improvements and upgrade utilizing the "Frontier Village Theme". Additional improvements are necessary to improve the rear facades and upgrade the Puddingstone Shopping Center area.
Creative Growth Area 3 - General Commercial is located along San Dimas Avenue between the Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad line and the Southern Pacific Railroad line.
11-17
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Creative Growth Area 4 - Commercial/Light Industrial is located south of Cienega Avenue and Arrow Highway just east of the Foothill Freeway.
Specific Plans
The City has adopted 23 Specific Plans that provide planning for areas of residential, commercial, and industrial land uses throughout the City. These Specific Plans and then-status are summarized in Table H-2.
Transit Nodes
In response to the Los Angeles County Transportation Commission's (LACTC) Commuter Rail Program, the City has identified 7 candidate transit stops on the A.T. & S.F. Railroad and Southern Pacific Railroad. The coordinator transit stops include:
1.	Lemon Packing House
2.	Arrow Highway, east of Stanley ACME
x 3.	Rimpau site
4.	Site south of Arrow Highway, west of Cataract Avenue
5.	Site east of Cataract Avenue, adjacent to south side of the railroad
6.	Specific Plan 24 at Lone Hill and Gladstone
7.	Sites outside of San Dimas with shared facilities with the cities of La Verne and/or Glendora
11-18
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
TABLE 11-2			
SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS	Source: Citv of San	Dimas. 3/9/91. 282:1	
			
			
SPECIFIC PLANS	AREA (acres)	ADOPTED	STATUS
			
Specific Plan #2	72 +/-	8/10/76	80% Construction Completed
-Valiev Ctr. (E). Lone Hill fW). &			
both sides of Arrow Hwy.			
			
Specific Plan #3	58+/-	Rev. 1/18/83	60-70% Construction Completed
-Gladstone SL (N). Monte Vista Ave. (E),			
Fifth St. (S); & Amelia Ave. fW)			
			
Specific Plan #4	104 +/-	Rev. 1/18/83	75% Construction Completed
-North of Walnut Creek Park			
			
Specific Plan #5	115+/-	Rev. 1/18/83	20-30% Construction Completed
-Via Verde (S) & 210 Frwv. fW)			
			
Specific Plan #6	43 +/-	8/28/79	80% Construction Completed
-210 Frwy. (E)			
			
Specific. Plan #7	142	2/12/85	75% Construction Completed
-Via Verde (S) & San Dimas (W)			
			
Specific Plan #8	58+/-	Rev. 1/18/83	40% Construction Completed
-Between Cannon Ave. & Puddingstone Dr.			
			
Specific Plan #9	28 +/-	1/27/8 1	95% Construction Completed
-Foothill Blvd. (N)			
		■	
Specific Plan #10.	30 +/-	Rev. 1/12/88	Linder Construction
-Walnut Ave. (E) & Allen Ave. (N)			
			
Specific Plan #11	262 */-	5/24/83	90% Construction Completed	1
-Via Verde (W). Puente Sl (S) &			
Covina Hills Rd. (N)			
			
Specific Plan #12	234 +/-	7/12/83	Construction Completed
-Along San Dimas Ave.			
			
Specific Plan #13	3.7	7/12/83	Construction Completed
-Between Cypress. Badillo. &			
Valley Ctr. Dr.			
			
Specific Plan #15	59	2/28/84	Construction Completed
-Via Verde (N). San Dimas Ave. fW)			
&Avenida Entrada (E)			
			
Specific Plan #16	6	3/26/85	Construction Completed
•Cypress Ave. (N) & Valley Ctr. (W)			
			
Specific Plan #17	5.7	7 /1985	Plan Approved
-NE corner San Dimas Ave. & Via Verde			
			
Specific Plan #18	50	9 / 1985	Construction Completed
-NE comer Arrow Hwy. & Lone Hill			
			
Specific Plan #20	20	5/27/87	Plan Approved
-210 Frwy. fW), Arrow Hwv. (S3. &			
Maimone Ave. extended (E)			
			
Specific Plan #21	9.55	10/27/87	Under Construction
-Cienega Ave. (S) & Lone Hill fW)			
			
Specific Plan #22	15*/-	3/10/87	Under Construction
-Baseline Rd. (N\ Cataract Ave. (E). &			1
Route 30 (S)			
			
Specific Plan #23	1 1	1990	
Cataract to Eucla inci. M&E site			
			
Specific Plan #24	25	9/1/90	
Lonehill (E) and Gladstone (S)			
			
TOTAL ACRES	1351 +/-		
TABLE IV-2 SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS
11-19
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Community Design
The City, over the years, has been preserving and promoting a rural atmosphere and image for San Dimas. This rural image was strongly supported by the community attitude survey respondents, community workshops, and the General Plan Advisory Committee. There are four themes which reinforce the City image, and they include:
•	Early California
•	Frontier Village
•	Semi-rural Atmosphere
•	City Entries
Early California Theme:

Typical bungalow craftsman architecture
The Early California Theme has been implemented in the town core of San Dimas Avenue between Bonita Avenue and Gladstone, and its major characteristics include:
• California Bungalow Craftsman and Queen Anne residential styles with wood-frame, post and beam construction with use of wood shingles and arroyo stone.
On Foothill Boulevard, the Early California style is represented by:
Mission style stucco construction and red tile roof.
Brick buildings with tum-of-the-cen-tury detailing and ornamentation.
11-20
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Frontier Village Theme:
The Frontier Village Theme area is bounded by Eucla Avenue, Walnut Avenue and north and south residential neighborhoods, and is a major element in this downtown area. Many of the front facades of these buildings have been renovated to reflect the frontier theme. The community survey, the GPAC meetings, and community-wide meetings supported to continue this theme. Priority improvements for this area are to upgrade the rear facades and parking areas.
Semi-Rural Atmosphere:
There are various means to achieve a rural/ semi-rural atmosphere. The City can control the density of housing to preserve open space and views to the hillsides and canyons; or preserve historical features that reflect San Dimas’ agricultural heritage. The opportunities to reinforce this rural image include:
•	The continued encouragement of equestrian residential uses.
•	Preservation of the foothills and canyons through very low density residential development.
•	Preservation of existing agricultural sites and structures, such as the packing house and a representative citrus grove.
11-21
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
City Entries:
City entries are gateways which reinforce the image of the City. These entries are recommended to be developed with unique landscaping and a City entry sign within medians or public property to create a sense of identity. There are numerous opportunities to provide these City entries within San Dimas; these opportunities include:
Valley Center and Arrow Highway (existing)
Via Verde and I-10 (existing)
The area north and west of the City at Gladstone and Lone Hill
Puddingstone Drive and City limits
Foothill Boulevard at east and west city limits
Foothill Boulevard at San Dimas Canyon Road
Arrow Highway at San Dimas Canyon Road
San Dimas Avenue at Highway 30 Bonita at San Dimas Canyon Road
AvamiA of	r'ihz limite
JJUUXliU IXWilUV Ul VWOk VrXbJ
Cienega Avenue at west city limits
Cypress Avenue at west city limits
11-22
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Historical Preservation
The Historical Society has been actively documenting historic resources within the City. The Historical Society has identified a number of structures within the City that have both State and local significance.
The City has contracted with a historic consultant to develop a historical element of the general plan. The historic element will identify and document the significant resources within the City. These resources will include buildings and sites. The historic element will develop a set of goals, objectives, policies, and implementation plan to retain and preserve the City’s historic resources. Agricultural heritage opportunities include the preservation of the packing house, farm structures, and a citrus grove.
Community Services
The City and other governmental agencies offer the citizens of San Dimas community services. These services are summarized in the paragraphs below, they include:
•	Child Care
•	Law Enforcement, Fire Protection
•	Utilities, yards and substations
•	Senior Citizens Services/Housing
•	Hospitals
•	Schools
11-23
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Child Care:
The City of San Dimas completed a child care needs assessment in July 1989. The information obtained from the study, and supported by other sources, shows a clear need for an increase in available infant and school age child care. It also indicates a strong desire by parents to increase the quality of care. Affordability of quality care is another serious problem for resident, particularly single-parent families.
For the most part, parent households in San Dimas seem to be satisfied with their child care arrangements. The majority appear able to find and afford quality child care which adequately meets their needs. The main areas of concern seem to be increasing the level of quality, and increasing flexibility and convenience.
Other than parents who are caring for their children not by choice, dissatisfaction levels are highest with un-related care givers, especially when the care is at the caretaker’s home. Day care homes (homes licensed to care for 6 to 12 children) and other unrelated care givers are a popular option for child care as they tend to be less expensive and more flexible with fees, hours and ages. Improving the quality and availability of these homes, and encouraging the licensing of homes providing child care would be a positive step toward increasing satisfaction levels.
11-24
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Law Enforcement Fire Protection:
San Dimas contracts with the County of Los Angeles Sheriffs Department for law enforcement protection services. According to the Sheriffs Department, the crime rate in San Dimas is low compared to other jurisdictions in Los Angeles County. The substation serving the City is located at 122 North San Dimas Avenue. The staff consists of 52 persons, 49 of whom are sworn personnel. A volunteer rescue team consisting of 29 persons, also operates from this substation.
The current level of staffing is adequate to meet future needs except in the area of traffic enforcement. As regional traffic increases, additional officers may be needed for traffic enforcement.
The City is within the County of Los Angeles Fire District and is served by four stations. The present level of staffing and equipment is adequate to serve current and future fire protection needs. Fire protection and emergency services are discussed in the Safety Element.
Utilities. Yards, and Substations:
Exhibit n-3 depicts the location of various utility easements, substations, and City and County yards. These include:
• The Metropolitan Water District (MWD) Flood Control Easement
11-25
■ cjn or
^aLIFORRia'

PUBLIC
FACILITIES
GENERAL
PLAN
11-26
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
*	City Yard
•	MWD Transmission Corridor
These uses are identified as public/semi-pub-lic categories in the General Plan. Some of these uses offer open space opportunities for trails and conservation of wildlife habitat and water recharge opportunities.
Senior Citizens Services/Housing:
There are two multi-purpose facilities which serve the City's senior population with meeting rooms and facilities. Currently a privately operated "Meals on Wheels" program is provided to seniors. In addition, the City partially funds a nutrition lunch program administered by the YWCA Intervale Senior Services Program. Currently, a nutrition lunch program is held at the Methodist Church. However, this operation will be relocated to the City of San Dimas senior/community center upon completion of the facility.
Senior Citizen housing is primarily provided by the private sector. The Housing Element of the General Plan discusses senior citizen housing in detail.
Hospitals:
Medical services are provided by the San Dimas Community Hospital. Additional private clinics include the Kaiser Clinic at Arrow Highway and Renelle Street, and the Houch Clinic atFoo thill Boulevard west of San Dimas Avenue.
11-27
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Schools:
The City of San Dimas is primarily served by the Bonita Unified School District. Smaller portions of the City are served by the Glendora
tt_	__J
UIllllCU OUilUUi -L715U.1UI OllU. k^ilcLL IC1 OctXi
Unified School District. There are five elementary schools, one intermediate school, and one high school and continuation high school at the School District headquarters on San Dimas Avenue and Route 30 Freeway. The schools account for about 110 acres of land area. These schools are listed in Table II-3. San Dimas High School shares its athletic facilities with the community. The jointuse of the Sportsplex and the City's swim and racquet club is a shared facility with the school district and the Human Services andFacilities Department.
Regional Plans
There are a number of issues that need to be resolved on a regional basis. There are adopted regional plans and policies which will affect the City of San Dimas. The City is required to participate or to comply with addressing these
rpcrtnnol ioouac A
x x cujvujjivn ui uivjv uuuytL'li
regional plans are summarized below:
Jobs-Housing Balance Air Quality Solid Waste Hazardous Waste
11-28
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Jobs-Housing Balance:
This land use planning topic has been considered in several ways; some of these relate to housing needs. For instance, State law requires cities to zone “sufficient vacant land for residential use... in relation to zoning for non-residential use...” (Government Code Section 76913.1Z). Moreover, the State housing element, as noted in this sub-section, also requires that population and employment projections be considered by cities in estimated housing need.
On the topic of jobs-housing balance, the State Department of Housing and Community Development has offered the following observations:
“Jobs-housing balance is an increasingly important concept to local planners, developers, employers, and residents. Generally, jobs-housing balance recognizes the desirability for housing type and availability to match housing need, using nearby or regional employment (i.e., number and type of jobs) as the determiner of need. It enters into discussions of commercial and industrial development, housing shortages, housing affordability, and local growth.
“As California cities grow, jobs-housing balance will become an even more important consideration in planning. City, county, regional, and State governments must work
11-29
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
together to achieve complementary, coordinated development which ensures safe, ade-
quate, appropriate housing for al workers.”
the state’s
In order to address the jobs-housing balance, the Southern California Association of Governments has prepared three interdependent plans to redirect growth in Ventura', Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino and Imperial Counties to alleviate traffic congestion and reduce air pollution. The three interrelated plans are:
•	Growth Management (GMP)
•	Regional Mobility (RMP)
•	Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA)
The Growth Management Plan is the core of the three plans. Its assumptions regarding future growth are what drive the Regional Mobility Plan and Regional Housing! Needs Assessment.
The main purpose of the Growth Management plan is to identify ways of altering land use patterns in the region in order to improve the jobs/housing balance.
The main purpose of the Regional Mobility Plan, whose preparation was mandated by the State, is to identify specific methods of improving circulation in the region. See Section III, Circulation Element for a discussion on
I
specific Transportation System Management (TSM) and Transportation Demand Management (TDM) methods.
11-30
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
SCAG: Southern California Association of Governments
Finally, the Regional Housing Needs Assessment uses population forecasts from the Growth Management Plan to estimate regional needs for affordable housing and recommends dwelling unit targets for each jurisdiction in order to distribute this housing more evenly throughout the region.
Ideally, a jobs-housing balance is to be reached by the year 2010 at the sub-region level in Southern California. San Dimas is located in the East San Gabriel Valley sub-region, one of 24 sub-regions identified by SCAG. Although the jobs-housing balance rises from 1.03 to 1.10, the sub-region remains housing rich.
The City of San Dimas has the responsibility to address these housing issues. They are discussed in detail in Section IV — Housing Element.
Air Quality
SCAQMD: South Coast Air Quality Management District
The Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) was prepared by SCAG with the cooperation and assistance of the SCAQMD. The AQMP addresses the issues of growth and transporta-
tion to achieve attainment of the federal clean
air standards by the year 2007. The AQMP emphasizes demand management measures, or mobility goals, to reduce the amount of vehicle trips and miles traveled. The AQMP envisions that the measures implemented to reach the mobility goals will in turn directly affect the future air quality.
11-31
City of San Dimas
, General Plan Land Use Element
The AQMP proposes to attain federal clean air standards by the year 2007 by accomplishing a series of actions within three time period divisions. These time period divisions are called “Tiers”.
Each section of the AQMP contains detailed policies on programs to reduce emissions into the air. The plan programs are to be implemented within the time frames of the Tiers. Each policy has one or several implementing agencies to be responsible for some or all of the implementation policies.
Local government responsibilities are addressed in these sections in detail. One of the primary responsibilities of local government in implementing the AQMP is to adopt an Air Quality Element in the General Plan.
The Air Quality Element component of the AQMP is the most significant to local government. The AQMP requires that all cities adopt an Air Quality Element, or amend an existing general plan element, to address air quality to the satisfaction of the SCAQMD and SCAG.
Air Quality Elements are the primary component of the Tier I control measures specified in the AQMP. Essentially, the Air Quality Elements are intended to develop action programs for the implementation of regional air quality measures at a local level.
11-32
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
The 1989 AQMP presents several opportunities and potential implications for San Dimas. In brief, these are as follows:
Cooperation with the AQMP by adopt-
inrr on Ait*	At
<444 4 XXI V^WlXXAljr iJlVliiVUV	ViiV
equivalent;
An implication that future legislation may preempt some amount of local land use control if a local government has not conformed with the provisions of the AQMP; and,
A series of control measures which local government is responsible to implement through the Air Quality Element and/or City policy.
Solid Waste
The California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (AB939) requires that cities reduce waste going to landfills by at least 25 percent by 1995 and 50 percent by the year 2000. To achieve these goals, cities are required to prepare a comprehensive waste management plan called Source Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE).
The City Source Reduction and Recycling Element shall include, but not be limited to, all the following components for solid waste generated in the jurisdiction:
Waste characterization component Source reduction component Recycling component
11-33
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
•	Composting component
•	Solid waste facility capacity component
•	Education and public information component
•	Funding component
•	Special waste component
The City of S an Dimas instituted a Solid Waste Recycling Program in 1989. The community attitude survey indicated that there was very strong support for solid waste recycling. The respondents to the community attitude survey were willing to pay an additional dollar per month for recycling efforts. The City is currently reviewing a Green Waste Program for composting gardening waste, in which the City’s Parks and Maintenance will compost 90% of its waste. Additional programs are currently under review with participation with the L.A. County Sanitation District and Cal Poly University in Pomona. The Recycling Program is also discussed in detail in the Conservation Element.
San Dimas is part of a solid waste Joint-Powers Authority (JPA) made of East San Gabriel Valley cities. The JPA hired a cosul-tant to prepare a solid waste source reduction plan. The City has formed a Waste Management Committee which recommends goals and objectives to the City Council on an ongoing basis.
11-34
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Hazardous Waste
In general, hazardous waste is defined as any waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may exhibit one or more of the following characteristics; toxicity, corrosivity, flammability, and reactivity. Hazardous waste includes a spectrum of wastes ranging from household wastes, like pesticides and used motor oil, to industrial wastes such as spent cleaning solvents and planting shop waste. The City must adopt a household Hazardous Waste Element (HAWE) as a companion to the SARRE.
Hazardous materials are transported through the City by truck, and there are users of hazardous substances within San Dimas. The use, storage and siting of hazardous materials are regulated by the Fire Department through implementation of the Hazardous Materials Disclosure Ordinance.
Chapter 1504 of the 1986 State Statutes (AB 2948, Tanner), as amended by Chapter 1167 of the 1987 State Statutes (SB 477, Greene), and Chapter 1389 of the 1988 State Statutes (AB 3206, Tanner) authorizes each county, in lieu of preparing the hazardous waste portion of the solid waste management plan, to prepare and to adopt a county hazardous waste management plan. The law requires this plan to be prepared in accordance with the State Department of Health Services (SDOHS) Guidelines, dated June 30,1987, and is to address the
11-35
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
management of hazardous waste that are shipped off-site from the site of generation for storage, treatment and/or disposal. The directive of the SDOHS is to develop siting capacity appropriate to meet single and multi-county hazardous waste management capacity needs while also acknowledging responsibility to meet a portion of overall Statewide capacity needs.
Following adoption of the County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, cities in Los Angeles County are required to take one of three actions:
Incorporate applicable portions of the County plan, by reference, into the City’s General Plan
Adopt a city hazardous waste management plan which is consistent with the County plan.
Enact an ordinance which requires that all applicable zoning, subdivision, conditional use permit and variance decisions are consistent with the applicable portions of the County Hazards Waste Management Plan.
11-36
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
DEVELOPMENT POLICIES_________________ A development policy is a general plan state-
ment that guides action; it includes:
•	Goals
•	Objectives
•	Policies
v	• Plan Proposals
•	Implementation Measures
Please refer to Section I for a detailed definition and explanation of how the Plan proposals (land use map) and implementation measures are referenced.
These development policies are summarized in a matrix on page 11-62.
11-37
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
GOALS STATEMENT L-l:
MAINTAIN THE RURAL SMALL TOWN LOW DENSITY ATMOSPHERE OF SAN DIMAS
	
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
1.1.1
Provide a community where residential uses are predominantly low density and non-residential uses are predominandy low intensity.
1.1.2
1.1.3
Residential densities shall begin at the low range and be increased for tradeoffs for more open, space, affordable housing and other appropriate public objectives and amenities
Enhance the rural/equestrian image north of Gladstone Street. Retain large lot development and improve circulation.
Development shall conform to terrain.
1.2	Preserve open space and conserve existing residential neighborhoods.
1.3	Abate non-conforming uses through City ordinances.
Plan Proposal: D, F, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, U, V (see page 11-47)
Implementation Measures: a, b, g (see page 11-59)
11-38
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
GOALS STATEMENT L-2:
PRESERVE THE INTEGRITY OF THE FOOTHILLS, INCLUDING THE: NORTHERN FOOTHILLS, PUDDINGSTONE HILLS AND WAY HILL.
OBJECTIVES:____________________
2.1 Protect the identity of prominaht ridgelines and canyons with significant stands of trees by directing development on slope areas within the foothills.
POLICIES:_______________________________
2.1.1	Development shall conform to terrain.
2.1.2	Develop building sites which are reasonably accessible with minimal grading.
2.1.3	Encourage development which prevents "skylining" of buildings through proper site planning, height limitations and landscaping.
2.1.4	Evaluate the significance of prominent ridgelines and canyons on a case-bycase basis within the City's image context.
2.2	Maintain the development at a very low estate density of 0 to .2 dwelling units/acre with the following sub categories: a) hillside residential with rural standards, grading to follow natural terrain and a minimum 150 feet separation between buildings shall be maintained;
b)	Puddingstone Hills —r minimum, lot size shall be 1.5 to 3 acres; and
c)	Way Hill — minimum lot size shall be 1 acre.
2.3	Minimize perception of building -bulk.	2.3.1 2.3.2 2.3.3 2.3.4	Design architecture to break up massing. Minimize building height. Design structure to fit with existing neighborhood. Use materials and colors to reduce bulk.
2.4	Integrate structures with the envir-	2.4.1	Use natural materials and colors.
	onment.	'i 2.4.2	Integrate with environmental texture
			and forms.
		2.4.3	Control exterior light sources.
11-39

General Plan Land Use Element
GOALS STATEMENT L-2: PRESERVE THE INTEGRITY OF THE FOOTHILLS, INCLUDING THE NORTHERN FOOTHILLS, PUDDINGSTONE HILLS AND WAY HILL.			
OBJECTIVES:		POLIC1	1ES:
2.1	Protect the identity of prominent ridgelines and canyons with significant stands of trees by directing development on slope areas within the foothills.	2.1.1	Development shall conform to terrain.
		2.1.2	Develop building sites which are reasonable accessible with minimal grading.
		2.1.3	Encourage development which prevents “skylining” of buildings through proper site planning, height	limitations	and landscaping.
		2.1.4	Evaluate the significance of prominent	ridgelines	and canyons on a case-by-case basis within the City’s image context.
2.2	Maintain the development at a Very Low Estate density of 0 to .2 dwelling units/acre with the following subcategories: a) Hillside Residential with rural standards, grading to follow natural terrain and a minimum 150 feet separation between buildings (not applicable to Way Hill) shall be maintained; b) Puddingstone Hills - minimum lot size shall be 1.5 to 3 acres; and c) Way Hill - maximum density shall be 1 dwelling unit per acre, lots may be created at lesser sizes where appropriate based on existing lot sizes and topography, a minor density increase may be granted where no new ridgeline lots are created.		•
II-39A
Ci^o^San^ma^^
General Plan Land Use Element
2.3	Minimize perception of building bulk.	2.3.1	Design architecture to break up massing.
		2.3.2	Minimize building height
		2.3.3	Design structure to fit existing neighborhood.
		2.3.4	Use materials and colors to reduce bulk.
2.4	Integrate structures with the environment.	2.4. r	Use natural materials and-colors.
		2.4.2	Integrate with environmental texture and forms.
		2.4.3	Control exterior light sources.
)
II-39B
City of San Dimas________________________________________________General Plan Land Use Element
O A r.
Xr.V. X
o A
knhonra inn/icmmn er
OBJECTIVES:POLICIES:
2.5 Preserve significant environmental 2.5.1 Minimize changes to the natural features.	topography.
2.5.2, Follow hillside contours.
T Tea 1	atm rr 1^1 art	/■'tn-ra x1 ri f
vj ov idaivtova.p'iiig, iu uiviivu. ou uviui v w iui
the environment:
Use drought-tolerant species.
Minimize excessive impervious surface cover.
2.6.2
2.6.3
Plan Proposal: V (see page 11-49)
Implementation Measures: b, e, g (see page 11-59)
GOALS STATEMENT L-3:
ENSURE THAT ALL PORTIONS OF THE CITY ARE ADEQUATELY SERVED WITH ESSENTIAL SERVICES, UTILITIES AND RECREATIONAL AND OPEN SPACE FACILITIES.
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
3.1	Promote future land use and development patterns which support local jurisdictions and other service provider in their efforts to provide equally to all citizens of San Dimas, accessible and effective services such as: public education; housing; health care;.child care; social ser-
• vices; law enforcement; and fire protection.
.1.1 Utilize City Facilities and other resources, when appropriate, to promote and encourage approved child care services.
.1.2 Consider the possibility of granting a density bonus of additional floor area when developes set aside space for a child care facility, this option is permitted by State law - AB 1828
11-40
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
3.1.3	Continue to support programs for the Senior Citizens of San Dimas.
3.1.4	Continue to support programsfor the youth of San Dimas.
3.1.5	Encourage the development of private care facilities to ensure the health and welfare of the citizens of San Dimas.
3.1.6	Assist finding shelter for the homeless.
Plan Proposal: R (see page 11-49)
Implementation Measures:
11-41
City of San Dimas	General Plan Land Use Element
GOALS STATEMENT L-4:
PLAN AND CREATE AN URBAN FORM THAT EFFICIENTLY UTILIZES URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES. PLAN FOR ORDERLY GROWTH RATHER THAN “LEAP FROG” DEVELOPMENT
	
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
4.1	Promote future land use and development patterns which reduce costs of infrastructure construction, encourages transit to make better use of existing facilities, and achieve a good match between future growth and phasing of existing facilities or expansion of new ones.
4.1.1 Limit intensity of non-residential development through height limits, lot coverage, setabacks and other appropriate standards.
4.2	Consider each development proposal in a larger development context. Understand how each development contributes to city-wide impacts and contributes to certain capacity thresholds for circulation, community services and utilities.
Plan Proposal: None
Implementation Measures: d, g (see page 11-59)
11-42
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
GOALS STATEMENT L-5:
PROVIDE WELL PLANNED COMMERCIAL CENTERS AND NODES. DISCOURAGE “STRIP” COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT
	
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
5.1.1
Encourage infill and development to occur in and around activity centers, transportation node corridors, underutilized infrastructure systems, and areas needing revitalization and redevelopment.
5.1.2
5.1.3
Encourage employee based business uses with a higher ratio of employee to floor area.
Foothill Boulevard - Restrict neighborhood retail to existing key intersections.
Provide opportunities for existing “mom and pop” commercial markets to remain to serve their neighborhoods.
5.2	Commercial development should 5.2.1 Because of its close proximity to San be concentrated at selected nodes.	Dimas Avenue and Route 30, identify
the Bonita School District parcel on Allen Avenue to a Commercial land use designation.
5.2.2	Consider locating future transit stations adjacent to commercial.
Plan Proposal: A, B, E, G, K, P, Q, T, U (see page III-47)
Implementation Measures: d, f (see page ni-59)
11-43
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
GOALS STATEMENT L-6:
REVITALIZE AND IMPROVE DOWNTOWN AS A COMMUNITY FOCUS.
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
6.1
Improve Downtown’s image and visual environment.
6.1.1	Give priority for redevelopment activities to declining areas within the City, particularly the Town core and
z' '•'xPuddingstone Center.
6.1.2	Encourage office and mixed uses to increase the day time population of Downtown to support the retail and service establishments such as restau-
• rants and other businesses in Downtown.
6.1.3 Encourage night time activity such as restaurant and entertainment in Downtown.
6.1.4	Encourage a partnership of merchants, property owners, and the City in revitalizing Downtown.
6.1.5	Encourage outside displays.
6.2 Provide more pedestrian areas and 6.2.1 Provide a Transit Station in the Down-night time activities in Downtown.	town area to encourage more night-
time activities.
6.3 Preserve the Historic aspect of the Downtown.
Plan Proposal: K, P, Q, R, T, U (see page 11-47)
Implementation Measures: e, f, g (see page 11-59)
11-44
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
GOALS STATEMENT L-7:
MAINTAIN EXISTING MOBILE HOMES TO MEET THE NEED FOR AFFORD-
ABLE HOUSING STOCK FOR THE CITIZENS OF SAN DIMAS.
	
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
7.1 Conserve and improve the existing mobile home parks.
7.1.1	Encourage the upgrading of some mobile home parks, especially the streetscape edge conditions visible from the public right-of-way where proper landscaping and screening would visually improve the neighborhood, without passing additional costs onto park residents.
7.1.2
In order to preserve mobile homes as affordable housing stock, foster land
uwixvxonx^/	luiiitivj xu/x uvcupauu.
Plan Proposal: C (see page 11-47)
Implementation Measures: c, d (see page 11-59)
GOALS STATEMENT L-8:
ENSURE ADEQUATE COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE OF SAN DIMAS
UDJILC 11 V JL0.
OAT TPWC.
8.1	Provide opportunities for all City 3.1.1 Provide information to the various residents to participate in the plan-	geographical areas of the City,
ning of San Dimas.
Plan Proposal: None
Implementation Measures: (see page 11-59)
11-45
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
GOALS STATEMENT L-9:
ENHANCE A UNIFIED AND A HIGH QUALITY VISUAL IMAGE FOR THE CITY
	
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
9.1
Preserve the visual identity and 9.1.1 character of existing neighborhoods.
Underground utilities to improve the visual environment.
9.1.2	Beautify the existing railroad rights-of-way.
9.1.3	Direct future development in a cohesive manner and promote the visual identity of the City’s important districts such as the Town Core, Civic Center, and Downtown.
9.14 Promote the arts in San Dimas through the development of a “Arts in Public Places” program.
9.1.5 Preserve important view corridors.
9.2	Preserve the City’s unique natural features and historic structures.
Plan Proposal: None
Implementation Measures: b, f, g (see page 11-59)
11-46

General Plan Land Use Element
GOALS STATEMENT L-10:
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NORTHERN FOOTHILLS AREA SHALL MAXIMIZE PRESERVATION OF THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT, RECOGNIZE THE OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS THAT THE LAND IMPOSES, AND ACCOMMODATE SUCH DEVELOPMENT AS CAN BE DESIGNED TO MINIMIZE IMPACTS ON THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT AND PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY.
OBJECTIVES:____________________________POLICIES:________________________________
10.1	Development of the Northern 10.1.1 The development strategy set forth Foothills shall be rural in character. in the Northern Foothills Development and
Infrastructure Study (November 1998) shall apply-
10.1.2	Maximum densities shall be as set forth in Figure II-5.1.
10.1.3	Even where clustering is allowed, minimum parcel sizes shall be not less than two acres in size.
10.1.4	Typical urban facilities including curb, gutter, sidewalk, street lighting, formal landscaping, sewers, underground utilities and similar shall be discouraged.
10.1.5	Provisions shall be made to facilitate the keeping of horses and other farm animals.
10.2 The visual intrusiveness of new development shall be minimized. Rather than relying on substantial landform modification to create artificial building pads, new development shall be designed to fit quietly into the natural character of the area.
10.1.6	Effort shall be made to establish new equestrian trails and preserve existing equestrian trails, where and when appropriate. ______________________________
10.2.1	Except within bedrock, where manufactured slopes in excess of 5 vertical feet cannot feasibly be avoided, they shall be landform graded. (NOTE: "Landform grading" is a contour grading method which creates artificial slopes with curves and varying slope ratios in the horizontal and vertical planes designed to simulate the appearance of surrounding natural terrain.)
10.2.2	Site design should utilize varying setbacks, structure heights, innovative building techniques, and retaining walls to blend structures into the terrain.
II-46A
City of San Dimas------------------- General Plan Land Use Element
10.2.3	Allow for different lot shapes and sizes, as well as the provision of split development pads, with the prime determinant being the natural terrain.
10.2.4	Structures shall be sited in a manner that will fit into the hillside’s contour and relate to the form of the terrain; retain outward views from the maximum number of units while maintaining the natural character of the hillside; preserve vistas of natural hillside areas and ridgelines from public places and streets; and, preserve existing views and allow new dwellings access to views similar to those enjoyed from existing dwellings.
10.2.5	Streets should follow the natural contours of the hillside to minimize cut and fill. Streets may be split into two, parallel one-way streets (thereby effectively functioning as a two-way street with a median) in steeper areas to minimize grading and blend with the terrain. Cul-de-sacs or loop roads are encouraged where necessary to fit the terrain. On-street parking and sidewalks may be eliminated to reduce required grading.
10.2.6	Driveways which serve more than one lot, as well as diagonal driveways running along contour lines, are encouraged as a means of reducing unnecessary grading, paving, and site disturbance.
10.2.7	Clustered development is encouraged as a means of preserving the natural appearance of the hillside and maximizing the amount of open space. Under this concept, dwelling units are grouped in the more level portions of the site, while steeper areas are preserved in a natural state. The effect of permitted clustering is to enhance the environmental sensitivity of a development project, and facilitate the permanent protection of key features of the natural environment, such as steep slopes, biological habitats, ridgelines, and scenic areas, including their retention
II-46B
Qensj;al Plan l^LLh&^lsiasaL
protected open space areas. Clustering is not be used to increase the overall density of an area beyond that which is otherwise permitted by the General Plan and applicable zoning regulations, nor is clustering to be used to create suburban style subdivisions within the Northern Foothills area.
10.2.8	The use of retaining walls and structures is encouraged when it significantly reduces site grading.
10.2.9	The overall scale and massing of structures shall respect the natural surroundings and unique visual resources of the area by incorporating designs which minimize bulk and mass, follow natural topography, and minimize visual intrusion on the natural landscape.
10.2.10	Houses shall not be excessively tall so as to dominate their surroundings. Structures shall be a maximum of one story in height, but may be constructed on split, flat pads contained within a limited envelope parallel to the finished grade, rather than "jutting out" over natural slopes. Building forms shall be scaled to the particular environmental setting so as to complement the hillside character and to avoid excessively massive forms that fail to enhance the hillside character. Building facades shall change plane or use overhangs as a means to create changing shadow lines to further break up massive forms.
10.2.11	Wall surfaces facing towards viewshed areas shall be minimized through the use of single story homes, single story dwellings placed on split pads, setbacks, roof pitches, and landscaping.
10.2.12	Roof lines and elements shall reflect the naturally occurring ridgeline silhouettes and topographical variation, or create an overall variety, that blends with the hillside.
10.2.13 	Architectural	style,
II-46C
General Plan Land Use Element
including materials and colors, should be compatible with the natural setting. The use of colors, textures, materials and forms which will attract attention by not relating to other elements in the neighborhood is to be avoided.
10.2.14	Overhead utilities should be permitted under certain circumstances, including within the right-of-way of roadways connecting development areas; to serve development of a single dwelling unit on an existing lot of record; and within the rights-of-way of roadways where all lots are 5 acres in size or greater. In cases where aboveground utilities are permitted within the right-of-way of a roadway, connections to individual dwellings shall be underground. Utilities shall continue to be underground within subdivisions and parcel maps along roadways serving parcels smaller than 5 acres, as currently required. Where overhead utilities are permitted, their adverse visual impact on surrounding properties is to be mitigated through sensitive placement. Clear cutting of vegetation for an overhead utility corridor shall not be permitted.
10.2.15	The interface between new development and natural open space shall be designed to provide a gradual transition from manufactured areas into natural areas. By extending fingers of planting into existing and sculptured slopes, the new landscape should blend in with the natural vegetation. For fire prevention purposes, a fuel modification zone shall be provided between natural open space and development.
10.2.16	New development within the Northern Foothills Planning Area shall ensure the ongoing maintenance of manufactured slopes.
10.2.17	Primary ridgelines should be protected from any construction activities including, but not limited to roads,
1I-46D
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
10.3 Roadway improvements to provide access to parcels should not adversely affect other properties through extensive grading, flood control facilities, or any other type of construction and/or requisite support infrastructure.
structures, water tanks, antennae, utilities, etc. so as to maintain a natural skyline.
10.2.18	New parcels which have as their only feasible building site a primary ridgeline shall not be created. Where the only feasible building site within an existing parcel is on a primary ridgeline, the structure shall be sited at the lowest possible elevation on the site, and along the least visible portion of the ridge upon which a structure can feasibly be constructed. Where development is proposed to occur adjacent to a primary ridgeline (a ridge which is visible against the sky as viewed from a public street), it should be set back a sufficient distance so as to be located below the ridgeline. The intent of this requirement is to maintain a natural skyline.
10.2.19	Sources of lighting within
the Northern Foothills shall be limited._____
10.3.1	Roadways within the Northern Hillside Area should provide for minimum safe passage of two cars along a paved road section, except in limited circumstances.
10.3.2	Within the upper elevations of the Northern Foothills area, permit a further reduction in required roadway width for private roadways which will ultimately serve a maximum of four dwellings, based on the maximum allowable density permitted by the General Plan, and where not providing such a reduction would effectively preclude access to an existing lot of record.
10.3.3	Roadway grades and curves should accommodate safety and emergency vehicles with certain limited exceptions.
10.3.4	The provision of adequate flood control and/or erosion control measures for public and private roadways shall occur in a manner consistent with the rural character of the Northern Hillside Area.
10.3.5	New development shall be permitted to take access from Terrebonne Avenue only where there are no viable alternatives.
II-46E
City of San Dimas
I
10.4 New development shall be designed so as to maximize the permanent preservation of open space, and to minimize the loss of biological resources.
10.3.6	An equestrian trails system should be provided. A trails plan should be prepared to link future residential areas to existing and planned equestrian facilities and trails in the City.________________________________
10.4.1	Open space within the Northern Foothills should be preserved through establishment and implementation of a purchase of development rights program.
10.4.2	The City should actively pursue an exchange program for property owners within the study area with the U. S. Forest Service in order to preserve the natural landscape while simultaneously providing private property owners with a means to realize use of their property. ■
10.4.3	Development projects are to be designed to protect habitat values and to preserve significant, viable habitat areas and habitat connections in their natural condition.
10.4.4	Within proposed developments, primary emphasis is to be placed on protecting the integrity of habitats and habitat linkages.
10.4.5	Within occupied habitat areas of rare, threatened or endangered species, disturbance of protected biotic resources is prohibited.
10.4.6	Within riparian areas, wetland areas, and coastal sage scrub habitats, the vegetative resources which contribute to habitat carrying capacity (vegetative diversity, faunal resting areas, foraging areas, and food sources) should be preserved in place or replaced so as to not result in a measurable reduction in the reproductive capacity of sensitive biotic resources.
10.4.7	Within habitats of plants listed by the California Natural Diversity Data Base (CNDDB) as “special” or “of concern,” new development shall not result in a reduction in the number of these plants, if they are present.
II-46F

10.5	It is the ultimate responsibility of individual developers (including construction of a single family dwelling on an existing lot of record) to define the infrastructure needed to serve their project, and to finance and construct needed roadway, water, sewage disposal, and utility facilities as part of their projects.
10.4.8	The use of motorized off-road vehicles shall be prohibited, and off-trail activities shall be limited to those that are consistent with protection of environmental values.
10.4.9	The establishment of buffer zones
adjacent to areas of preserved biological resources shall be required. Such buffer zones shall be adequate in width so as to protect biological resources from grading and construction activities, as well as from the long-term use of adjacent lands. The landscape design adjacent to areas of preserved biological resources shall be designed so as to avoid invasive species which could negatively impact the value of the preserved resource._________
10.5.1	The City should encourage landowners within development feasibility zones to work together to cooperatively plan for, finance, and construct backbone infrastructure to serve each development feasibility zone.
10.5.2	Provision shall be made for alternative infrastructure in areas where municipal systems cannot reasonably be extended.
Plan Proposal: W
Implementation Measures: b, h
II-46G
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Plan Proposals
The Land Use Element provides for seven major types of land use: Residential, Commercial, Administrative/Professional, Industrial, Public/Semi-Public, Open Space, and Specific Plan. Each of these is divided into separate categories and correlated with intensity of development based upon the goals and objectives of this element. The General Plan Land Use Map in Exhibit H-4, classifies land uses within San Dimas into these new categories. The Plan proposals on the proceeding pages are designed to implement the Land Ue Map Exhibit H-4.
Table U-4 presents an inventory of the General Plan land use categories and summarizes currently developed, undeveloped and total general plan acreage by type of use for all uses.
A:	Designate the southeast comer of Lone
Hill Avenue and Gladstone Street as a Business Park.
B:	Extend Specific Plan boundaries
(SP20) to Cienega Street. Develop this project area as regional commercial and buffer the residential uses adjacent to project.
C:	Designate a mobile home land use
category in the Land Use Element, and apply the mobile home designation to existing mobile home land uses.
D:	Development in the Rancho Park Site
is recommended to have a single family residential low density of 2 to 4 dwelling units/acre.
11-47
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
E:	Designate Foothill Boulevard as a pro-
fessional office corridor.
F:	The Pacific Coast Baptist Bible Col-
lege area is recommended to remain an open space land use category.
G:	The SP-5 is a “major entry window” to
the community. Include the AP zone area north of Calle Rosa into Specific Plan 5; this would visually leave the north face of the hill visible going southbound on San Dimas Avenue towards Via Verde Drive in open space.
H:	Designate the parcel at Foothill Blvd.
and Amelia Avenue (Southeast corner) medium density residential.
I:	Designate the Way Hill area (SP-3) as
Single Family Estate Very Low with 1 acre minimum lot size.
J:	Retain the area north of Gladstone
Street as equestrian/residential with a minimum 16,000 square foot lots.
K:	Designate the historic San Dimas
Lemon Packing House for historic adaptive reuse by revitalizing the existing packing house for either office or combination of commercial and retail (mixed use). Integrate a light rail transit station stop as part of the development.
L:	Town Core Residential: Designate
this area as single family low density residential.
M:	Designate the Pioneer Park neighbor-
hood as single family residential.
11-48
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
N:	Designate the north side of Railway St.
and Commercial Street as single family low residential.
O:	Designate low density residential on
the parcel south of Commercial Street and north of the existing commercial center at Arrow Highway and San Dimas Avenue.
P:	Downtown Area:	Extend the
Downtown boundaries west to Eucla Avenue.
Q:	The City shall revitalize the
Puddingstone Shopping Center site and actively encourage additional commercial development on the current vacant City owned property between the shopping center and Walnut Avenue.
R:	Expand the Civic Center boundaries to
include areas east of Walnut Avenue and south of Bonita Avenue to include the Post Office, new Sheriffs station and other institutional uses.
S:	Designate the area adjacent to the
Circle K Market for possible medium density residential or senior housing.
T:	The City shall designate the Canyon
Shopping Center as a Specific Plan. Area for commercial and/or Residential Development.
U:	Designate a Downtown residential
area.
V:	Designate the foothills as “Northern
Foothills.”
11-49
of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
W:	Amend the land use designation of all
privately owned lands within the Northern Foothills that are currently designated Single Family Residential to Very Low Estate, with the exception of Terrebonne tract, to “Northern Foothills.” Retain existing “Park” and “Open Space” land use designations for the National Forest, Camp Glen Rocky, Horsethief Canyon Park, San Dimas Wash, San Dimas Canyon Golf Course, and other publicly owned properties. Amend the land use designation of the privately owned property (APN 8678-030-301) within the boundaries of the National Forest to “Northern Foothills.”
X:	Designate Way Hill as Single Family
Very Low.


GENERAL
PLAN
S»ngte family very low tstote
Single family Very Low
Single fomily Low
Low/Medium
Mobile Home
Residential calculations shall be computed from the low end of each cotegory. increoses in density (within the ronge) may be allocated lor odditionoi amenities
ano oorticiootion in city programs designed 5 lor the puui'C good.
EXHIBIT II-4
LAND USE MAP
AFT
RESIDENTIAL	DEN Si TV

□J
rvu
c*«*« KMX
t_I <r\
itaar A j/
COMMIT OCtCkOMMl KFMfcUl
11-50
cbaaimti casumm/imau useoAas mo
~A
Cit£j)££anDunc£
General Plan Land JJse Element
	Existing Land Use*	General Plan 2
LAND USE CATEGORIES	Acres	Acres
		
Northern Foothills		972
Single Family Residential Very Low Estate		555
Single Family Residential Very Low		•	499
Single Family Residential Low	3,191	2,337
Residential Low/Medium		251
Residential Medium	186	86
Residential High		48
Mobile Home		92
Commercial	225	263
Administration/Professional	39	43
Industrial	287	312
Public/Semi-Public	132	255
Park	1,957	1,974
Open Space	1,819	1,819
Freeway Right-of-Way	372	372
Vacant	1 S74 * ‘	
		
TOTAL	9,782	9,878
		
*As of Dec. 1989		
TABLE II-4
EXISTING LAND USE & GENERAL PLAN SUMMARY
11-51
GENERAL
PLAN
GLaMTONB JT.
COHMVNfTY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT CONSULTANTS: CASTANEDA/TAKATA ASSOCIATES
EXHIBIT n-4.1
LEGEND
— CITY LIMITS LINE

11-52
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
LAND USE STANDARDS ■	........ This section provides general definitions of
the variety of land uses depicted on the Land Use Map. State planning law requires that the Land Use Element include a land use diagram, definitions of the land uses, and standards for population density and building intensity.
Quantifiable standards of population density must be provided for each residential land use category. The average persons per household is an acceptable standard, standard for population density. According to the State Department of Finance, the average household size in the City is 2.98 arid this is the measure for population density.
With regard to building intensity, the floor area ratio is a useful measure of commercial and industrial intensity. Consequently, each commercial and industrial category also is defined with reference to a floor area ratio or maximum building coverage.
Residential Use
Residential use is the primary land use within the City. There are five categories of this use which reflect intensity and their correspond-
ing population.
11-53
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY CATEGORIES. The following are the standards for residential density categories:	
Residential Category	Dwelling Units/Acre
Northern Foothills	See Exhibit II-5.1
Single Family Estate Very Low	0-.2
Single Family Very Low	.21-3
Single Family Low	3.1-6
Low/Medium	6.1-8
Medium	8.1-12
High	12.1-16 :
Single Family Estate Very Low: Density uses are very low density single family detached and large estate developments with the following subcategories: a) Hillside residential with rural standards grading to terrain minimum 150’ between structures; b) Puddingstone Hills - 1-1/2 to 3 acre minimum lot size; and c) Way Hill - 1 acre minimum lot size. These areas shall comply with the Hillside Development Regulations.
Very Low: Density uses are single family detached dwellings on large lots, greater than Vi acre. These uses are typically designated for more rural areas.
Low: Density uses are single family detached dwellings on lots ranging in size from 7,000 s.f. to 9,000 s.f. The low density category represents the most prevalent residential use in the City including the downtown residential neighborhood district near Frontier Village.
11-54
Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Low/Medium: Density uses include single family detached and attached dwelling units including cottages, patio homes, duplexes, townhouses, and garden apartments. These are found on smaller lots ranging in size from 1/4 acre to 5000 square feet.
Medium: Density uses are multi-family dwelling units such as two-story apartments, townhouses, and mobile home complexes.
High: Density uses are typically multi-family dwellings including apartments, and multistory residential developments.
In addition to the above categories, there are three additional special categories. They include:
Mobile Homes:
This category is intended for the residential use of areas as mobile home parks. Such a land use is encouraged only when such areas are particularly suitable for planned and integrated mobile home parks. A major purpose of this zone is to encourage the preservation of existing parks at their present density.
11-55
(
General Plan Land Use Element

Low/Medium: Density uses include singly family detached and attached dwelling units including cottages, patio homes, duplexes, townhouses, and garden apartments. These are found on smaller lots ranging in size from 14 acre to 5,000 square feet.
Medium: Density uses are multi-family dwelling units such as tow-story apartments, townhouse, and mobile home complexes.
High: Density uses are typically multi-family dwellings including apartments, and multistory residential developments.
Northern Foothills: Essentially, the Northern Foothills area has four general areas available for development (see Exhibit II-5.2). These general areas are separated into a higher elevation portion (two areas) and a lower elevation portion (two areas). The higher and lower portions are separated by significantly steep slopes (<30 percent). While each of these four areas may accommodate some development, constructing acceptable means of access to the higher elevations will be difficult, except via existing, single lane unpaved roads. Constructing access roads to the higher elevation areas will result in severe grading, extended benches, ridge line alterations, and substantial visual impacts, as well as impacts to off-site properties.
The maximum allowable development densities for development shall be as shown in Exhibit II-5.1.
Exhibit	1-5.1 - Maximum Allowable Density	
Actual Slope	Development Feasibility Zone	
	Within	Outside
0 - 25%	1 du/5 acres:	1 du/20 acres
25.-35%	1 du/10. acres	1 du/20 acres
35-50%	1 du/20 acres	1 du/40 acres
50% or more	1 du/40 acres	1 du/80 acres
II-55A

General Plan Laird Use Element
Achievement of the maximum development intensity cited above is not guaranteed; the actual yield of any development is to be determined based upon:
♦	site-specific physical characteristics;
♦	the need for mitigation or avoidance of impacts to biological habitats;
♦	the environmental sensitivity of proposed site design, grading, and type of construction;
♦	available on-site and off-site access; and
♦	the ability of the proposed project to avoid impacts on other properties.
Individual developments within the Northern Foothills must be consistent with the general policies and actions contained in the General Plan, as well as the specific provisions, which apply to the Northern Foothills. It is specifically acknowledged that a project which meets applicable development policies might not achieve the nominal maximum development intensity for the site.
Within the Northern Foothills area, there are existing lots of record which exceed the maximum development densities cited above. For these parcels, one single family dwelling unit may be permitted, if such dwelling is constructed in a manner which minimizes alteration of the natural terrain, and if such construction can meet established health and safety requirements.
The 150-foot building separation policy which applies to other hillside areas in the City shall not apply to the Northern Foothills.
II-55B

General Plan Land Use Element
S'**!!
GENERAL PLAN
DEVELOPMENT FEASIBILITY ZONES
ANGELES •NATIONAL FOREST
| 8E7s-o3o-mi| Undeveloped Land 1	.... (by Assessor Parcel Number';
>■ CITY OF ' • SAN DIMAS
Potential Water Sendee Areas
LNSSSM Potential Development Areas
Potential Water Tank
Source: USGS Maps; San Dimas Quadrangle, 1972, & Glendora Quadrangle, 1981; City of San Dimas Community Development Department Aerial Photography, 1994; Los Angeles County Assessors Map J 996.
EXHIBIT II-5.2
II-55C

Reasonable limitations on development intensity are needed for protection of sensitive environmental features, public safety, efficient provision of public services, and protection of existing public investments in adjacent open space lands. Thus, the general development strategy for the Northern Foothills area is to let the land dictate the location and intensity of use. Thus, the overall objective for the Northern Foothills planning area is to maximize preservation of the area’s natural environment, recognize the opportunities and constraints that the land itself imposes, and accommodate such development as can be designed to minimize impacts on the natural environment and protect the public health and safety.
Debris from falling rocks, landslides, mudslides, and other hazards from developing on steep slopes are just some of the hazards of developing in these areas. The supply of public services (water, sewer, electricity, firefighters, police, etc.) can be cost prohibitive in mountainous areas such as the Northern Foothills. This is due to having to provide levels of service identical to those in the more urbanized areas, while encompassing significantly more land area. Police and firefighters many times have difficulty negotiating the steep, winding roads inherent to the mountainous areas, especially during periods of heavy rain and/or wild fires. In addition, with the grading necessary for development and the subsequent disturbance to the natural vegetation, runoff flows increase drastically during periods of either high wind and/or rainfall.
Given these facts, the Northern Foothills development strategy looks to minimize alterations to the natural terrain, not only to preserve natural environmental features, but. also to protect residents’ health and safety
II-55D
Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
within developed areas. The recommended development strategy recognizes that the limited development which can reasonably occur within the Northern Foothills will provide a sense of refuge and escape from the urban expanse of the Los Angeles metropolitan area.
Development within the area, even when clustered, should be rural in character. For purposes of the Northern Foothills Development strategy, "rural" is defined as:
“A way of life characterized by living in an area with few people; a natural, peaceful, quiet setting; allowance for a sense of solitude; and, unhindered views of stars in the night sky. Rural areas are unencumbered by typical urban/suburban facilities, including: curbs, gutters and sidewalks; street lighting except where needed for safety purposes; formal, manicured landscaping; and commercial facilities.”
It is intended that future development within the Northern Foothills planning area be rural in character, as defined above.
It is also intended that future development within the Northern Foothills planning area be consistent with the appropriate level of development and environmental protection outlined below in Exhibit II-5.3. Whenever a division of land is proposed to accommodate more than a single family dwelling on an existing lot of record, the applicant shall provide such information to the City as needed to ascertain whether any of the specific environmental characteristics outlined in Exhibit II-5.3 occur on site.
II-55E
General Plan Land Use Element
Exhibit II-5.3 - Recommended Environmental Thresholds and Appropriate Levels of Development		
General Description of Affected Lands	Specific Environmental Characteristics	Appropriate Level of Development/ Environmental Protection
Areas whose environmental values are such that any alteration of the natural landscape would create significant environmental impacts, including lands that have been previously been committed to open space as environmental mitigation in order to protect environmental resources.	Slopes in excess of 50 percent. Primary ridgelines forming a skyline. Occupied habitat areas of rare, threatened, or endangered species identified by federal or state law. Archaeological sites that have been preserved in place as mitigation for a previous development project. Floodways as defined by Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).	Land use should be limited to environmental education, research, and enhancement programs. Development, including developed recreation, is generally inappropriate.
Areas with significant environmental features where a certain degree of development may be tolerated without significant environmental impacts provided that development is appropriately clustered.	Areas owned or managed by the U.S. Forest Service that are designated in the General Plan as “Open Space.” Hillsides having a slope between 25 and 50 percent. Riparian and wetland vegetative communities, as well as woodlands; areas that provide connectivity between core wildlife habitats where few linkage options are available. Significant archaeological sites (as defined by Appendix K of CEQA Guidelines). Areas of known and/or current mass wasting/landslides.	Land use should be limited to undeveloped and developed recreation and low intensity rural use. While the value of these lands is for preservation of environmental resources, development may be clustered into the least sensitive portions of the site in order to preserve and protect natural features. The specific environmental features described to the left in this table are to be preserved in place, and development should not be the visually dominant feature when viewed from designated scenic corridors. “Manufactured” open space areas, such as manmade slopes and introduced landscaping, should blend in
II-55F
General Plan Land Use Element
aat—^—g—a—a
imas
	Areas subject to 100-year flooding as defined by FEMA. Areas of outstanding scenic value.	with the surrounding natural environment.
Lands that retain a natural or open character, or which include rural development that is compatible with the characteristic natural setting. These lands may contain isolated, significant environmental features; however, these features do not generally dominate the natural landscape. As a result, these lands are generally suitable for some level of development.	Rolling lands having slopes less than 25 percent, except in isolated areas. This does not includie lands containing significant biological habitats such as riparian areas. Mixed coastal sage scrub. Areas located more than 600 feet from a two-lane roadway or motorway, or 300 feet from a motorway which does not provide for the passage of two vehicles. Designated scenic corridors. Areas of moderate natural scenic value.	New development should remain visually subordinate to the characteristic landscape. However, significant environmental features must be protected, and introduced landscaping, manufactured landforms, structures, roads, and other manmade features should be compatible with the surrounding natural environment. Thus, landform grading and landform planting techniques are to be incorporated into new development.
infill lands within or adjacent to current development.	Developed lands, areas committed to development, and open lands that have not been committed to open space which will visually function primarily as part of existing developed lands. Areas not containing significant biological resources; previously disturbed lands where revegetation is impractical. Areas free from natural hazards. Areas without significant natural scenic values. Areas or primarily manmade landforms.	New development may replace the characteristic natural landscape. A developed rural character that is compatible with the characteristics of the adjacent community is anticipated. Thus, development may be visually different from natural features when seen in the foreground, new development and land management activities need not appear to borrow from the natural environment. To soften visual impacts, landform grading and landform planting techniques are to be incorporated into new development. New development should not dominate the background. The visual characteristics of background views are to be those of the natural environment.
II-55G
o£'SanDugasB
General Plan Land Use Element
The general plan anticipates additional residential development occurring in various areas, including in-fill areas and open hillside areas. The majority of new housing is expected to occur in these in-fill areas. In-fill areas have a potential for up to 475 new dwelling units.
Density bonus opportunities will be available for provision of affordable housing and amenities, such as, open space.
Commercial Use
Commercial land use includes various uses including retail sales, and service oriented use (i.e., restaurants, automotive service, dry cleaning, banks, etc). With regard to intensity of commercial use, this category is implemented by several zoning districts:
C-C	Commercial	Community Zone
C-H	Commercial	- Highway Zone
C-N	Commercial	- Neighborhood Zone
C-G Creative Growth Zone MU	Mixed Use
Downtown Mixed Use
The intent of the downtown mixed use designation is to provide flexible land uses in certain areas near the downtown area to provide the ability for developments that will strengthen the downtown area by including housing with commercial and office developments.
This designation is intended to encourage ground floor, pedestrian oriented, commercial, service and office uses with upper floors of office and residential uses. Zoning for the downtown mixed use designation shall be accomplished through the Specific Plan
11-56

process to ensure integrated and well designed projects.
The standard maximum density is 16 dwelling units per acre for projects that provide residential development within a mixed use project.
For projects that provide opportunities for affordable housing within the project, one of the following density bonuses may apply:
a.	for standard residential mixed use projects, a density bonus of 50% (or 8 units per acre) shall be permitted (total maximum density 24 d.u./ac.).
or
b.	for senior citizen residential mixed use projects, a density bonus of 75% (or 12 units per acre) shall be permitted (total maximum density 28 d.u./ac.).
The FAR is 1.2.
San Dimas Canyon Center Mixed Use
The intent of the San Dimas Canyon Center mixed use designation is to provide flexible land uses and to provide the ability for developments that will strengthen the City of San Dimas by including housing with commercial development.
This designation is intended to encourage commercial uses serving the surrounding neighborhood and residential uses. Zoning for the San Dimas Canyon Center mixed use designation shall be accomplished through the Specific Plan process, to ensure an integrated and well designed project.
II-56A
of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
The standard maximum density is 16 dwelling units per acre for projects that provide residential development within a mixed use project.
For projects that provide opportunities for affordable housing within the project, one of the following density bonuses may apply:
a.	for standard residential mixed use projects, a density bonus of 50% (or 8 units per acre) shall be permitted (total maximum density 24 dwelling units per acre).
or
b.	for senior citizen residential mixed use projects, a density bonus of 75% (or 12 units per acre) shall be permitted (total maximum density 28 dwelling units per acre).
Administrative/Professional
This designation provides for the development of suburban low-intensity administrative and professional offices and related uses. The types of land uses encouraged by this category includes, for example:	administrative,
financial, professional and sales offices; medical and health services; special service agencies
II-56B
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
such as travel and employment agencies and other related used. The maximum building coverage of a parcel by all structures shall not exceed 40%.
The Floor Area Ratio (FAR) is 1.2.
Industrial
This land use category provides a district which assures an environment conducive to research and development, fabrication and assembly, research institutions and administrative facilities. The industrial designation also provides for the development of industrial uses which include fabrication, manufacturing, assembly or processing of materials that are already processed form, wholesaling and warehousing. The intensity of use is quantified as a maximum building coverage; in this category -the maximum coverage of a parcel by all structures shall not exceed 40% of the lot area. The Floor Area Ratio (FAR) is 1.2.
Public/Semi Public
This land use designation includes public in-
TJ^ll
auiuuviia emu uaea auui aa me vmiy nan auu civic center, libraries, and fire stations as well as privately owned institutions of a public nature such as cemeteries and hospitals. The FAR for these uses is 0.5.
11-57
n Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Open Space
The purpose of the Open Space Category is to protect and preserve open space for the preservation of natural resources, for the preservation and managed production of resources, for outdoor recreation and outdoor education, and for public health and safety. It is also the intent of the Open Space and Conservation Elements to provide open space in a City by limiting development in areas which possess physical features that they may provide valuable and functional open space for the purposes of helping to shape urban form, to provide local or buffer greenbelts, and/or to serve as linkages between open space areas. It is intended that any building or structure permitted in this category shall be subordinate to and in furtherance of use of the land for open space as defined in the General Plan and the State Planning and Zoning Law.
Open Space includes all City and County parks, golf courses, Los Angeles County Flood Control lands, and United States Forest Service lands. The intensity of use is measured by maximum site coverage. Buildings and structures, when permitted, shall not occupy more than 25% of the gross area of the parcel.
A conservation overlay category is identified on the land use map (See Exhibit II-4.1). It is the intent of the General Plan to implement the conservation overlay category by establishing an overlay zoning classification. The conservation overlay designation and zone would be applied to land which have scenic value, naturally significant characteristics and resources. The conservation overlay is further discussed in the Conservation Element (see Conservation Element Implementation Measure a).
11-58
■P
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Population Density
Population density can best be expressed as the relationship between two factors: the number of dwellings per acre and the number of residents per dwelling. Current estimates of the average number of persons per household which are available from the Census Data Center of the State Department of Finance may be used to set forth population intensity standard. For San Dimas, the average household size is 2.98, according to the State Department of Finances.
Past court cases have further defined population and density. Camp v. Countv of Mendocino (1981) 123 Cal. App. 3d 334 established that a general plan must contain standards for population density. It did not however, define such standards. The landmark case of Twain Harte Homeowners Association v. Tuolumne County (1982) 138 Cal. App. 3d 664 defined population density as the “numbers of people in a given area and not the dwelling units per acre, unless the basis for correlation between the measure of dwelling units per acre and numbers of people is set forth explicitly in the plan.” Quantifiable standards of population density must be provided for each of the land use categories contained in the plan.
11-59
of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Population density standards need not be restricted solely to land use designations with residential developmentpotential. As the court stated in Twain Harte: “...it would not be unreasonable to interpret the term “population density” as relating not only to residential density, but also to uses of nonresidential land categories and as requiring an analysis of use patterns for all categories.
“It appears sensible to allow local governments to determine whether the statement of population standards is to be tied to residency or, more ambitiously, to the daily usage estimates for each land classification.”
Building Intensity
The Camp decision also held that an adequate general plan must contain standards for building intensity. Again, the Twain Hart court has provided the most complete interpretation of building intensity available to date. These are its major points: intensity should be defined for each of the various land use categories in the plan; general use captions such as “neighborhood commercial” and “service industrial” are insufficient measures of intensity by themselves; and, building intensity is not synonymous with population density. Intensity will be dependent upon the local plan’s context and may be based upon a combination of variables such as maximum dwelling units per acre, height and size limitations, and use restrictions. Unfortunately, the court stopped short of defining what are proper measures of building intensity.
11-60
of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Local general plans must contain quantifiable standards of building intensity for each land use designation. These standards should define the most intensive use that will be allowed under each designation. While the land use designation identifies the type of allowable uses, the building intensity standard will define the concentration of use.
OPR suggests that each intensity standards include these variables: (1) permitted lands uses and building types; and (2) concentration of use. Permitted uses and building types is a qualitative measure of the uses that will be allowable in each land use designation. The concentration of use can be defined by one or more quantitative measures that relate directly to the amount of physical development that will be allowed. Maximum dwelling units per acre is a good residential standard. Floor area ratio (the ratio of building floor area to the total site area) is a useful measure of commercial and industrial intensity. The dual standard of maximum lot coverage and maximum building height is suitable for agricultural, open space, and recreational designations where development is being limited. On the other hand, lot size, which has been widely used for agricultural and open space designations, is an inadequate standard of building intensity because, although it regulates lot area, it does not quantify the allowable concentration of development on each lot.
11-61
an Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Implementation Measures:
a:
b:
c:
d:
e:
f:
h.
Higher density residential developments should require more open space. The City shall review existing open space requirements and, if appropriate, increase the standard.
Review and . revise the ' hillside ordinance.
Designate a mobile home park zone in the City Zoning Code.
Annexation Areas, annex the following areas to “round out” the City limits (see Exhibit 1-2).
1.	Annex Area 13A into City and make it a pail of the Foothill Boulevard Corridor.
2.	Annex Area 13B into the City.
3.	Annex Area 13C into the City.
4.	Annex Area 13D into the City.
5.	Annex Area 13E into the City.
6.	Annex Area 13F into, the City.
7.	Annex Area 13G into the City.
In the Way Hill area, amend SP-3 land use designation to Single Family Very Low with 1 unit per acre maximum density.
Develop a Foothill Boulevard Corridor Plan to unify development and guide revitalization efforts in this area.
Modify the Zoning Ordinance to implement the Conservation Overlay Zone. Also see Conservation Element implementation measure #a.
Modify the existing zoning to implement the “Northern Foothills Development and Infrastructure Study” as it applies to the Northern Foothills Area.
11-62
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER
GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS	While state planning law divides a general
plan’s required contents into seven distinct elements, this division is more a product of the incremental nature of the legislative process than of conscious design. The division of the general plan provisions into elements tends to mask the statutory and functional interrelationships among the elements and issues to be addressed in the General Plan.
Statutorily, the requirements for the elements overlap and intertwine. For instance, geologic hazards are mentioned specifically in the safety
/
element and also appear under “open space for public health and safety” in the open space element. Open space, in turn, is mentioned as one of the categories to be addressed in the land use element. Similarly, natural resources are to be addressed in the open space and conservation elements as well as in the land use element. The noise element is directly tied to both the land use and the circulation elements.
The issues to be addressed in the general plan also interrelate functionally. The consideration of fire hazards in wildland areas involved the analysis of vegetation, topography, weather, availability of water, density of development, adequacy of road systems and fire protection services. As another example, housing considerations are directly linked to questions of land availability, the adequacy of public services, seismic, geologic, and fire hazards, and noise.
11-63
dry of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Such structural and functional interrelations point out the problems of treating issues in isolation and the need to think of the general plan as an integrated whole. For these reasons and because of local topographic, geologic, climatologic, political, socioeconomic, eco-nomic, cultural, and historical diversities, cities and counties should design their general plan formats to suit local needs.
The San Dimas General Plan is comprised of seven separate elements. The Land Use Element is most directly related to the Open Space, Housing and Noise Elements. The non-development areas of the City are principally designated for open space uses and are further elaborated upon in the Open Space and Conservation Element. The residential land use sub-sections of the Land Use Element set forth a policy framework for the Housing Element. The intensity of uses assigned to both vacant and underutilized areas, in effect, establish the housing unit potential of the City to build-out. These land use policies, in tum, provide input to the adequate site analysis of the Housing Element. Lastly, one of the major purposes of the Noise Element is to identify
nr\iC£	ncac
uviuv ^\yxxx|yuxxcrxv uova.
J.XXXQ XXXVtXliO UiUt VilV
information and findings of the Noise Element guide some of the land use designations of the Land Use Element.
11-64
City of San Dimas
General Plan Land Use Element
Land Use Element - Goals / Implementation Matrix
GOALS / IMPLEMENTATION	a	b	c	d	c	f	i
L-l Maintain the rural small town low density atmosphere of San Dimas.	■	■					■
L-2 Preserve the integrity of the foothills, including the northern foothills, Puddingstone Hills, and Way Hill.		■			■		■
L-3 Ensure that all portions of the City are adequately served with essential services, utilities, and recreational and open space facilities.							
L-4 Plan and create an urban form that efficiently utilizes urban infrastructure and services. Plan for orderly growth rather than 'Heap frog" development				■			■
L-S Provide well planned commercial centers and nodes. Discourage "strip" commercial development				■		■	
L-6 Revitalize and improve downtown as a community focus.							
L-7 Maintain existing mobile homes to meet the need for affordable bousing stock for the citizens of San Dimas.			■	■			
L-8 Ensure adequate community participation in planning for the future of San Dimas.							
L-9 Enhance an unified and a high quality visual image for the City		■				■	■
11-65﻿of San Dimas
VIII.
NOISE ELEMENT General Plan
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
INTRODUCTION	—
AUTHORIZATION ....—	—
PURPOSE	....
Physical health, psychological stability, social cohesion, property values, and economic productivity are factors affected by excessive amounts of noise. Noise, as it has been simply defined, is “unwanted sound”. It is an undesirable by-product of transportation elements and industrial activities within the community that permeates man’s environment and causes disturbance. The full effect of such noise on the individual and the community will vary with its duration, its intensity, and the tolerance level of the individual.
Recognizing the increasing human environmental impacts of noise pollution and the impact that local agency land use and circulation plans have on the community’s environmental quality, the California Legislature, in 1972, mandated that a noise element be included as part of the City and County general plans. Guidelines have been prepared as a result of Senate Bill 860(A) (effective January 1,1976) by the Office of Noise Control, State Department of Health, concerning the specific requirements for a noise element which are responsive to State guidelines. Within the City of San Dimas, the Department of Community Development is responsible for the coordination of all local noise control activities.
The purpose of the Noise Element is to serve as an official guide to the City Council, the Planning Commission, City departments, individual citizens, business people, and private organizations concerned with noise pollution
VIII-1
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
within the City of San Dimas. The Noise Element provides a reference to be used in connection with actions on various public and private development matters as required by law, and is utilized to establish uniformity of policy and direction within the City concerning actions to minimize or eliminate excessive noise and for making decisions regarding proposals which may have an impact on the City’s environment.
The Noise Element includes definitions, objectives, policies, standards, criteria, pro-grams, and maps which are to be considered when decisions are made affecting the noise environment within the City of San Dimas.
The sections and appendix that follow provide a discussion of the methods used to measure and analyze the noise environment of San Dimas. The results of the analysis will then be compared with accepted stand-ards to determine where the city is affected by adverse levels of noise. This will lead to a description of a Development Policies Program designed to minimize (or eliminate) these adverse levels and prevent future problems from occurring.
The following findings summarize a comprehensive noise analysis consisting of interviews, review of existing documents, community attitude survey, community-wide workshops and numerous work sessions with the General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC) including:
V1II-2
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
•	Noise Survey Results;
•	Day-Night Sound Level;
•	Existing and Future Freeway	and
Highway Traffic Noise;
•	Existing and Future Major and Secondary Arterial Traffic Noise;
•	Train noise;
•	Aircraft Noise;
•	Commercial/Industrial Noise;
•	Construction Activity; and
•	Noise Sensitive Locations
FINDINGS ..........................-..— The most significant noise-producing activity
within the City of San Dimas involves the transportation elements: arterials, the freeways, aircraft noise, and the rail line. In addition, numerous fixed sources of noise exist within portions of the City. The following section provides a discussion of the noise measurements obtained and an inventory of noise sources within the City. From these measurements and complementing analytical procedures, existing and future noise exposure contours have been derived for the City and noise impact areas have been identified.
VIII-3
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
Noise Survey Results
Various locations within San Dimas were surveyed in May, 1990, to establish the existing levels of noise. These measurement sites were selected to determine the impact of noise on residential areas due to traffic on the major arterials (including the Route 10, 210 and 30 Freeways) and train movements on the AT & SF rail line. A total of fourteen (14) noise measurements were obtained, three (3) of which were 24-hour samples. The measurement locations are illustrated in Exhibit VIII-1. Exhibit VIII-2 illustrates the noise exposures in various outdoor environments and Exhibit VIH-3 the land use compatibility for community noise environments.
Existing and Future Day-Night Sound Level (Ldn)
Ldn contours have been derived for major arterials and other noise sources within the City of S an Dimas and are provided in Exhibits VID-4 and VIH-5. The methodology utilized for traffic noise evaluation is based on a simplified version of the Federal Highway Administration Traffic Noise Model (FHWA-RD-77-108) and studies conducted by Wyle Laboratories. Ldn contour maps have been prepared on 1" = 900' scale city street maps as separate exhibits. The exhibits provide Ldn contours ranging from 60 to 75 dB in 5 dB increments for the existing and future (buildout) noise environments.
VIII-4
GENERAL
PLAN
,ejTT or
A

California
vm-s

GENERAL
PLAN
c ALlfQRKj a
CNEL / LDN IN DB
9 0 -----
Apartment Next to Freeway
80
Downtown With Some Construction
70
Urban Row Housing on Major Avenue
60
Old Urban Residential Area
50
Wooded Residential
Agricultural Crop Land
40
Rural Residential
Wilderness Ambient
Outdoor Noise Exposure at Various Locations Exhibit VIII- 2
30
VIII-6

GENERAL
PLAN
CNEL / LDN IN DB
LAND USE CATEGORY
55	60	65	70	75	80
Residential Multi-Family

Residential -low density single family duplex, mobile homes
7ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ.
Transient lodging- motels, hotels

Schools, libraries, churches, hospitals, nursing homes

Auditoriums, concert halls, amphitheatres
TZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ.
NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.
Y7/7777X
CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice.
Sports arena, outdoor spectator sports
TZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZrt
Playground, neighborhood parks

NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE New construction or development should generally be discouraged.
If new construction or development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
Golf courses, riding stables, water recreation, cemeteries



CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE New construction or development should generally not be under taken.
Office buildings, business commercial and professional


Industrial, manufacturing, ' -----utilities, agriculture-------

-~VZZ222ZZZZZ&
3
Source: In part taken from "Aircraft Noise Impact Planning Guidelines for Local Agencies." U.S. Dept of Housing and Urban Development. TE/NA-472. November 1972
Land Use Compatibility for Community Noise Environments Exhibit VIII-3
VI11-7

a
GENERAL
PLAN
^{JlT «
California

EXISTING NOISE, CONTOURS
LEGEND
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
300 0 600'	1200'	1800*
GRAPHIC SCALE
NORTH
EXHIBIT VHI-4
CONSULTANTS: CASTANEDA/TAKATA ASSOCIATES
VIII-8

GENERAL
PLAN
UtH «(
A
L-ZaLIFORMIK1
FUTURE NOISE, CONTOURS
LEGEND
—— CITY LIMITS LINE
eiAKTOM it. :
waxit* *r«-;
Projected (Buildout) Day-Night Average Sound Level (Ldn)
300 0 600'	1200*	1800'
GRAPHIC SCALE
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
CONSULTANTS: CASTANEDA/TAICATA ASSOCIATES
EXHIBIT VHI-5
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
In addition, a significant part of the noise experienced within the City is produced by train movements on the AT & SF rail line. The rail line Ldn contour distances provided in Appendix V were developed based on Wyle Laboratories’ computational procedure (Report # WCR-73-5) and train activity data supplied by AT & SF personnel. Rail line contours are also depicted on the noise contour maps.
Existing and Future Freeway and Highway Traffic Noise
The majority of homes adjacent to the Route 210 and Route 30 Freeways are situated below the roadway elevation. At these locations, the Ldn values are in the range of 65 to 70 dB. However, in the vicinity of the Route 10 Freeway, where the homes are situated well above the roadway elevation and have direct line of sight to the traffic flow, the Ldn ranges from 70 to 75 dB. The results of a 24-hour measurement in this area indicate an Ldn of about 77 dB at one residence. These Ldn values are greater than is considered acceptable for a residential area.
VIII-10
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
Traffic Noise from Major and Secondary Arterials
The Ldn values at noise-sensitive locations directly adjacent to the following arterials exceed 65 dB. Hence, the noise exposure at these areas is considered excessive:
Arterial	Reach
Arrow Highway City Limit	Valley Center Avenue to East
Bonita Avenue Limit	Arrow Highway to East City
Cataract Avenue	Bonita Avenue to Covina Boulevard
Covina Boulevard	Badillo Street To Cataract Avenue
Arterial	Reach
Foothill Boulevard	W. City Limit to E. City Limit
Gladstone Street	W. City Limit to E. City Limit
Lonehill Avenue	Gladstone Avenue to Covina Boulevard
Puente Street	W. City Limit to Via Verde
Route 10	Along the South City Limit
Route 30	W. City Limit to E. City Limit
Route 210	N. City Limit to S. City Limit
San Dimas Avenue Drive	Foothill Boulevard to Puddingstone
San Dimas Canyon Road	Gladstone Street to Arrow Highway
Via Verde Avenue	W. City Limit to Ganesha Boulevard
VIII-11
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
Noise from Train Movements on the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Rail Line
Currently, there are approximately seventeen (17) operations per day on the AT & SF rail line (data supplied by AT & SF). The Ldn at the nearestresidences ranges from 70 to 72 dB. On April 26,1990, a 24-hour noise measurement was made in the rear yard of a residence on Railway Street. This residence is located directly adjacent to the AT & SF rail line. The results of the measurement indicate an overall Ldn of about 70 dB. The impact of noise generated by the operations is considered significant at existing residential locations bordering the rail line. Specifically, the late night and early morning train passes are the primary annoyance to residents who live adjacent to the tracks.
The Los Angeles County Transportation Commission’s (LACTC) commuter rail proposal plans to use existing railroad rights-of-way and will provide commuter rail to Downtown Los Angeles. However, at this time, the location of the transit corridors, stations or number of operations have not been determined.
The current level of railroad activity is not expected to increase significantly in the future. However, the LACTC commuter rail proposal and any other future impact will be directly related not only to the number of operations occurring each day but also to the time of day
VIII-12
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
at which they occur. A significant increase in night time operations will have a detrimental effect on the quality of life in San Dimas and will require appropriate mitigation.
Aircraft Noise from Brackett Airport
At the current level of activity, the impact of Brackett Airport flight operations is not considered significant at existing residential locations throughout the City. The Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department is considering three sites to relocate their Air Bureau. Brackett Airport is one of the candidate sites. The Air Bureau has seventeen helicopters and two fixed wing aircraft; their impacts have not been determined and the proposal is currently going through a public hearing process. Future impacts, will be directly related to the number of operations occurring each day and the time of day they occur. The airport plan is currently being updated. The City’s noise element will be revised when the updated airport plan becomes available.
Commercial/Industrial Noise
In general, commercial/industrial noise within the City of San Dimas is not considered excessive. However, where residential locations are adjacent to heavy industrial zones or trucking operations, a significant impact exists. This impact is primarily related to noise generated
VIII-13
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
by loading dock operations, trucks entering and leaving the area, and mechanical equipment located both inside and outside the building(s).
Construction Activity
The impact of construction noise which occurs during the daytime is considered minimal for no more than two or three months of activity. However, late night and weekend disturbance caused by construction noise may cause a significant impact when experienced at ne arby residential locations.
Noise-Sensitive Locations
In general, the sound levels at noise-sensitive locations within the City are not considered excessive. However, the following areas are located within a 65 dB Ldn contour:
•	Portions of Gladstone Elementary School
•	Portions of Allen Elementary School
•	Portions of Ekstrand Elementary School
•	Portions of Scholl Elementary School
•	Portions of Sutherland Elementary School
•	Portions of Lone Hill School
VIII-14
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
Portions of Catholic Elementary School
Portions of San Dimas High School
Portions of Continuation High School
Portions of Baptist Bible School
Fire stations on Puente Street and San Dimas Avenue
PROBLEM STTMMARY-
•	Library at the Civic Center
•	Portions of Bonelli Park
•	Portions of San Dimas Community Hospital
In the City of San Dimas there are seven major sources of noise:
1.	Traffic on the Route 10, 210, and 30 Freeways,
2.	Train movements on the AT & SF and Southern Pacific rail line,
3.	Traffic on the major arterials within the City,
4.	Trucking operations and mechanical equipment associated with commer-cial/industrial activities adjacent to residential locations,
5.	Gas powered leaf blowers in residential locations,
6.	Special events, and
7.	Incompatible land uses in the industrial zone (M-l).
VIII-15
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
Of these, the most serious problems are the noise levels produced by traffic on the freeways and train movements on the AT & SF rail line. AnLdnof70to77 dB exists at the nearest residential sites adjacent to these noise sources. This compromises the welfare of citizens in these areas and should be corrected.
The noise element has identified a number of noise related problems and issues within the City. The Policy Program consists of policies and implementation techniques which will minimize these problems and issues. Shortterm possibilities for noise reduction in San Dimas consist mostly of the enforcement of noise control guidelines and the appropriate placement of walls and berms to buffer resi-
dential and other noise-sensitive areas from traffic and rail line noise. Long-term possibilities for noise reduction will be contingent upon future development, especially along major traffic routes and in the vicinity of the AT & SF rail line. Planning now can help to minimize the future impact of noise on the community.
DEVELOPMENT POLICIES
A development policy is a general plan statement that guides action; it includes:
•	Goal
•	Objectives
•	Policies
•	Plan Proposals
•	Implementation Measures
VIII-16
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
A development policy is a general plan statement that guides action; it includes:
•	Goals
•	Objectives
•	Policies
•	Plan Proposals
•	Implementation Measures
Please refer to Section	I for a detailed defini-
tion and explanation of how the Plan proposals (land use map) and implementation measures are referenced.
These development policies are summarized in a matrix on page VHI-26.
VIII-17
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
GOALS STATEMENT N-1A:
TO PROTECT THOSE EXISTING REGIONS OF THE CITY FOR WHICH THE NOISE ENVIRONMENT IS DEEMED ACCEPTABLE AND THOSE LOCATIONS THROUGHOUT THE CITY WHICH ARE DEEMED “NOISE-SENSITIVE”.
GOALS STATEMENT N-1B:
TO PROVIDE SUFFICIENT INFORMATION CONCERNING THE COMMUNITY NOISE ENVIRONMENT SO THAT NOISE MAY BE EFFECTIVELY CONSIDERED IN THE LAND USE PLANNING PROCESS AND THE CONTINUING ENFORCEMENT OF THE CITY COUNCIL’S POLICY CONCERNING NOISE CONTROL IN RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
1.1	Future projects within the City will 1.1.1 reflect a consciousness on the part of the City regarding the reduction of unnecessary noise near noise-sensitive areas such as parks, hospitals, libraries and convalescent homes, etc. 1.1.2	Maintain liaison with transportation agencies such as Caltrans regarding the reduction of noise from existing facilities. The design and location of new facilities will also be considered. Consideration should be given to buffering noise-sensitive areas from noise-generating land uses.
1.1.3	Noise monitoring within the City will be an ongoing process conducted by the appropriate departments. Additionally, a liaison will be developed between the City and the Los Angeles County Health Department in order to obtain assistance in on-site measurements of noise levels.
1.1.4	Close attention should be paid to the noise evaluation in environmental impact statements.
VIII-18
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
1.1.5	Existing residential neighborhoods impacted by noise generated by Route 30 and its eventual completion shall be mitigated to protect the City’s existing residential neighborhoods.
Plan Proposals: A (see page VIII-25)	
Implementation: a, b, g, h (see page VIII-25)
GOALS STATEMENT N-2A:
TO DEVELOP STRATEGIES FOR THE ABATEMENT OF EXCESSIVE NOISE EXPOSURES.
GOALS STATEMENT N-2B:
TO ESTABLISH THE COMMUNITY NOISE ENVIRONMENT (IN THE FORM OF
NOISE CONTOURS) FOR LOCAL COMPLIANCE WITH THE STATE MANDATED NOISE INSULATION STANDARDS.
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
2.1	The City will consider planning	2.1.1 guidelines which include noise control for the exterior living space of all new residential developments within noise impact areas. 2.1.2	The City will adopt guidelines which consider noise as an early factor in planning future residential developments. Tbp C'itv will	nlnnnincr guidelines which include noise control for the interior living space of all new residential developments within noise impact areas.
VIII-19
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
	2.1.3 The City will require that the State noise insulation standards for exterior-to-interior noise control be applied to all new single family and multi-family structures.
- 		2.1.4 The City will adopt the State noise insulation standards to limit intrusive noise levels for all new condominium conversion projects within the City.
	2.1.5 The City will evaluate the noise generating characteristics of existing operations when applications are submitted concerning enlargement, expansion or change in use.
	2.1.6 The City will review noise characteristics of applicants requesting conditional use permits, variance, zone changes and other discretionary actions.
2.2	The City will apply noise insulation requirements for the conversion of existing apartments into condominiums.
Plan Proposals:; None . ;
Trnnlpm^ntohnn1 rl rr K	rmfra A/TTT O^A
AA;jyiviiiviiLui.xvii. vi,	ik	/
•VIII-20
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
GOALS STATEMENT N-3A:
TO PROVIDE A QUIET ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH THE CITIZENS OF SAN DIMAS MAY LIVE.
GOALS STATEMENT N-3B:
TO ENCOURAGE THE REDUCTION OF NOISE FROM ALL SOURCES SUCH AS MOTOR VEHICLES, INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES, AIRCRAFT AND HOME APPLIANCES.
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
3.1	The City will encourage the AT &	3.1.1 SF and Southern Pacific Railways to reduce the level of noise produced by train movements within the City.	The City will encourage that AT & SF and Southern Pacific Railways to minimize the level of noise produced by existing train movements. This can be accomplished by regular maintenance of the track and trains. Use of the trains' horns and other noise shall be within Federal standards.
3.1.2	The City-will monitor the existing operations on the rail line as well as any plans for future development. Any actions that increase the level of noise throughout the City will be discouraged.
3.1.3	The City will monitor the existing operations of Brackett Airport and any plans for future developments. Any actions that increase the level of noise throughout the City will be discouraged. These include increased flight operations, and flight paths that pass over the City.
VIIl-21
City of San Dimas '	General Plan Noise Element	
OBJECTIVES:		POLICIES:
	■ 3.1.4	The City will monitor the existing operations of Ontario International Airport and any plans for future developments. Any actions that increase the level of noise throughout the City will be raised in environmental reviews and stronly opposed by the City. These include increased flight operations, and flight paths that pass over the City.
	3.1.5	The City will encourage all law enforcement agencies operating within the City limits to enforce the State Vehicle Code noise standards, includ ing enforcement of car stereo noise.
d	; • . 7;..	!	3.1.6	The City will discuss possible noise control measures with the trash collection service on contract to the City to encourage the implementation of such measures.
3.2	The City will encourage the reduction in the number of flights at Brackett airport, discourage any future expansion of the facilities, and attempt to ensure that flight patterns do not go over residences. The City will also encourage the Airport to
- properly mitigate, aircraft noise im- -
_______pacts on adjacent lhhd uses. .......
3.3	Noise levels produced by City
c ' eqUipment will be considered a factor in the procurement process.
: VIU-22
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
OBJECTIVES:_____________________ POTTCTES:
3.4	The City will encourage the enforcement of regulations (such as the State vehicle code noise standards) for all privately owned, City owned, and City operated automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles operating within San Dimas.
3.5	The City will monitor noise generators from existing facilities. The City will raise issues in environmental reviews, increase noticing for potential noise generating uses such as industrial development and facility expansion.
Plan Proposals: None
Implementation: c, e, f, g (see page VHI-25)
GOALS STATEMENT N-4A:
TO PROMOTE INCREASED PUBLIC AWARENESS CONCERNING THE EFFECTS OF NOISE., . . . ,
GOALS STATEMENT N-4B:	'
TO PROVIDE METHODS BY WHICH THE PUBLIC MAY ASSIST IN REDUCING NOISE.
OBJECTIVES:' POLICIES:' :
K.espona io cnanges in punnc con- 4.i.i sciousness concerning noise.
me city wiii periodically .review ana revise as necessary their noise ordinance..
■4-1-1
4.1.2	The City will investigate the adoption of a more encompassing noise ordinance, such as the County of Los Angeles Noise Ordinance.
Plan Proposals: None Implementation: c, d, g
VIIb-23
■ ' "City of San Dimas,,
General Plan Noise Element
GOALS STATEMENT N-5:	.
TO ENSURETHATTHE-EIEALTH AND WELL BEING OF THE CITIZENS OF SAN DIMAS ARE NOT BEING COMPROMISED BY EXPOSURE TO EXCESSIVE AND PQ^^LY^HARMFUL LEVELS OF NOISE.
OBJECTIVES^ ■	POLICIES:
5.1 Noise barriers will be constructed along the Route 2lO/ahd?’3O Freeways at reaches directly adj-acent to residential units';1;
5.1.1	The City will aggressively pursue Caltrans to construct the noise bar-biers along the Route 210 and 30 Freeways bordering residential units.
5.1.2	The City will aggressively pursue the railroad companies to construct noise barriers in residential areas where ex isting homes are directly adjacent to the main track.
5.1.3	The City is strongly opposed to Bonelli Regional Park’s noise generating special events and recreational activities and direct these concerns to Los Angeles County.
' ‘1 5.2' ' Noise barriers will be" constructed along the AT & SF and Southern Pacific rail line corridor where residences exist adjacent to the main track.
-'--S;3"-•^nlPrfetecVS';ari‘bm&-6fcfei-:e)rcessive ------- -	-
noise from special events such as outdoor rock concerts and boat races.
''^.4j Protect SanDimas frorri excessive . .o:: u	from-recitanobai'noise, esp-
... ecially fromBfcfiSlli Regional Park activities: Ragihg'Watts','Fireworks events and other noise gen-
'featin^activitiesl ' 1 !
t Plan Proposals- Norte'7
Implementation: a.b, g h (see page VIII-25)
-Vin-24
City of San Dimas
General Plan Noise Element
The development policies for the noise element include ■theifaljowing:; j -	■
: -j
Plan Proposals
A:	See Land Use Map; Section II
Implementation:
C". . ’fij
V- 2	'j?/'
a: '	The .Cityjhall pursue with, the appro-
priate state and railroad authorities to construct sound wall noise barriers where their existing and future facilities will impact the City’s residential neighborhoods.
b:	The City shall strongly communicate
their opposition to Bonelli Regional Park’s noise generating special events and recreational activities to Los Angeles County.
c:	The City shall revise its noise ord-
inance to ban leaf blower operation on Sundays.- r.
d:	The City’s, noise ordinance will be
reviewed and expanded to reflect
, • z.„.changes ip. publicj^opseiousness- con-;,f. cem.ing.noise,r.	..
e:	The City shall strongly communicate
z . thpir opposition to .to Los Angeles ,;i .County regarding any additional noise . o j ^uetoexpapsionand increase orchange
' ./4n?operatiop at Brackett,Field.
f:	The City shall strongly communicate
their opposition to the City of Los Angeles pepartmentcOf Airports re-
W-25
City of San Dirfias
General Plan Noise Element
garding any additional noise due to expansion and increase or change in operation at Ontario International Airport.
B
c.k nvhBJnr. ui »
g:.- {. The City shall consider revising the development standards and noise ordi-nance to require all new residential within noise impact areas meet State - noise insulation standards for exterior
______ and interior noise.
h: : The City shall pursue with the appropriate state and railroad authorities to provide noise insulation for the residential neighborhoods directly affected by their facilities.

-VJJ/-26
City of San Dimas
Generate Ian Noise Element
Noise Element - Goals / Implementation Matrix
Goals / Implementation	a	b	c	d	e	f	g	h
N-1A. Protect those existing regions of the City;for., which the noise environment is deemed acceptable and those locations throughout the City which are deemed "noise sensitive”.			■						a	B
N-1B. Provide sufficient information concerning the community noise environment so that noise may be effectively considered in the land use planning process and the continuing enforcement of the City Council’s policy concerning noise control in residential construction.	B . i	Q					B	B
N-2A. Develop strategies for the abatement of excessive noise exposures.	'■				' B			B	B
N-2B. Establish the community noise environment (in the form of noise contours) for local compliance with the state mandated noise insulation standards.				B			B	B
N-3A. Provide a quiet environment in which the citizens of San Dimas may live.			B		G	B	B	
N-3B. Encourage the reduction of noise from all sources such as motor vehicles, industrial/commercial activities, and home appliances.			B		a	B	B	
N-4A. Promote increased public awareness concerning the effects of noise.			B	B			a	
N-4B. Provide methods by which the public may assist in reducing noise.			B	H			fl	
N-5. Ensure that the health and well being of the citizens of San Dimas are not being compromised by exposure to excessive and possibly harmful levels of noise.	■	■					B	B
■..VUI-27﻿Ci
of San Dimas
V.
OPEN SPACE ELEMENT General Plan
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
INTRODUCTION
The Open Space Element designates “open-space land” which is defined by Section 65560(b) of the Government Code as “any parcel or area of land or water which is essentially unimproved and devoted to open space use...” Open space use, in turn, is defined to encompass four principal categories:
•	Natural resources,
•	Managed production of resources,
•	Outdoor recreation and
•	Public health and safety.
The Conservation Element overlaps those categories of the Open Space Element which deal with open space for the preservation of natural resources and open space for the managed production of resources they are discussedin the Conservation Element. Open Space for public health and safety is discussed as part of the Safety Element.
A comprehensive open space baseline setting, existing conditions and community attitudes regarding open space are detailed in the Technical Appendix.
FINDINGS -.......—	.—
The following findings summarize a comprehensive open space analysis consisting of interviews, review of existing documents, community attitude survey, communitywide workshops and numerous work sessions with the General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC) including:
V-l
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
•	Future demand for park land and facilities;
•	Opportunities for	meeting	the de-
mand for outdoor recreation;
•	Trails; and
•	Scenic resources.
These findings form the basis for the updated open space element’s goals, objectives, plan proposals and implement-ation measures.
Future Demand for Park Land and Recreation Facilities
A detailed analysis was undertaken to determine the City’s future demand for park land and recreation facilities. Detailed information on park land and park facilities data is contained in the Technical Appendix. The summary of future demand for park land and recreation facilities analysis is summarized as follows:
There are fourteen City operated recreational facilities, which include twelve parks, a Swim and Racquet Club and the recently completed Sportsplex. As Table V-l illustrates, of the fourteen recreational facilities, Horsethief Canyon Park, the Swim and Racquet Club and the Sportsplex are considered Community parks and total about 138 acres. The remaining parks are considered
V-2
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
INVENTORY OF OUTDOOR RECREATION RESOURCES				
				
City Parks	Community	Neighborhood	Type	Radius
	Park (acres)	Park (acres)		
				
1. Soortsplex	25.00		Community	2 mile
2. Horsethief Cyn. Park	110.00		Community	2 mile
undeveloped				
3. Kiwanis Korner		0.25	Neiqhborhood	1/2 mile
4. Ladera Sera Park		3.00	Neiqhborhood	1/2 mile
5. Loma Vista Park		1.00	Neiqhborhood	1/2 mile
6. Lone Hill Park		9.11	Neiqhborhood	1/2 mile
7. Marchant Park		9.11	Neiqhborhood	1/2 mile
8. Pioneer Park		5.00	Neiqhborhood	1/2 mile
9. Rhoades Park		0.12	Neiqhborhood	1/2 mile
10. Terrebonne Park		0.25	Neiqhborhood	1/2 mile
11. Via Verde Park		8.50 '	Neiqhborhood	1/2 mile
12. Swim and Racquet Club	2.50		Community	2 mile
13. Civic Center Park		2.12	Neiqhborhood	1/2 mile
14. Briqqs Point		0.50	Neiqhborhood	1/2 mile
				
TOTAL	1 37.50	38.96		
			Source: City of San Dimas Deoartment of	
			Human Services • 1990	
TABLE V-l
INVENTORY OF OUTDOOR RECREATION RESOURCES
V-3
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
neighborhood parks, which total about 39 acres. Exhibit V-l illustrates existing and proposed parks.
The Urban Land Institute has established park land standards for community recreation, for the purposes of this analysis, we had applied these standards to San Dimas. They include: 2.0 acres of land per 1,000 population for neighborhood parks and 3.5 acres of land per 1,000 population for community parks. The park service radius for a community park is 2 miles; and 1/2 mile for a neighborhood park. The Table V-2 summarizes the City’s future park land need based upon the projected population of 34,945. Park land deficiencies and surpluses were determined by comparing the City’s present park acreage inventory to the Urban Land Institute standard. As Table V-2 illustrates, there is a deficiency of 31 acres for neighborhood parks and a surplus of 15 acres for community parks. Further analysis regarding park accessibility based upon park service radius standards leads to the conclusion that the current need is for two neighborhood parks one in the north and another in the southwest part of the City.
Table V-3 identifies the City’s future recreational facilities deficiencies and surpluses in terms of meeting those needs with:
• Its own facilities;
V-4
.[JTT or
A
c aUFORHia
PARKS & RECREATION
GENERAL
PLAN
EXHIBIT V-l
V-5
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
PARKLAND NEEDS ANALYSIS (Protected General Plan build-out population - 34,945)					
					
	Present	Park Standard	Required	Existina Inventory	Excess/
Park	Population	Acres/1000 People	Acreaqe	(in acres)	Deficiency
					
1. Neiqhborhood Parks	34,945	2	70	39	-3 1
2. Community Parks	34,945	3.5	1 22	137.5	1 5
					
					
					
					
				Source: Urban Land Institute - 1989	
TABLE V-2
PARK LAND NEEDS ANALYSIS
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
										CITY PARK,
nrr nc	rrcp «ki «■ vote nt^nu«nvii rMviuitu	■ «ji«?						existing		PARK	PARK & SCHOOL	SCHOOL &
				EXISTING	EXISTING	COUNTY		FACILITIES ONLY	FACILITIES	COUNTY PARK
	PROJECTED	FACILITY	REQUIRED	PARK	SCHOOL	PARK	PROPOSED	DEFICIENCY OR	DEFICIENCY OR	DEFICIENCY OR
	POPULATION	STANDARO I FACILITIES		FACILITIES	FACILITIES	FACILITIES	FACILITIES	SURPLUS	SURPLUS	SURPLUS
FACILITIES										
Football/Soccer Area	34,945	1 per 5000	7	7	2	1		0.01	2.01	3.01
Basketball Goals	34,945	1.5 per 1000	52	39	1 6			•13.42	2.58	2.58
Baseball Diamond	34,945	1 per 6000	6	5	2			-0.82	1.18	1.18
Softball Diamond	34,945	1 per 2000	1 7	6	4	1		•1 1.47	-7.47	-6.47
Handball Court	34.945	1 per 5000	7	3				•3.99	-3.99	•3.99
Tennis Court	34.945	1 per 2000	1 7	16				■1.47	-1.47	-1.47
Volieybail Court	34,945	1 per 2000	1 7	3	2			-9.47	-7.47	-7.47
Swimminq Pool (25 yard)	34,945	1 per 10,000	3	1				-2.49	-2.49	-2.49
Swimminq Pool (50 Meter)	34,945	1 per 20.000	2	1				•0.75	-0.75	•0.75
Tot Play Area	34,945	1 per 2000	1 7	5		2		•1 2.47	-1 2.47	-10.47
Play Area	34,945	1 per 2000	1 7	6	5	2		•11.47	-6.47	-4.47
Multi-Purpose Bldq	34,945 .	1 per 3000	1 2	4	1	1		•7.65	-6.65	-5.65
Senior Citizens Center	34,945	1 per 20,000	2	1			1	0.25	0.25	0.25
Golf Course	34,945	1 per 50,000	1					0.00	0.00	0.00
											
								Source: City of San Oimas Department of Human		
								Services, National	Recreation and Park Association:	
								Park and Recreation Division. Leaque of California Citiei		
TABLE V-3
FACILITIES AiNALYSIS
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
•	Its own facilities and school facilities; and
•	Its own facilities, school facilities and County park facilities.
The City’s recreation facility needs were based upon the projected City population of 34,945 and compared with park facility standards established by the National Recreation and Park Association; Park and Recreation Division, League of California Cities; and Time Savers Standards for Landscape Architecture. Based upon this analysis, the City’s General Plan build-out population will increase by 9% from 31,800 to 34,945. Table V-3 illustrates the recreation facility needs required to meet this future demand.
Table V-3 also illustrates that the park deficiencies may be, with some exceptions as noted below, partially satisfied when existing schools and County park facilities are included in the inventory. The major facility deficien-cies include the need for: sports fields for softball (5); handball courts (4); volleyball courts (7); Tot Play areas (10); Play areas (4); and multi-purpose building (5).
V-8
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
The GPAC identified that it would be desirable to have a city heritage park for historical and city image purposes. Potentially, a heritage park would include a demonstration citrus grove, farm implements, and other features which would preserve the agricul-
x___1 i__
lurai ncmagc ui oa.ii j_>iinad. 111c however, operates an existing citrus demonstration grove named "Teague Grove" adjacent to the historical "Martin House" on the southwest comer of Bonita Avenue and Walnut Avenue.
Meeting the Demand for Outdoor Recreation
Additional park land will be required to meet the City’s future recreation needs. The
fXH/Minnrr £1 nir\crc rliernec f h /Ar^nrsrtitniftpc a VliV *» a muni^o uuviijj mv \_/p/vwuiviv j
for joint use and joint development with the school districts, County and development of new park land.
School District Lands
The opportunity to jointly utilize school district land for park and recreation is very attractive because public open space may be shared for educational and'recreational purposes with no new costs for acquisition and maintenance. The joint-use and joint development of the Sportsplex at S an Dimas High School is a successful example of how the City and school district can share facilities. Table V-4 presents an inventory of the open space available on school land, excluding structures, for potential joint use, joint development and shared maintenance.
V-9
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
Through joint development and joint use agreements with the school districts the City ’ s park and recreation facilities needs may be partially met by entering into agreements for Ekstrand Elementary School, Gladstone Elementary School, Allen Ave. Elementary School, Shull Elementary School, Sutherland Elementary School, Glenoaks Elementary School, and Lone Hill Intermediate School. The schools can also offer joint use opportunities to meet the need for multipurpose buildings at Ekstrand Elementary School, Lone Hill Intermediate School, and San Dimas High School.
Table V-5 illustrates various facilities and locations where these park and recreation needs may be met. The total of 15 acres from these joint use agreements would be dedicated for these facilities identified in Table V-5. The additional parkland acreage will be satisfied by the development of new parkland. (See discussion on new parkland).
V-10
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
INVENTORY OF CITY SCHOOLS						
	Size of Open					
Citv Schools	Space (acres)	Type	Joint-Use A	qreement		
						
1. Allen Avenue School	1 0	Elementary				
2. Ekstrand School	1 0	Elementary				
3. Gladstone Street School	1 0	Elementary				
4. Shull School	1 0	Elementary				
5. Sutherland Avenue School	1 0	Elementary				
6. Lone Hill School	20	Intermediate				
7. Cont. Hiqh School	0	Hiqh School				
8. San Dimas Hiqh School	40	Hiqh School	yes, with Sportsplex			
9. Glen Oaks School	1 5	Elementary				
						
TOTAL	1 25					
						
	Source: Bonita Unified School District and Charter Oaks Unified School District - 1989					
TABLE V-4
INVENTORY OF SCHOOL SITES
V-ll
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
MEETING PARK NEEDS										
										
					SWIMMING	SWIMMING			MULTI	
	SOFTBALL	HANDBALL	TENNIS	VOLLEYBALL	POCL	POCL	TOT PLAY	PLAY	PURPOSE	
SCHOOLS	DIAMOND	COURT	COURT	COURT	(25 YARD	(50 METER	AREA	AREA	BUILDING	
	(need 6)	(need 4)	(need 1	(need 7)	(need 2)	(need 1)	(need 10)	(need 4)	(need 5)	
										
ALLEN AVE ELEMENTARY								1		
EKSTRAND ELEMENTARY	1			1			1			
GLADSTONE ELEMENTARY	1						1			
SHULL ELEMENTARY							1			
SUTHERLAND AVE ELEMENTARY										
GLEN OAKS ELEMENTARY				1			1			
LONE HILL INTERMEDIATE	3	2							1	joint-use
SAN DIMAS HIGH SCHOOL		2							1	joint-use
										
NEW PARKS										
										
TOWN CORE PARK				2			1			new
HERITAGE PARK							1			new
RAILROAD PROPERTY MINI PARKS							1			
RANCHO PARK BLUFF PARK										
3 MINI-PARKS < 1/2 ACRE EACH							1			
										
EXISTING PARKS										
										
HORSE THIEF CANYON PARK	1			2			1	1	1	new
MARCHANT PARK				1						
SWIM AND RACQUET CLUB					2	1				
										
TOTAL	6	4	1	7	2	1	1 0	4	5	
										
										
										
							Source: Takata Associates, 4/90			
TABLE V-5
MEETING PARK FACILITY NEEDS
V-12
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
County Regional Parks
Within the City limits are two County regional parks, Bonelli Park (1650 acres) and San Dimas Canyon Park (130 acres). Although the regional parks would provide a significant park land acreage per capita, they do not always meet local recreation needs, therefore, they were not included in the total park land inventory. However, an analysis of the facilities in the two regional parks (see Table V-3) indicates that the park's tot play areas, sports fields and multi-purpose buildings may provide an opportunity to meet some of the City's recreation needs.
Bonelli Park has been a concern to the City because of the develoDment of hish inten-
X	w
sity facilities, such as, the Raging Waters water park. The community has demonstrated an on-going concern for the proposed permanent and temporary facilities in Bonelli Regional Park. The community is against uses which cause excessive noise, traffic, congestion and similar impacts detrimental to passive recreation and adjacent City neighborhoods. The activities in the park should be passive recreation such as boating, fishing, bird watching, picnicking,
nrcakn r»L»-	/*! i-r* rr -J lx-i rr nr*z4
UUiCVUaVA 11 Villig, JilKUig OiXU. YtALllg,
Development of New Park Land
The development of new park land is summarized in Table V-5 and they include the Railroad Property Mini-parks, Rancho Park, Bluff Park, and three mini parks. Exhibit V-1 depicts existing and proposed parks.
V-13
y of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
The City has an equestrian trails commission
The total acreage for the new parks is 17.5 acres. When combined with the joint use acreages of the various schools, the total parkland area is 32.5 acres, meeting the parkland criteria identified in the earlier sections of this element.
Trails
There are three categories of trail development in the City of San Dimas:
•	Equestrian;
Bicycle; and
•	Hiking.
These existing trails are depicted in Exhibit V-2.
As Exhibit V-2 illustrates, the City has developed an extensive system of equestrian trails; the need has basically kept up with the demand. The City has an Equestrian Commission; they review proposed trails and recommend trails and facilities for implementation to the City Council.
The community attitude survey and community meetings confirmed the equestrian trail needs have been adequately met. However, the survey and community meetings also identified the need for bicycle trails and hiking trails. The community attitude survey indicated development of bicycle trails should be a higher priority than equestrian trails.
V-14
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
Connect City trails to regional trail systems
There are opportunities to link equestrian, bicycle and hiking trails to existing regional trails and to trail systems of the adjacent cities of Covina, Glendora, La Veme and Pomona.
Exhibit V-2 also identifies future and trail recommendations. The basis for the trail design includes:
Priority for the implementation of bicycle trails at a local level.
Connections to regional trails.
Recreational opportunities within the City to connect activity areas and opportunities to utilize utility rights-of-ways.
Creation of trails for hiking and biking in the canyon and the hillside areas.
Develop trail linkages with Northern Foothills, Bonelli Park and Walnut Creek.
V-15
^ALiroRxiA
GENERAL
PLAN
LEGEND
—— CITY LIMITS LINE •••••• EQUESTRIAN TRAIL (CITY)
oo-oooo UNDEVELOPED EQUESTRIAN TRAIL (CITY)
.... EQUESTRIAN TRAIL (COUNTY)
BICYCLE ROUTE (COUNTY)
HIKING TRAILS (COUNTY)
EXHIBIT V-2
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
CONSULTANTS: CASTANEOAZTAKATA ASSOCIATES ]/- ]
RECREATIONAL
TRAILS
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
The proposed trails include an additional 3.66 miles of bicycle trails, 1.96 miles of hiking trails and 11.09 miles of multi-use trails.
The following proposed trails are identified in Exhibit V- 2, and are listed as follows:
LOCATION	LENGTH (MILES)	TYPE
Badillo Street	.85	Bicycle Route
Covina Boulevard	1.53	Bicycle Route
Arrow Highway	1.28	Bicycle Route
San Dimas Avenue	.94	Multi-use
Via Verde	1.02	Multi-use
Rail Road Easement	2.30	Multi-use
Canyon/Hillside	7.85	Multi-use
Cypress to Puente	.94	Multi-use
San Dimas Canyon Road	1.4	Multi-use
Railroad R.O.W.	3.0	Multi-use
SCENIC RESOURCES
City Image
It has been the goal of the City in past general plans to maintain a rural image for San Dimas. The Community has a strong desire to keep a small town image. The goal is still relevant today because its importance was voiced by the GPAC, in the community meetings and confirmed by almost all of the community attitude survey respondents. Important elements which reinforce the rural image include
V-17
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
scenic resources equestrian uses trails downtown western theme agricultural heritage historic character
The scenic resources of the City include: the open foothills and canyons and views to the San Gabriel Mountains. The northern foothills, Way Hill, San Dimas Canyon, Sycamore Canyon, Walnut Creek, Cinnamon Creek and other associated canyons are unique visual resources within the City of San Dimas.
TV, ac a »»ac /"», 1r/'AC ot*a	or /■» An/^Arn z
x xxvov x Bovill wo ax v yux uxv lxxuj. vmxxwx xx u y
the community because they are visible from
most areas of the City.
The Equestrian image and trails reinforce theCity’s rural atmosphere. Equestrian uses have been actively pursued by the City through the establishment of the equestrian commission, equestrian residential developments, and a strong equestrian trail program.
Almost all respondents in the community attitude survey said they liked the Downtown western theme. They felt Downtown is a major ingredient in maintaining this rural community image. The front facade and streetscape environment facing Bonita Avenue are well maintained and create a rural western environment. The rear facade
V-18
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
Gateway signs welcome visitors to San Dimas
area, however, needs to be visually upgraded and organized. A detailed improvement program is discussed in the Land Use Element.
Keeping the City’s agricultural heritage was recommended by the GPAC. A park which has a small citrus grove and based on a historic agricultural theme would complement the desired rural image.
Scenic Highways
The scenic highway system is one of the major means in which one experiences the rural environment of the City of San Dimas. These scenic highways provide a framework for organizing the visual environment of the City. Identifying certain roadways within the City as scenic highways gives the City an opportunity to communicate the city image through landscaping, medians, signage, land use controls and other streetscape elements. Scenic highways have varying degrees of significance: regional and local. The 210 Foothill Freeway and Highway 30 are considered scenic corridors of regional significance because of the quality of their environment and the large number of people traveling these routes. City entries, and views to critical areas within the City may be controlled within these scenic corridors. Local scenic highways have various reasons for designation. Walnut Avenue and San Dimas Avenue are scenic corridors because
V-19
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
DEVELOPMENT POLICIES.
they convey an historical feeling of older residential neighborhoods and mature landscaping. The Foothill Boulevard Corridor is especially important because the boulevard is highly travelled and in need of improving its streetscape image. In areas like this it is highly desirable to improve the streetscape image as a major public commitment to revitalizing and improving this area with medians and land use control.
A development policy is a general plan .statement that guides action; it includes:
•	Goal
•	Objectives
•	Policies
•	Plan Proposals
•	Implementation Measures
Please refer to Section I for a	detailed defi-
nition and explanation of how the Plan proposals and implementation measures are referenced.
These development policies are summarized in a matrix on page V-34.
V-20
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
COALS STATEMENT OS-1:
MAINTAIN THE RURAL OPEN SPACE ATMOSPHERE
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
1.1 Continue to enhance ±e “Western 1.1.1 theme”, “Early California Theme” and Frontier Village themes within the City.	1.1.2
Retain the low density atmosphere of San Dimas.
Require more open space from Higher density residential developments.
1.1.3	Discourage intensive development at Bonelli Regional Park.
1.2	Maintain a quiet and serene atmosphere in the City’s.
Plan Proposals: See Open Space Map, Exhibit V-3.
Implementation: k, 1, m, y (see pages V-30)
V-21
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
COALS STATEMENT OS-2:
MAINTAIN OPEN SPACE FOR THE PROTECTION OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
2.1	Protect life and property of the citizens of San Dimas from natural disasters.
2.1.1	For public health and safety desig-natepotential hazard areas, such as, flooding, seismic, land slides, fire, and other hazardous areas as open space.
Plan Proposals: See Safety Element
Implementation: aa, (see page V-30)
COALS STATEMENT OS-3:
PROVIDE PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES TO ADEQUATELY SERVE THE RESIDENTS OF THE CITY
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
3.1	Develop and maintain pedestrian/-bicycle/equestrian trails which provide connections with the major activity areas,
3.1.1	In areas where minimum standards can not be met for a small neighborhood park, mini parks should be encouraged to help satisfy the needs of the residents in the immediate
areas.
3.2	Develop new parks in areas which are now being inadequately served relative to current standards.
Plan Proposals: None
Implementation: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, n, o, t, v, y (see page V-30 and Circulation Element Implementations)
V-22
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
GOALS STATEMENT OS-4:
PRESERVE SAN DIMAS’ SCENIC RESOURCES
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
4.1	Preserve existing views of ±e foot- 4.1.1 Minimize views to development hills.	from the trails within the natural
areas and view corridor.
4.2	Enhance the scenic highways with in the City.
Plan Proposals: B, C (see page V-26)
Implementation: u, z (see page V-30)
GOALS STATEMENT OS-5:
PRESERVE THE CITY’S NORTHERN FOOTHILLS
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
5.1	Preserve the existing ridge lines 5.1.1 Development shall conform to terrain.
5.1.2	Protect views and viewsheds of the foothills.
5.2	Preserve the topographic and scenic character of the Northern Foothills. .
Plan Proposals: See Land Use Map, Exhibit II-4
Implementation: a, k, 1 (see page V-30)
V-23
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
COALS STATEMENT OS-6:		
PROVIDE ACCESS TO PUBLIC OPEN SPACE		z
		
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:	
6.1
Provide access to trails, parks and other public open space areas.
6.1.1 Retain and enhance existing recreational developments
6.1.2	Develop equestrian and bicycle trails and facilities that provide linkage between the City and the foothills, adjacent city trails, park and ride facilities and other major areas of interest.
6.1.3	Upgrade existing recreational trails to meet City standards.
6.1.4	Equestrian facilities such as private and commercial stables and trail head staging areas, with parking for ■ trailers and off loading of horses,
should be considered for develop mentin easily accessible areas of the City, and wherever possible, in con junction with other open space facilities.
6.2	Provide neighborhood parks within 6.2.1 Land dedication is preferred over
a one-half mile radius service area.	fee for acquisition of parkland.
6.3	Provide community parks within a one mile radius service area.
Plan Proposals: See Trails Map Exhibit V-2
Implementation: a, b, c h, v, w (see page V-30)
V-24
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
GOALS STATEMENT OS-7:
PROVIDE A WIDE RANGE OF RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES
wpTnzrc. V7AAJILV, AAV ILO.	DAT Tr’TTTC.
7.1	Provide parks and recreation at a	7.1.1 community and neighborhood level according to the user needs and accessibility. ,	Provide opportunities for the citizens of San Dimas to participate to variety of recreational activities.
Plan Proposals: See Parks Map (Exhibit V-l) Implementation: p, q, z (see page V-30)
GOALS STATEMENT OS-8:
PROVIDE A BALANCED PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROGRAM OF RECREATIONAL SITES, FACILITIES, AND SITE SIZES
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
8.1	Support a program in which citizens 8.1.1 can participate in the acquisition, planning, construction and develop-	 ment of parks.	Small parks or plazas adjacent to activity centers should be encouraged as part of the overall urban design of commercial centers.
8.2	Provide private open space within each future development.
Plan Proposals: None
Implementation: p, z (see page V-30)
V-25
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
GOALS STATEMENT OS-9:
MAINTAIN QUALITY RECREATION SERVICES AND PROGRAMS
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
9.1 Provide recreation services which meet the needs and interest of the community.
9.1.1 Provide adequate resources, facilities and staff to deliver the recreation services and programs.
9.2	Provide services and programs with in the context of wise use of facilities and resources.
Plan Proposals:
Implementation: g, j, p, q, r, s (See Page V-30)
Plan Proposals
The plan proposals are depicted in the Open Space (Exhibit V-3), Scenic Highways (Exhibit V-4), and Recreational Trails (Exhibit V-2) maps. Additional open space proposals are also depicted in the Land Use-_ Element and Conservation Element.
A:	Designate utility easements open
space for trails.
B:	Designate a scenic highway overlay
on Foothill Blvd and provide for a landscaped median and parkway.
V-26

GENERAL
PLAN
.(JIT W
^aLIFORMJa
A
OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
LEGEND
OPEN SPACE FOR CONSERVATION
| OPEN SPACE FOR FLOOD CONTROL
|	PUBLIC RECREATION
PRIVATE RECREATION
JUANITA AVI. —
EXHIBIT V-3
AClt SCALE
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT department
CONSULTANTS: CASTANeOA/TAKATA ASSOCIATES	~2 7
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
C:	Identify the following corridors as
scenic highways (See Exhibit V-3):
a.	Foothill Blvd. (expand to City limits)
b.	Walnut Ave.
c.	San Dimas Canyon Road
d.	San Dimas Avenue
e.	Via Verde Drive
f.	Puente Street
g.	Foothill Freeway (210)
h.	Highway 30
i.	San Bernardino Freeway (10)
Provide entry monuments at key gateways within the City at the above scenic highways and at Puddingstone Drive (East Entry).
Implementation:
a:	Develop recreational trails (equest-
rian, bicycle and/or hiking trails) and access in the following areas:
1.	Way Hill
2.	Cinnamon Creek natural area
3.	Canyon areas near ADP facility, Rimpaus and other canyon areas.
4.	Northern Foothill area
b:	Retain Walnut Creek as a natural
passive recreation area and maintain a continuous trail through the Walnut Creek corridor.
V-28
,(IIY M

A
California
SCENIC
HIGHWAYS
GENERAL
PLAN
SCENIC HIGHWAYS
COMMl'm MAtlUTMCM* OCMRTMCVr
CmUXTAXTSi CaSTaSKDa.'TaKaTK ASSOCIATES
EXHIBIT V-4
V-29
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
c:	All railroad right-of-ways, where
feasible, shall have a combination of bicycle, equestrian and hiking trails. Key access points to these trails for equestrian use would be part of the plan.
d:	Develop the Horse Thief Canyon
Park to serve as a community park and fulfill neighborhood park needs. Provide access by extending Walnut Avenue to Sycamore Canyon Road.
e:	Locate the proposed senior/comm-
unity center in existing Civic Center park. Site the facility to retain a significant amount of open space.
f:	The City shall revitalize the Pud-
dingstone Shopping Center site and actively encourage additional commercial development on the current vacant City-owned property between the shopping center and Walnut Avenue.
g: . The City shall consider entering into a joint development and joint use agreement with the Charter Oaks Unified School District to develop a neighborhood park facility on the Glen Oaks school property.
h. The City shall Develop a one acre passive bluff park on Rancho Park site to provide neighborhood park facilities and act as a trail head for the Cinnamon Creek hiking trail. The Park development shall follow the contours of the slope.
V-30
Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
i:	The City shall develop a tot lot on the
Swim and Racquet Ball site.
j:	The City shall review existing open
space requirements and, if appropriate, increase the standard for higher density developments.
k. Review and revise the hillside development ordinance to insure the integrity of the undeveloped hillside areas, retention of a rural image, and preservation of views and view corridors. Require a minimum lot size in the following areas, as follows: Puddingstone Hills, 1-1/.2 acres to 3 acres; and Way Hill, 1 acre.
1:	Review the existing open space
ordinance and strengthen the document to protect the City ’ s open space resources. Standards should be formulated to incorporate open space as a part of future development.
m:	The City shall strongly communi-
cate their concerns and disapproval of the intensive development of Bonelli Regional Park. The City shall strongly express its disapproval
' of development and operational policies, such as intensive development; special events such as drag boat racing, and other events and facilities which generate traffic; noise; and other environmental impacts which threaten to degrade the quality of life of the citizens of San Dimas. In addition long-term travel trailer and recreation vehicle stays at Bonelli Park should not be
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
allowed.
n:	The City shall enter into joint-use
and joint-development agreements with the Bonita Unified School District and the Charter Oaks Unified School District to expand the open space available to the community.
o:	The City shall discuss the potential
of a joint-use agreement with Water District for recreational use of their lands.
P-
The City shall develop a comprehensive park protection program in cooperation with interested parties such as the neighborhood watch, elementary schools, and the com-munity to reduce incidents of vun-dalism within the park facilities.
q:	The City shall continue to imple-
ment the park development fee ordinance as a source of park development funds.
r:	The City shall consider establishing
a City-wide park assessment district to provide supplemental funding for park maintenance and/or development.
s:	The City shall consider the use of
redevelopment funds for the development of parks and open space.
t:	The City shall develop and update a
city-wide Master Park Plan that provides for a good balance of open space types and identifies areas that
V-32
City of San Dimas
General Plan Open Space Element
Develop trail standards
are underserved and future park lands and facilities.
u:	The City shall draft special develop-
ment standards for all categories of scenic highways.
v:	The City shall develop a city-wide
masterplan of Recreation Trails and Facilities, including:
•	Bicycles,
•	Equestrian and
•	Hiking trails.
w:	The City shall develop trail con-
struction standards,including: compaction and equestrian fence openings every quarter-mile.
x:	The City shall direct the Park and
Recreation Commission to form a Bicycle and Hiking Trails Committee. The Committee shall coordinate with the Equestrian Commission for trail related matters.
y:	The City shall develop a park based
upon San Dimas’ agricultural heritage. (also see Conservation Element)
z:	The City shall encourage residential
development patterns such as cluster development and garden residential, where a common green and recreation area can be achieved.
aa:	Support and coordinate the Safety
Element’s recommendation for the protection of public health and safety.
V-33
V-34
Open Space Element - Goals / Implementation Matrix
Goat* / Implementation	a	b	c	d	<	fa f-b	I	h	1	1	k	•	m	n	0	P	4	r	a	t	■	T	•	t	1	t	at
OS-1. Malntaio the ton) open apace atmosphere.											■	■	■												■		
OS-2. Maintain open apace for the protection of public health and safety.																											■
OS-3. Provide part and recreation fadlitiea to adequately eerve the reeidenta of the Qty.	■													■	■					■		■			■		
OS-4. Pieservc San Dima*’ acemc resources.																					■					■	
OS-5. Preserve the Qty’a northern foothill a.	■										■	■															
OS-6. Provide access to public open qpacc	- ■	■	■					■														■	■				
OS-7. Provide a wide range of recreational activities.																■	■									■	
OS 8. Provide a balanced public and private program of recreational at tea, fadlitiea, and ute size.																■										■	
OS9. Maintain quality recreation aervicea and programs.							■			■						■	■	■	■								
City of San Dimas	_____________General Plan Open Space Element﻿VII.
SAFETY ELEMENT
City of San Dimas
General Plan
City of San Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
INTRODUCTION--------------
FINDINGS.
The Safety Element’s purpose is to reduce deaths, injuries, property damage, and economic and social dislocation resulting from natural hazards including flooding, mudslides and soil creep, tsunamis and seiches, land subsidence, earthquakes, avalanches, other geologic phenomena, levee or dam failure, certain types of urban and wildland fires, and building collapse. It is the primary vehicle for identifying the hazards that municipalities must consider when making land use decisions.
Findings establish the foundation for this element’s, goals, objectives, plan proposals and implementation measures. The information for the summary of findings is drawn from a review of existing reports, the previous element input from City Staff and the comments of the General Plan Advisory Committee. A detailed assessment was made of safety element concerns including:
•	Surface Rupture
•	Ground Shaking
•	Liquefaction
•	Seiches
•	Dam Failure
•	Flooding
•	Multi-hazard planning
•	Seismic and Abatement Survey
VII-1
City of San Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
Surface Rupture
The City is in the Southern California seismic area
Ground Shaking
A surface rupture is a break in the ground’s surface and the associated deformation resulting from the movement of a fault. Ground rupture could occur along the surface traces of the “potentially active” Sierra Madre Fault which crosses the northern portion of the City. A “potentially active” fault is one that evidences surface displacement during the last two million years. The City is not in an Alquist-Pirillo zone.
The City will probably experience ground shaking from earthquake activity that is most likely associated with the faults in the surrounding area. Ground shaking of moderate to severe intensity could be expected from seis-.mic activity along the Sierra Madre Fault or other nearby faults of significance. There is potential for landsliding in hillside areas. Sedimentary bedrock units consisting primarily of silts tones and shales are the least stable of the major geologic units underlying San Dimas.
Liquefaction
In San Dimas there is a low potential for liquefaction which is a condition where subsurface soils become liquid in nature. Soils most prone to liquefaction are medium to fine sand fractions located in areas where the water
VII-2
, UK or

■cALifDRHlA

A
GENERAL
PLAN
GEOLOGIC & SEISMIC STRUCTURE

LEGEND
CITY LIMITS LINE

c
EE3 ACTUAL FAULT LOCATION INFERRED FAULT LOCATION

I ,-'^J:vl/
- CSS /
SIERRA
MADRE
FAULT
ZONE
,<........
' 7iVL S""'"
& '3	’•••
/
/ •” f
:.«/// -z-
...............™................•X**' -.
1AF
:vx r	■
\\2AF
................-------------"P
\ *  ......,
A /PSafMONOA FAULT	J
r-r...	/ ••••
IASU.INC AB.
ctAorroMt n.
JUAATT* *»«.
CONSULTANTS: CASTANeDA/TAKATA ASSOCIATES
VII-3
EXHIBIT VII-1
City of San Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
Puddingstone Dam serves as a reservoir and recreation
table is high. Since these unfavorable conditions overlap in few areas of the community, the overall liquefaction potential is low. The areas are generally north of Way Hill, southeast of the spreading grands, and in the central-southwestern end of the City limit and also in flood plains of San Dimas Wash near the western-central part of the City.
Seiches
Due to the presence of Puddingstone Reservoir and San Dimas Canyon Reservoir in San Dimas, seiches, or earthquake-generated waves, are a potential hazard. These waves are generated in enclosed or restricted bodies of water such as lakes or reservoirs and are similar to the sloshing of water in a bucket or bowl when shaken or jarred. The waves can be tens of feet high or more and can have devastating effects on people and property within their reach. Since the easiest way out for the water is over the lowest side of the enclosure, the greatest effects are usually felt in the mouths of feeding streams or when the water overtops the dam, dumping large volumes of water on areas downstream.
Dam Failure
Dam failure at Puddingstone Reservoir in the eastern portion of San Dimas is not expected to significantly impact existing developed areas. Available data indicates Walnut Creek would
VII-4
City of San Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
be innundated by dam failure at Puddingstone Reservoir.
Failure at the San Dimas Canyon Reservoir or the Puddingstone Diversion Dam both located above the northern portion of the City, would effect primarily City-owned properties such as public rights-of-way. (New standards prohibit building in the flood plain.)
Flooding
San Dimas has three flood zone designations: A9, B and C. Flood Zone A9, which is defined as subject to flooding in a hundred year storm, covers a small stretch of the San Dimas Canyon Wash south of Golden Hills Road. Areas included in Flood Zone B, which means they could be impacted in a 100-500 year storm, are located along the San Dimas Canyon Wash and just south and west of the Foothill Freeway north of Arrow Highway. The balance of the City is within a Flood C designation which is defined as subject to minimal flooding
Multi-Hazard Planning -
The San Dimas Multi-Hazard Functional Planning Guidance document is an informal, working document. The City Manager is responsible for preparation of this document. The Civic Center will serve as a referral Center. The preferred emergency center commence post is at the City Yard. The San Dimas High School and Lone Hill Intermediate School will
VII-5

GENERAL
PLAN
,tt»T or
-cALlFORtaA
A
FLOOD ZONES
LEGEND
n_j—!_j
©
SOURCE:	FLOOD INSURANCE RATE
MAP #060154.000l-C CITY OF SAN DIMAS. CALIFORNIA. REVISED JUNE 2. 1978
Areas of lOO-year Hood; base Hood elevations and flood hazard factors not determined.
floodzone b
Areas between limits of the lOO-year flood and 500- year flood; or certain areas subject to 100-year flooding with average depths less than one (1) foot or where the contributing drainage area is less than one square mile; or areas protected by levees from the base flood.
Areas of minimal flooding.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
CONSULTANTS: CASTANEOA/TAKATA ASSOCIATES WZ“6
EXHIBIT VII-2
City of San Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
X
Seismic abatement is a priority program
serve as aide stations. Emergency routes used for evacuation would depend on a number or variables such as the type and location of the emergency. In general, east/west routes would be Arrow Highway, Foothill Boulevard, and I-210. The north/south route would be San Dimas Avenue.
Seismic and Abatement Survey
In December 1989, the City updated the Seismic and Abatement Survey. This survey identified eight (8) buildings which were constructed using unreinforced masonry. These buildings are defined as Category I buildings and are located on Bonita Avenue in Frontier Village.
DEVELOPMENT POLICIES ......... A development policy is a general plan state-
ment that guides action; it includes:
•	Goals
•	Objectives
•	Policies
•	Plan Proposals
•	Implementation Measures
Please refer to section I for a detailed definition and explanation of how the Plan proposals (land use map) and implementation measures are referenced.
These development policies are summarized in a matrix on page VIII-14.
VII-7
City of San Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
GOALS STATEMENT S-l:
TO MAINTAIN SAN DIMAS SAFE FROM NATURAL, SEISMIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY HAZARDS
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
1.1	Manage development of S an Dimas 1.1.1
to protect areas subject to geologic hazards.
1.1.2
1.1.3
1.1.4
1.1.5
1.1.6
1.1.7
1.1.8
Continue to adopt updated versions of the Uniform Buildng Code and require all new private and public construction to conform to its earthquake resistant design provisions.
Review and update, as appropriate, the Multi-Hazard Functional Planning Guidance document.
Require that adequate soils, geologic and structural evaluation reports be prepared, by registered soils engineers, engineering geologists, and/or structural engineers, as appropriate, for all new development.
Require that geological reports, building plans and the appropriate sections of environmental impact reports be reviewed by registered engineering geologists and/or structural engineers.
Evaluate disaster plans and potential effectiveness in light of various earthquake intensities.
Encourage the creation of countywide systematic review of emergency preparedness organizations, schools, police departments and programs.
Establish a volunteer citizens Disaster Group to help during emergencies.
Locate facilities that are necessary for post-disaster emergency services in areas of low geologic hazard risk.
VII-8
City of San Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
OBJECTIVES:	POLICIES:
1.2	Minimize damage to public and pri- ate property from flooding.	1.2.1	Continue to require any new development to mitigate flooding problems identified by the National Flood Insurance Program as a condition of approval. 1.2.2	Ensure that development in the hillside area is regulated to reduce erosion potential.
1.3	Provide for the safe use and trans- portation of hazardous materials and wastes.	1.3.1	Discourage the location of new high risk industrial and relocation of existing hazardous uses unless adequate mitigation measures are included. 1.3.2	Consider a program to develop a plan for household hazardous waste. 1.3.3	Encourage low risk industries within the City and monitor the risks associated with existing industries such as the production and transfer of gas.
Plan Proposals:
Implementation Measures: a, b, c, d, e, f (See Page VII-14)
VII-9
City of San Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
GOAL STATEMENT S-2:
PROVIDE EFFECTIVE AND EFFICIENT PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES INCLUDING FIRE AND POLICE PROTECTION AND EMERGENCY ACCESS
OBJECTIVES:
POLICIES:
1.4 Provide effective and efficient fire and protection services.
1.4.1	Ensure that new development is ade quately served by sufficient water pressure and/or flow capacities to meet current and future standards.
1.4.2	Ensure that existing and new development is served by adequate response times for police, fire and paramedic services.
1.4.3	Restrict the use of flammable
materials and provide additional setbacks in fire hazard zones.
1.4.4	Provide adequate supplies of water at appropriate locations for fire suppression.
1.4.5	Encourage new projects to have adequate fire service equipment and sprinkler systems.
Plan Proposals:
Implementation Measures: g, h, i, j, k (See Page VII-14)
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES___________ a:	Grading Ordinance and Erosion Con
trol Ordinance:. Continued enforce ._ ment to minimize risks associated with seismic hazards.
b:	Geology and Soils Reports: Prior to
hillside and flat land development these reports will be required.
VII-10
City of San Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
c:	Unreinforced Masonry Buildings:
There are eight such buildings in San Dimas, located primarily in the downtown area. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, reinforcement shall be reviewed and, where appropriate, retrofitted to improve seismic safety.
d:	NFIP: Continued participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program. The NFLP identifies areas subject to flooding in severe storm conditions.
To mitigate flood hazards, the City participates in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The NFIP, which is administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, has regulations requiring communities to adopt land use restrictions for their 100-year floodplain to qualify for federally subsidized flood insurance. These restrictions include a requirement that residential structures be elevated above the level of the 100-year flood and that other types of structures be flood-proofed.
e:	. HMDO: Hazardous materials will be
monitored by enforcement of the Hazardous Materials Disclosure Or-din-ance. This ordinance regulates the use, siting and storage of hazardous materials. Amend the ordinance, as nnnrnnriatp fnllnu/ina pvalnatinn nf
the LACo HWMP.
f:	For use in emergency situations, de-
velop a list which identifies hazardous material sites such that emergency crews can check on these buildings. The City will coordinate with the CoHWMP in the listing of hazardous materials.
VII-11
Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
f:	MHFPD: Utilize and update, as appro-
priate, the Multi-Hazard Functional Planning Guidance document. The document identifies the functions of various public service agencies in an emergency situation. Conduct a study to determine the structures most suitable for an emergency center. Design a program to help inform the public about MHFPD.
g:	Fire Department Program: Continued
implementation of the following public education programs:
1.	Junior Fireman program in the elementary schools.
2.	Community programs for homeowners groups and civic organizations on request.
3.	“Shakie-Quakie” earthquake safety program for school children.
h:	Fire Station Planning: The County of
Los Angeles Fire Department is working with the City of San Dimas to plan a new fire station on City land in the vicinity of Bonita Avenue and Walnut Avenue. This station will replace Station #64.
i:	Fire Hazard Areas: Fire retardant
roofing (Class B or better) and brush clearance zone shall continue to be required in wild land fire hazard areas such as the foothills and Via Verde. Preserve to the extent practical the fire roads in the City’s foothill areas.
VII-12
City of San Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
j:	Fire Roads: Preserve fire roads in the
foothills and address the fencing of fire roads on private property.
k:	Education: Implement a safety educa-
tion program for children and seniors encompassing fire and police protection and geologic hazards.
1:	Sheriff’s Department Programs: Con-
tinued implementation of the following programs:
1.	Neighborhood watch.
2.	Business Watch which uses fax machines to distribute pertinent crime information to business establishments. (Note: voluntary participation program a FAX is only sent ot businesses which request service.)
3.	Child alert personal safety program.
4.	SANE substance abuse program.
5.	Sober Graduation.
VII-13
City of San Dimas
General Plan Safety Element
Safety Element - Goals / Implementation Matrix
Goals / Implementation	a	b	c	d	e	f	g	h	i	j	k
S-l. Maintain San Dimas safe from natural, seismic and public safety hazards.	■	■	■	■	■	■					
S-2. Provide effective and efficient public safety services including fire and police protection and emergency access							■	■	■	■	■
VII-14