         CHAPTER 10
AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                                         CHAPTER 10
                               AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
GUIDING PRINCIPLE
                 The City of Carson is committed to improving air quality by: reducing total air
                 emissions, educating the public on pollution control measures, minimizing dust
                 generation, and encouraging the use of best available technology.
1.0     INTRODUCTION
                 The Air Quality Element is intended to protect the public’s health and welfare by
                 implementing measures that allow the South Coast Air Basin to attain Federal and
                 State air quality standards, that will move toward a sustainable level of air quality.
                 To achieve this goal, the Element sets forth a number of programs to reduce current
                 pollution emissions and to require new development to include measures to comply
                 with air quality standards. In addition, this Element contains provisions to address
                 new air quality requirements.
2.0     STATE LAW REQUIREMENTS
                 The State of California Government Code Section 65302(d), which provides the
                 statutory requirements for the Conservation Element, also serves as the applicable
                 Government Code section for the Air Quality Element. Other relevant sections of
                 the Government Code that are applicable to the Air Quality Element include
                 Section 65303, which allows cities to include any other element or address any other
                 subjects that may relate to the physical development of the city. Further guidance is
Carson General Plan                                AQ-1                                      Chapter 10

                                                                                            AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                 provided in the 1998 General Plan Guidelines regarding the assessment of air
                 quality impacts in General Plans.1
3.0 SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
                 Air quality conditions in Carson are influenced by many factors, including the
                 topography, climate, and number and type of pollution producers. This section
                 examines these issues and historical pollution levels in the community, as compared
                 to State and Federal air quality standards.
3.1     CLIMATE
                 Carson is located within the South Coast Air Basin (SCAB). This Basin is a 6,600
                 square mile area that includes all of Orange County and the non-desert portions of
                 Los Angeles, Riverside and San Bernardino counties. The South Coast Air Basin is
                 topographically bounded by the Pacific Ocean to the west with the San Gabriel, San
                 Bernardino and San Jacinto Mountains to the north and east.
                 The topography and climate of Southern California combine to make the distinctive
                 climate in the South Coast Air Basin. The City of Carson is located in the southern
                 portion of the Los Angles Coastal Plain within the semi-marine microclimatic zone
                 of the SCAB. A semi-permanent, subtropical high-pressure zone over the Pacific
                 Ocean primarily controls the climate. Mild winters, warm summers, infrequent
                 rainfall, moderate daytime onshore breezes and moderate humidity characterize
                 local climatic conditions. The mild climate is occasionally disrupted by periods of
                 hot weather, winter storm and Santa Ana winds. Minimum temperatures average
                 around 42 degrees Fahrenheit during the winter, while summer temperatures
                 average in the 70s. Annual precipitation is rather variable in Carson. Rainfall
                 averages between 12 to 14 inches per year, occurring primarily from late October to
                 early April.
                 Climatic patterns in the City are affected by the Palos Verdes Hills, which split
                 onshore winds unless the marine layer is very deep. The dominant daily wind
                 pattern is a daytime sea breeze and a nighttime land breeze. Thus, the predominant
                 daytime wind comes from westerly and southwesterly directions, while the nighttime
                 wind comes from a northerly direction. Average wind speeds are approximately 3.4
                 miles per hour. During the summer, the nighttime land breeze is very minimal
                 resulting in light winds from the southwest. The predominant wind patterns are
                 occasionally disrupted by winter storms or Santa Ana winds. The Santa Ana winds
                 are strong northerly or northeasterly which are warm and dry and usually occur
                 between September to March.
                 During the summer months, a warm air mass frequently descends over the cool,
                 moist marine layer produced by the interaction between the ocean's surface and the
                 lowest layer of the atmosphere. The warm upper layer forms a cap over the cool
        1
           Source: State of California, Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, 1998 General Plan Guidelines,
November 1998, page 64.
Chapter 10                                             AQ-2                                 Carson General Plan

AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                 marine layer and prevents pollutants from dispersing upward and allows pollutants
                 to accumulate within the lower layer. This situation is called a temporary inversion.
                 In addition, light winds during the summer further limit ventilation.
                 Because of the low average wind speeds in the summer and a persistent daytime
                 temperature inversion, emissions of hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen have an
                 opportunity to combine with sunlight in a complex series of reactions producing
                 photochemical oxidant (smog). The smog potential is increased in the basin because
                 the South Coast region experiences more days of sunlight than any other major
                 urban area except Phoenix, Arizona.
                 During the winter, the greatest pollution problems result from the presence of
                 carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxide concentrations in conjunction with extremely
                 low inversions and air stagnation during the night and early morning hours. Since
                 carbon monoxide is produced almost entirely from automobiles, the highest
                 concentrations are associated with areas of heavy traffic. Thus, due to the City’s
                 proximity of three major freeways, the potential for higher concentrations of carbon
                 monoxide levels is enhanced.
                 However, Carson is rarely affected by the same heat and smog conditions as the
                 Central Los Angeles basin, based on its proximity to the Pacific Ocean. The Ocean
                 plays an important role in affecting local temperatures. As a result of the fairly
                 narrow spread between the warmest and coldest monthly mean sea surface
                 temperature in southern California coastal waters, the relatively warm ocean
                 modifies the climate in Carson in winter and provides cooling sea breezes in
                 summer. The breezes serve to disperse pollutants through the air basin.
3.2     AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS
                 Ambient air quality is described in terms of compliance with Federal and State
                 standards.     Ambient air quality standards are the levels of air pollutant
                 concentration considered safe to protect the public health and welfare. They are
                 designed to protect people most sensitive to respiratory distress, such as asthmatics,
                 the elderly, very young children, people already weakened by other disease or
                 illness, and persons engaged in strenuous work or exercise. National Ambient Air
                 Quality Standards (NAAQS) were established by the United States Environmental
                 Protection Agency (EPA) in 1971 for six air pollutants. States have the option of
                 adding other pollutants, to require more stringent compliance, or to include
                 different exposure periods.
                 The California Air Resource Board (CARB) is required to designate areas of the
                 State as attainment, non-attainment, or unclassified for any State standard. An
                 “attainment” designation for an area signifies that pollutant concentrations did not
                 violate the standard for that pollutant in that area. A “non-attainment” designation
                 indicates that a pollutant concentration violated the standard at least once,
                 excluding those occasions when a violation was caused by an exceptional event, as
                 defined in the criteria. An “unclassified” designation signifies that data do not
                 support either an attainment or non-attainment status.
Carson General Plan                                AQ-3                                       Chapter 10

                                                                                                AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                  State and Federal ambient air quality standards have been established for the
                  following pollutants:
                          Ozone (O3),
                          Carbon Monoxide (CO),
                          Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2),
                          Sulfur Dioxide (SO2),
                          Fine Particulate Matter less than 10 microns in diameter (PM10), and
                          Lead.
                  For some of these pollutants, notably O3 and PM10, the State standards are more
                  stringent than the Federal standards. The State has also established ambient air
                  quality standards for:
                          Sulfates,
                          Hydrogen Sulfide,
                          Vinyl Chloride, and
                          Visibility Reducing Particles.
                  The above-mentioned pollutants are generally known as “criteria pollutants.”
                  In 1997, the EPA announced new ambient air quality standards for O3 and PM10.
                  The new standards were intended to provide greater protection of public health.
                  The EPA proposed to phase out the 1-hour O3 standard and replace it with an 8-
                  hour standard. The EPA also announced new PM2.5 standards. Industry groups
                  challenged the new standard in court and the implementation of the standard was
                  blocked. However, upon appeal by the EPA, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed this
                  decision and upheld the EPA’s new standards. Beginning in 2002, based on three
                  years of monitoring data, the EPA will designate areas as non-attainment that do
                  not meet the new PM2.5 standards.2
                  Following the announcement of the new national standards, the SCAQMD began
                  collecting monitoring data to determine the region’s attainment status with respect
                  to the new standards. On June 20, 2002, CARB adopted amendments for statewide
                  annual ambient particulate matter air quality standards. The ambient annual PM10
                  standard was lowered from 30 micrograms per cubic meter (g/m3) to 20 g/m3. As
                  no ambient annual state standard existed for PM2.5, a new annual standard was
                  established at 12 g/m3. A 24-hour average standard for both PM10 and PM2.5 was
                  retained. These standards were revised/established due to increasing concerns by
                  CARB that previous standards were inadequate, as almost everyone in California is
                  exposed to levels at or above the current State PM10 standards during some parts of
                  the year, and the statewide potential for significant health impacts associated with
                  particulate matter exposure was determined to be large and wide-ranging.3
                  Particulate matter impacts primarily effect infants, children, the elderly, and those
                  with pre-existing cardiopulmonary disease.
        2
          Environmental Protection Agency Website, http://www.epa.gov/air/aqtrnd97/brochure/pm10.html.
        3
           Staff Report: Public Hearing to Consider Amendments to the Ambient Air Quality Standards for Particulate
Matter and Sulfates. California Environmental Protection Agency, Air Resources Board, May 3, 2002.
Chapter 10                                              AQ-4                                    Carson General Plan

AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                    The South Coast Air Basin has the worst air quality problem in the State. Despite
                    implementing many strict controls, the South Coast Air Quality Management
                    District (SCAQMD) portions of the basin still fail to meet the Federal air quality for
                    three of the six criteria pollutants: ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO) and fine
                    particulate matter (PM10). Because Federal pollution standards have not been
                    achieved, the basin is considered a non-attainment area for Federal standards for
                    these pollutants. For State standards, the Orange County portion of the basin is
                    designated as non-attainment for O3 and PM10.4
3.3        LOCAL AMBIENT AIR QUALITY
                    The SCAQMD operates several air quality monitoring stations within the Air Basin.
                    The City of Carson is located within Source Receptor Area (SRA) 4. The
                    communities within an SRA are expected to have similar climatology and
                    subsequently, similar ambient air pollutant concentrations. The nearest air
                    monitoring stations to the City of Carson within SRA 4 is located in the north
                    portion of the City of Long Beach. Air Quality Data from 1997 to 2001 for the
                    North Long Beach Monitoring Station is provided in Table AQ-1, Local Air Quality
                    Levels.
3.4        REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
3.4.1      FEDERAL CLEAN AIR ACT
                    The 1970 Clean Air Act (CAA) authorized the establishment of the NAAQS, and
                    set deadlines for their attainment. The Federal Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990
                    made major changes in deadlines for attaining NAAQS and in the actions required
                    of areas of the nation that exceeded these standards. Other changes to the 1990
                    Clean Air Act occurred in 1997. In 1997, after observing the numerous studies
                    citing the adverse effects of ozone under the then existing standard, the EPA
                    changed 1990 ozone standard to reflect a change in averaging times and levels that
                    are considered more appropriate and stringent. Additionally, in 1997 the EPA
                    changed the particulate matter criteria to provide for more stringent goals for fine
                    air particles.5
3.4.2      CALIFORNIA CLEAN AIR ACT
                    The 1988 California Clean Air Act (CCAA) requires that all air districts in the State
                    endeavor to achieve and maintain California Ambient Air Quality Standards
                    (CAAQS) for ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO), sulfur oxides (SO2), and nitrogen
                    oxides (NO2) by the earliest practical date. The CCAA specifies that districts focus
           4
             Data from California Air Resources Board web-site www.arb.ca.gov/desig/ adm/sld001.htm. Although the site
shows 1999 data, it has been verified by RBF Consulting personnel with Ms. Marci Langstrom of the Planning and
Technical Support Division of the California Air Resources Board that the 1999 attainment status is valid at the time of
this writing.
           5
             www.epa.gov/oar/oaqps/peg-caa/pegcaa03.html as cited under heading “1997 Changes to the Clean Air Act”.
Carson General Plan                                     AQ-5                                                 Chapter 10

                                                                                                  AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                                                        Table AQ-1
                              Local Air Quality Levels for Source Receptor Area 41
                                                  Federal                                            Days (Samples)
                          California             Primary                              Maximum2        State/Federal
      Pollutant                                                        Year
                          Standard              Standard                            Concentration    Std. Exceeded
                                                                       1997                8.6             0/0
                                                                       1998                8.1             0/0
                            20 ppm                35 ppm
                                                                       1999                7.5             0/0
                          for 1 hour            for 1 hour
                                                                       2000                9.7             0/0
       Carbon                                                          2001                6.0             0/0
      Monoxide                                                         1997               6.63             0/0
                                                                       1998               6.46             0/0
                            9 ppm                  9 ppm
                                                                       1999               5.49             0/0
                          for 8 hour            for 8 hour
                                                                       2000               5.73             0/0
                                                                       2001               4.74             0/0
                                                                       1997               .095             1/0
                                                                       1998               .116             2/0
                           0.09 ppm              0.12 ppm
       Ozone                                                           1999               .131             2/1
                          for 1 hour            for 1 hour
                                                                       2000               .118             3/0
                                                                       2001               .091             1/0
                                                                       1997               .200             0/0
                                                                       1998               .160             0/0
                           0.25 ppm             0.053 ppm
  Nitrogen Dioxide                                                     1999               .151             0/0
                          for 1 hour         annual average
                                                                       2000               .140             0/0
                                                                       2001               .122             0/0
                                                                       1997               .044             0/0
                                         0.14 ppm for 24 hours
                                                                       1998               .083             0/0
                           0.25 ppm                  or
   Sulfur Dioxide                                                      1999               .050             0/0
                          for 1 hour      80 μg/m3 (0.03 ppm)
                                                                       2000               .047             0/0
                                             annual average
                                                                       2001               .047             0/0
                                                                       1997               87.0             10/0
                                                                       1998               69.0             6/0
                           50 g/m3             150 μg/m3
       PM103,4                                                         1999               79.0             13/0
                         for 24 hours          for 24 hours
                                                                       2000              105.0             13/0
                                                                       2001               74.0             11/0
                                                                       1997               N/M              N/A
                                                                       1998               N/M              N/A
                                                 65 μg/m3
       PM2.54                 N/A                                      1999               66.9            N/A/1
                                               for 24 hours
                                                                       2000               74.5            N/A/3
                                                                       2001               72.9            N/A/1
 ppm = parts per million               PM10 = particulate matter 10 microns in diameter or less
 μg/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter    PM2.5 = particulate matter 2.5 microns in diameter or less
 N/M = not measured
 NOTES: 1. Data is based on measurements taken at the North Long Beach monitoring station located at 3648 North Long
                Beach Boulevard, Long Beach, California.
           2. Maximum concentration is measured over the same period as the California Standard.
           3. PM10 exceedances are based on state thresholds established prior to amendments adopted on June 20, 2002.
           4. PM10 and PM2.,5 exceedances are derived from the number of samples exceeded, not days.
 Source: Data obtained from the California Air Resources Board ADAM Data Summaries Website,
           www.arb.ca.gov/adam/welcome.html.
Chapter 10                                                  AQ-6                                  Carson General Plan

AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                 particular attention on reducing the emissions from transportation and area-wide
                 emission sources. The Act also gives districts new authority to regulate indirect
                 sources. Each district plan is to achieve a five-percent annual reduction (averaged
                 over consecutive three-year periods) in district-wide emissions of each non-
                 attainment pollutant or its precursors. Any additional development within the
                 region would impede the “no net” increase prohibition, in that further emissions
                 reductions must be affected from all other airshed sources to fit any project
                 development mobile source emissions increase.
                 A strict interpretation of the “no net” increase prohibition suggests that any general
                 development within the region, no matter how large or small, would have a
                 significant, project-specific air quality impact unless the development-related
                 emissions are offset by concurrent emissions reduction elsewhere within the airshed.
                 Any planning effort for air quality attainment would thus need to consider both
                 State and Federal planning requirements.
                 1997 AQMP
                 The 1997 AQMP was prepared and adopted by the SCAQMD on November 15,
                 1996. The 1997 AQMP was adopted by the CARB on January 23, 1997. The 1997
                 Plan contains two tiers of control measures: short- and intermediate-term, and long-
                 term. Short- and intermediate-term measures are scheduled to be adopted between
                 1997 and the year 2005. These measures rely on known technologies and other
                 actions to be taken by several agencies that currently have the statutory authority to
                 implement the measures. They are designed to satisfy the Federal CAA
                 requirement of Reasonably Available Control Technology (RACT) and the CCAA
                 requirement of Best Available Retrofit Control Technology (BARCT). There are
                 37 stationary source and 24 mobile source control measures in this group.
                 The most recent amendment to the 1997 AMQP is the 1999 Ozone State
                 Implementation Plan (SIP) Revision. This revision was adopted by the SCAQMD
                 in December 1999 and ratified by the EPA in April 2000. The provisions of the 1999
                 SIP Revision are intended to: 1) include new short-term control measures that
                 implement and replace portions of the 1997 long-term measures, 2) expedite the
                 implementation schedule of a portion of the short-term measures in the 1997
                 AQMP and 3) revise the adoption and implementation schedule for those 1997
                 AQMP control measures with lapsed adoption dates.
                 To ultimately achieve ambient air quality standards, further development and
                 refinement of known low- and zero-emission control technologies, in addition to
                 technological breakthroughs, would be necessary. Long-term measures rely on the
                 advancement of technologies and control methods that can reasonably be expected
                 to occur between 1994 and 2010.
                 The 1997 AQMP continues to include most of the control measures outlined in the
                 previous 1994 Ozone Plan with minor exceptions, but postpones many marginal
                 measures found to be less cost-effective, drops future indirect-source rules that are
                 now deemed infeasible, and focuses the SCAQMD’s efforts on about ten major
                 emission-reduction rules. The SCAQMD will focus its efforts on seven major rules
Carson General Plan                                AQ-7                                       Chapter 10

                                                                                    AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
              to reduce volatile organic compounds (VOCs), a key ingredient in smog; and the
              Plan includes new market-based measures giving businesses greater flexibility in
              meeting emission-reduction requirements, such as intercredit trading and additional
              credits for mobile source emission reductions.
              The 1997 AQMP shows that measures outlined in the 1994 Ozone Plan are
              sufficient to attain the Federal health standards for the two most difficult
              ingredients in smog, PM10 and ground level O3, by the years 2006 and 2010,
              respectively. The region already has met the three other Federal health standards
              for Pb, SO2 and NO2. To help reduce PM10 pollution, the 1997 Plan outlines seven
              control measures for directly emitted particulates that will reduce emissions from
              agricultural areas, livestock waste, wood-working operations, construction, and
              restaurants. The measures will also help control dust from paved and unpaved
              roads, which accounts for two-thirds of the directly-emitted particulates.
              1997 AQMP Control Strategies. The 1997 AQMP’s off-road mobile source control
              measures are based on the EPA’s proposed Federal Implementation Plan (FIP) for
              the SCAB. The FIP’s proposed control measures are based on a combination of
              stringent emission standards, declining caps on emission levels and emission/user
              fees.
3.5     SENSITIVE RECEPTORS
              Sensitive populations are more susceptible to the effects of air pollution than are the
              general population. Sensitive populations (sensitive receptors) who are in proximity
              to localized sources of toxins and carbon monoxide are of particular concern. Land
              uses considered sensitive receptors include residences, schools, playgrounds,
              childcare centers, athletic facilities, long-term health care facilities, rehabilitation
              centers, convalescent centers, and retirement homes. Refer to Exhibit N-1, Sensitive
              Receptor Location Map, and Table N-5, Noise Sensitive Receptors, in the Noise
              Element for the location of sensitive receptors in the City.
3.6     TOXIC AIR CONTAMINANTS
              In addition to the criteria pollutants previously discussed, toxic air contaminants
              (TACs) are another group of pollutants of concern in Southern California. There
              are many different types of TACs, with varying degrees of toxicity. Sources of TACs
              include industrial processes such as petroleum refining and chrome plating
              operations, commercial operations such as gasoline stations and dry cleaners, and
              motor vehicle exhaust. Public exposure to TACs can result from emissions from
              normal operations, as well as accidental releases of hazardous materials during
              upset conditions. Health effects of TACs include cancer, birth defects, neurological
              damage and death.
              The SCAQMD implements TAC controls through Federal, State and local
              programs. Federally, TACs are regulated by EPA under Title III of the CAA. At
              the State level, the CARB has designated the Federal hazardous air pollutants as
              TACs, under the authority of AB 1807. The Air Toxic Hot Spots Information and
Chapter 10                                      AQ-8                               Carson General Plan

AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                 Assessment Act (AB 2588) requires inventories and public notices for facilities that
                 emit TACs. Senate Bill 1731 amended AB 2588 to require facilities with “significant
                 risks” to prepare a risk reduction plan (reflected in SCAQMD Rule 1402).
                 SCAQMD also regulates source-specific TACs.
                 Diesel exhaust is a growing concern in the Basin area and throughout California.
                 The CARB in 1998 identified diesel engine particulate matter as a TAC. The
                 exhaust from diesel engines includes hundreds of different gaseous and particulate
                 components, many of which are toxic. Many of these toxic compounds adhere to the
                 particles, and because diesel particles are very small, they penetrate deeply into the
                 lungs. Diesel engine particulate matter has been identified as a human carcinogen.
                 Mobile sources (including trucks, buses, automobiles, trains, ships and farm
                 equipment) are by far the largest source of diesel emissions. Studies show that
                 diesel particulate matter concentrations are much higher near heavily traveled
                 highways and intersections. The cancer risk from exposure to diesel exhaust may be
                 much higher that the risk associated with any other toxic air pollutant routinely
                 measures in the region.6
                 Prior to the listing of diesel exhaust as a TAC, California had already adopted
                 various regulations that would reduce diesel emissions. These regulations include
                 new standards for diesel fuel, emission standards for new diesel trucks, buses, autos,
                 and utility equipment, and inspection and maintenance requirements for health duty
                 vehicles. Following the listing of diesel engine particulate matter as a TAC, the
                 ARB is evaluating what additional regulatory action is needed to reduce public
                 exposure. The ARB does not plan on banning diesel fuel or engines, but may
                 consider additional requirements for diesel fuel and engines, as well as other
                 measures to reduce public exposure.
                 Other air quality issues of concern in the SCAB include nuisance impacts of odors
                 and dust. Objectionable odors may be associated with a variety of pollutants.
                 Common sources of odors include wastewater treatment plants, landfills,
                 composting facilities, refineries, and chemical plants. Similarly, nuisance dust may
                 be generated by a variety of sources including quarries, agriculture, grading and
                 construction. Odors rarely have direct health impacts, but they can be unpleasant
                 and can lead to anger and concern over possible health effects among the public.
                 Each year, the SCAQMD receives thousands of citizen complaints about
                 objectionable odors.        Dust emissions can contribute to increased ambient
                 concentrations of PM10, particularly when dust settles on roadways where it can be
                 pulverized and re-suspended by traffic. Dust emissions also contribute to reduced
                 visibility and soiling of exposed surfaces.
        6
           BAAQMD CEQA Guidelines, Assessing the Air Quality Impacts of Projects and Plans, Bay Area Air Quality
Management District, Revised December 1999, page 6.
Carson General Plan                                 AQ-9                                             Chapter 10

                                                                                    AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
4.0     PLANNING ISSUES, GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION
             The acronyms listed below are used for the implementation measures:
                 RA/D:     Responsible Agency/Division
                 FS:       Funding Source
                 TF:       Time Frame
             ISSUE:     DUST GENERATION
             Generation of dust not only creates a nuisance, but those temporary and permanent uses
             which generate substantial amounts of dust can impact the health of residents.
             Goal:      AQ-1:        Reduced particulate emissions from paved and unpaved
                                     surfaces and during building construction.
             Policies: AQ-1.1        Continue to enforce ordinances which address dust
                                     generation and mandate the use of dust control measures to
                                     minimize this nuisance.
                        AQ-1.2       Promote the landscaping of undeveloped and abandoned
                                     properties to prevent soil erosion and reduce dust
                                     generation.
                        AQ-1.3       Adopt incentives, regulations, and/or procedures to minimize
                                     particulate emissions.
             Implementation Measures:
                        AQ-IM-1.1        Investigate further amending of existing requirements for
                                         grading permits and erosion, siltation and dust control
                                         procedures. (Implements AQ-1.1)
                                         RA/D:      Planning, Building & Safety, SCAQMD
                                         FS:        AB1566 funds, General Funds
                                         TF:        2004-05
                        AQ-IM-1.2        Investigate the feasibility of requiring planting of
                                         undeveloped and abandoned properties. (Implements
                                         AQ-1.2)
                                         RA/D:      Planning, Code Enforcement
                                         FS:        General Fund
                                         TF:        2005-06
                        AQ-IM-1.3        Amend contracting requirements for any new street
                                         cleaning equipment to require, to the maximum extent
Chapter 10                                     AQ-10                                Carson General Plan
AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                                                feasible, the most efficient fine particle removal.
                                                (Implements AQ-1.3)
                                                RA/D:      Public Works
                                                FS:        General Fund
                                                TF:        2005-06
                              AQ-IM-1.4         Study the feasibility of requiring the use of less impactive
                                                leaf blowers, such as equipment that will collect
                                                particulates rather than blow them around. (Implements
                                                AQ-1.3)
                                                RA/D:      Public Works, Planning
                                                FS:        General Fund
                                                TF:        2005-06
                                                                                                      
                 ISSUE:       REGIONAL AIR QUALITY
                 Stricter enforcement of emission reduction rules; educating the public on pollution control
                 measures; and promoting the use of alternate fuel vehicles will assist in the improvement
                 of air quality in the region.
                 Goal:        AQ-2:         Air quality which meets State and Federal standards.
                 Policies: AQ-2.1           Coordinate with other agencies in the region, particularly
                                            SCAQMD and SCAG, to implement provisions of the
                                            regions’ AQMP, as amended.
                              AQ-2.2        Utilize incentives, regulations and implement the
                                            Transportation Demand Management requirements in
                                            cooperation with other jurisdictions to eliminate vehicle trips
                                            which would otherwise be made and to reduce vehicle miles
                                            traveled for automobile trips which still need to be made.
                              AQ-2.3        Cooperate and participate in regional air quality
                                            management plans, programs and enforcement measures.
                              AQ-2.4        Continue to work to relieve congestion on major arterials
                                            and thereby reduce emissions.
                              AQ-2.5        Continue to improve existing sidewalks, bicycle trails, and
                                            parkways, and require sidewalk and bicycle trail
                                            improvements and parkways for new developments.
                              AQ-2.6        Encourage in-fill development near activity centers and along
                                            transportation routes.
Carson General Plan                                   AQ-11                                        Chapter 10

                                                                          AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                    AQ-2.7    Reduce air pollutant emissions by mitigating air quality
                              impacts associated with development projects to the greatest
                              extent possible.
           Implementation Measures:
                    AQ-IM-2.1     Continue to participate, where possible, in committees
                                  involved in the development and implementation of air
                                  quality implementation plans. (Implements AQ-2.1)
                                  RA/D:     City Council, City Manager, Planning, Public
                                            Safety
                                  FS:       AB1566, General Fund
                                  TF:       Ongoing
                    AQ-IM-2.2     Continue to encourage and assist employers in
                                  developing and implementing work trip reduction plans,
                                  employee ride sharing, modified work schedules,
                                  preferential carpool and vanpool parking, or any other
                                  trip reduction approach that is consistent with the
                                  AQMP for the South Coast Air Basin. (Implements AQ-
                                  2.2 and 2.3)
                                  RA/D:     Planning, SCAQMD
                                  FS:       SB1566, General Fund
                                  TF:       Ongoing
                    AQ-IM-2.3     Continue City employee work trip reduction programs
                                  and use of alternative fuel vehicles. (Implements AQ-2.2
                                  and 2.3)
                                  RA/D:     Transportation
                                  FS:       General Fund
                                  TF:       Ongoing
                    AQ-IM-2.4     Encourage those companies that ship or receive high
                                  volumes of goods by commercial truck to limit operations
                                  to non-peak hours. (Implements AQ-2.4)
                                  RA/D:     Planning
                                  FS:       General Funds, impact fees
                                  TF:       2003-04+
                    AQ-IM-2.5     Encourage those companies with high truck volumes to
                                  use the Alameda Corridor. (Implements AQ-2.4)
                                  RA/D:     Planning
                                  FS:       General Funds, impact fees
                                  TF:       2003-04+
Chapter 10                             AQ-12                              Carson General Plan
AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                           AQ-IM-2.6     Require new developments to provide pedestrian and
                                         bicycle trails access to nearby shopping and employment
                                         centers, thereby encouraging alternate modes of
                                         transportation and reducing vehicle miles traveled.
                                         (Implements AQ-2.5)
                                         RA/D:      Planning, Public Works
                                         FS:        Development processing fees, General Funds
                                         TF:        Ongoing
                           AQ-IM-2.7     Encourage infill projects to provide convenience to
                                         existing facilities and minimize trip generation.
                                         (Implements AQ-2.6)
                                         RA/D:      Planning, Redevelopment
                                         FS:        Development processing fees, General Funds
                                         TF:        Ongoing
                           AQ-IM-2.8     Prepare potential air quality mitigation measures and
                                         thresholds of significance for use in environmental
                                         documentation. (Implements AQ-2.7)
                                         RA/D:      Planning
                                         FS:        General Funds
                                         TF:        2003-04
                 Goal:     AQ-3:     Increased use of alternate fuel vehicles.
                 Policies: AQ-3.1    Continue to promote the use of alternative clean fueled
                                     vehicles for personal and business use. To this end, consider
                                     the use of electric, fuel cell or other non-polluting fuels for
                                     Carson Circuit buses and other City vehicles.
                           AQ-3.2    Continue to promote ridership on the Carson Circuit and
                                     Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority
                                     (MTA) bus and metro rail lines.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           AQ-IM-3.1     Continue and expand the use of City-owned alternative
                                         fueled vehicles. (Implements AQ-3.1)
                                         RA/D:      Public Works
                                         FS:        Gas Tax, AB1566
                                         TF:        Ongoing
Carson General Plan                            AQ-13                                      Chapter 10
                                                                                 AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                        AQ-IM-3.2       Prepare a feasibility study of the use of electric or other
                                        alternative fueled vehicles for Carson Circuit buses.
                                        (Implements AQ-3.1)
                                        RA/D:      Public Works
                                        FS:        AB1566
                                        TF:        2004-05
                        AQ-IM-3.3       Develop a cooperative program to further increase
                                        transit ridership. (Implements AQ-3.2)
                                        RA/D:      Transportation Services
                                        FS:        AB 1566
                                        TF:        2004-05
                                                                                              
           ISSUE:       COMMUNITY AWARENESS AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTIONS
           The City should coordinate with industries and regional agencies to respond to incidents
           involving air quality impacts.
           Goal:        AQ-4:       Increased community awareness and participation in efforts
                                    to reduce air pollution and enhance air quality.
           Policies: AQ-4.1         Work with the City’s Public Information Office to increase
                                    public awareness regarding air quality, implementation
                                    issues, reporting and enforcement.
                        AQ-4.2      Promote and encourage ride sharing activities within the
                                    community, including such programs as preferential parking,
                                    park-and-ride lots, alternative work week/flexible working
                                    hours and telecommuting, as well as other trip reduction
                                    strategies.
           Implementation Measures:
                        AQ-IM-4.1       Publicize the SCAQMD complaint telephone number.
                                        RA/D:      Transportation Services, Public Information
                                        FS:        General Fund
                                        TF:        2003-04
                        AQ-IM-4.2       Continue to implement City programs and encourage
                                        other employers’ programs to promote ride sharing,
                                        alternative work week schedules, and telecommuting.
                                        (Implements AQ-4.2)
Chapter 10                                    AQ-14                              Carson General Plan

AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                                            RA/D:       Transportation
                                            FS:         AB 1566, General Fund
                                            TF:         Ongoing
                             AQ-IM-4.3      Coordinate with transportation agencies to establish
                                            additional park-and-ride facilities for work and non-work
                                            trip reduction. (Implements AQ-4.2)
                                            RA/D:       Transportation, Planning
                                            FS:         State funds, grants
                                            TF:         Ongoing
                                                                                                     
                 ISSUE:      POLLUTING INDUSTRIES
                 There are a number of industries/facilities in Carson which contribute to air pollution in
                 the South Bay region.
                 Goal:       AQ-5:      Reduce emissions related to industry to enhance air quality.
                 Policies: AQ-5.1       Through the City’s Planning processes, reduce air pollutant
                                        emissions by mitigating air quality impacts associated with
                                        facilities/industries in Carson, to the greatest extent possible
                             AQ-5.2     Continue to work with industries and regulatory agencies to
                                        monitor, regulate, and provide quick response and
                                        communication with the community in the event of an
                                        emergency impacting air quality.
                             AQ-5.3     Discourage PM10 producers and other polluting industries
                                        from locating in the City.
                             AQ-5.4     Work with the SCAQMD to better monitor emissions.
                 Implementation Measures:
                             AQ-IM-5.1      Prepare potential air quality mitigation measures and
                                            thresholds of significance for use in environmental
                                            documentation. (Implements AQ-5.1)
                                            RA/D:       Planning
                                            FS:         Development Processing fees, General Funds
                                            TF:         2003-04
                             AQ-IM-5.2      Reinforce cooperative agreements and informal
                                            arrangements to maintain a high level of responsiveness
                                            to air quality emergencies. (Implements AQ-5.2)
Carson General Plan                                AQ-15                                        Chapter 10

                                                                  AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                       RA/D:      Public Safety, Fire, Sheriff, SCAQMD
                       FS:        General Fund
                       TF:        Ongoing
             AQ-IM-5.3 Request that the SCAQMD locate a monitoring station
                       in Carson.
                       RA/D:      Public Safety, Planning
                       FS:        General Fund
                       TF:        Ongoing
             AQ-IM-5.4 Cooperate with the SCAQMD by reporting emissions
                       violations.
                       RA/D:      Public Safety
                       FS:        General Fund
                       TF:        Ongoing
                                                                               
Chapter 10                   AQ-16                                Carson General Plan

       CHAPTER 2
LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                CHAPTER 2
                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
GUIDING PRINCIPLE
                   The City of Carson is committed to providing a sustainable balance of land
                   uses, including residential, commercial, industrial, educational, recreational,
                   and open space. The City is also committed to providing quality development
                   that incorporates features such as integrated, walkable, and mixed use
                   neighborhoods. Furthermore, the City is committed to facilitating the adaptive
                   reuse of former landfills and contaminated sites. The City of Carson is
                   committed to creating an attractive environment for its citizens by developing,
                   implementing and enforcing community design guidelines which will assure
                   quality development and the maintenance and beautification of properties.
1.0     INTRODUCTION
                   To quote the State’s General Plan Guidelines, “The land use element functions as a guide
                   to planners, the general public, and decision makers as to the ultimate pattern of
                   development for the city or county at buildout.”1
                   The Land Use Element has perhaps the broadest scope of the mandatory elements. It
                   plays a central role in correlating all land use issues into a set of coherent development
                   policies. Its objectives, policies, and programs relate directly to the other elements.
                   Although all general plan elements carry equal weight, the Land Use Element is often
                   perceived as being most representative of “the General Plan.” The Land Use Element has
        1
          State of California, General Plan Guidelines, Governors Office of Planning and Research, 1998, p.38.
Carson General Plan                                         LU-1                                               Chapter 2

                                                                                          LAND USE ELEMENT
              a pivotal role in zoning, subdivision, and public works decisions. The Element’s
              objectives and policies provide a long-range context for those short-term actions.
2.0     STATE LAW REQUIREMENTS
              The State of California Government Code Section 65302(a) requires that a General Plan
              include:
                   “… a land use element which designates the proposed general distribution and
                   general location and extent of the uses of the land for housing, business, industry,
                   open space including agriculture, natural resources, recreation, and enjoyment
                   of scenic beauty, education, public buildings and grounds, solid and liquid waste
                   disposal facilities and other categories of public and private uses of land. The
                   land use element shall include a statement of the standards of population density
                   and building intensity recommended for the various districts and other territory
                   covered by the plan which are subject to flooding and shall be reviewed annually
                   with respect to those areas.”
              In addition to the State’s requirements set forth in the Government Code, above, it has
              also been legally established that, while the location of a particular land use may be
              expressed in general terms, a property owner must be able to identify the General Plan
              designation for his/her parcel from the land use diagram contained in the Land Use
              Element.
              Among the important implementation mechanisms for the Land Use Element are
              redevelopment, specific plans and the zoning ordinance. The California Government
              Code requires that a city’s zoning ordinance and map be consistent with its general plan
              land use element and map, and that all provisions of specific plans and redevelopment
              projects adopted by a city must be consistent with the general plan they implement.
3.0     SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
3.1     LAND USE ISSUES
              CARSON VISION
              Prior to beginning work on the Carson General Plan Update, an extensive effort was
              made to identify citizens’ concerns for the future of their City. The effort culminated in
              the development of the Carson Vision, adopted by the Carson City Council on September
              2, 1997. A number of methods were used to identify citizens’ concerns in the
              development of the Carson Vision. These methods included group and confidential
              interviews, community workshops, a random-sample community survey, meetings with a
              General Plan Advisory Committee, City Council/Planning Commission Workshops,
              articles in the Carson Report and press releases.
              GENERAL PLAN UPDATE OUTREACH EFFORTS
              Since the adoption of the Carson Vision, new information and concerns have been
              identified during the General Plan Update process via the preparation of an Existing
              Conditions Report, interviews and community workshops, meetings with the General
Chapter 2                                         LU-2                                 Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                 Plan Advisory Committee, City Council/Planning Commission workshops, newsletter
                 articles, and press releases. Issues important to the City are addressed in Section 5.0,
                 Planning Factors, Goals, Policies, and Implementation, of this Element.
3.2     EXISTING LAND USE DESIGNATIONS AND RELATED PLANS
                 EXISTING GENERAL PLAN
                 The Carson General Plan currently consists of the State-mandated elements, such as Land
                 Use and Circulation, as well as what are termed “optional” elements, such as Historical
                 Preservation and Scenic Highway. All of these elements were adopted in 1981 and 1982,
                 with the exception of the Housing Element, which was last adopted in March 2002, and
                 the Air Quality Element, adopted in 1994.
                 The Land Use Element identifies land use designations and locations and a general
                 description of the uses permitted in each land use category. The location and extent of
                 land uses for each designation are illustrated on the existing General Plan Map, shown as
                 Exhibit LU-1, Existing General Plan. The current General Plan land use designations
                 include:
                         Low Density Residential (1-8 dus/ac.),
                         Medium Density Residential (9-12 dus/ac.),
                         High Density Residential (13-25 dus/ac.),
                         General Commercial,
                         Regional Commercial,
                         Light Industry,
                         Heavy Industry, and
                         Public Facilities.
                 CITY OF CARSON ZONING ORDINANCE
                 The Zoning Ordinance is the most important implementing tool for the General Plan. The
                 Ordinance text and Zoning Map provide permitted land uses and development standards
                 for each category of land use, consistent with the land use designations on the General
                 Plan. The Ordinance includes the following zoning classifications:
                      Residential Zones
                         RS - Residential, Single Family
                         RM (8) - Residential, Multiple Dwelling (up to 8 dus/ac.)
                         RM (12) - Residential, Multiple Dwelling (up to 12 dus/ac.)
                         RM (25) - Residential, Multiple Dwelling (up to 25 dus/ac.)
                         RA - Residential, Agriculture
Carson General Plan                                  LU-3                                         Chapter 2


LAND USE ELEMENT
                     Commercial Zones
                        CN - Commercial, Neighborhood Center
                        CR - Commercial, Regional Center
                        CG - Commercial, General
                     Industrial Zones
                        ML - Manufacturing Light
                        MH - Manufacturing, Heavy
                     Open Space Zone and Special Uses
                        OS - Open Space
                        SU - Special Uses
                     Overlay Districts
                        Design Overlay
                        Organic Refuse Landfill Overlay
                        Mixed Use Residential Overlay
                        Electronic Marquee Signage Overlay
                 More detailed descriptions of these designations are given in the Existing Conditions
                 Report for the General Plan Update.
                 EXISTING LAND USE AND ZONING EQUIVALENCE
                 Table LU-1, Existing Development By General Plan Land Use Category With Zoning
                 Equivalence, provides a summary of existing General Plan land use categories and their
                 respective implementing zoning designation(s). Also shown in Table LU-1 is the acreage,
                 density/intensity, and total number of residential units or non-residential square footage
                 associated with each land use category.
                 SPECIFIC PLANS
                 In addition to the Zoning designations summarized above, there are five Specific Plan
                 areas in the City of Carson: Dominguez Technology Centre, Dominguez Hills Village,
                 Villages of Brighton and Strathmore (formerly Cambria Pines), Monterey Pines, and
                 Carson Town Center. These areas are governed by detailed land use regulations, unique
                 to each Specific Plan area. A full description of these Plans is given in the Existing
                 Conditions Report.
Carson General Plan                                 LU-5                                          Chapter 2

                                                                                                                                           LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                       Table LU-1
           Existing Development By General Plan Land Use Category With Zoning Equivalence
                                                                   March 14, 2001
 Existing General Plan Land                                                                               Density/                        No. of Units/
                                         Existing Zoning                 Acreage
          Use Category                                                                                    Intensity                       Sq. Footage
Residential
   Low Density                             RS, RA, RM-8                   2,432.9                      1 – 8 dus/ac.                       18,244 dus
   Medium Density                                RM-12                      109.7                     9 – 12 dus/ac.                        1,127 dus
   High Density                                  RM-25                      350.7                    13 – 25 dus/ac.                        4,203 dus
Commercial
                                                                                                         0.32 (avg.)
   General Commercial                           CG, CN                      288.8                                                         2,383,114 sf
                                                                                                         0.7 (max.)
                                                                                                         0.32 (avg.)
   Regional Commercial                             CR                       320.3                                                         1,652,268 sf
                                                                                                         0.7 (max.)
Industrial
                                                                                                         0.34 (avg.)
   Light Industry                                  ML                     1,496.6                                                        17,268,562 sf
                                                                                                         0.5 (max.)
                                                                                                     0.2 – 0.7 (avg.)
   Heavy Industry                                 MH                      4,000.2                                                        23,200,526 sf
                                                                                                         1.0 (max.)
Other
   Public Facilities                            OS, SU                    1,177.3                                                               N/A
Total                                                                    10,176.4                                                  24,830 dus*/44,504,470
* Includes 989 mobile home units currently located in areas designated for non-residential uses, as well as 267 other residential units currently located in areas
designated for non-residential purposes.
NOTES:
1) Acreage: Calculated by RBF Consulting, GIS Department, July 25, 2000, based on information provided by the City of Carson.
2) Residential number of units: Based on information supplied by City of Carson, GIS Department, January, 2001. Includes 989 mobile home units currently
located in areas designated for non-residential uses, as well as 267 other residential units currently located in areas designated for non-residential purposes.
3) Square footage for non-residential uses: Non-residential square footages are based on information supplied by the City of Carson Planning Department,
December 14, 2000, which was based on the City of Carson GIS data base (information provided by the Los Angeles County Assessors Office).
4) General Commercial: Includes Goodwill, Auto Zone, RV Center and Blockbuster projects under construction.
5) Light Industry – Includes Dominguez Technology Center, Lakeshore and Ducommun projects under construction. A total of 282,360 sq. ft of Light Industry
are used for commercial purposes, including 110,700 sq. ft. at the Carson Depot Center (Home Depot) and 171,660 sq. ft. at the Super K-Mart Center.
6) Heavy Industry – Includes IDS, Watson Land (220th Street), Watson Land (Arnold Center), IDI, and the Hewson Development project on Sepulveda
Boulevard, as well as the southern corners of Victoria and Figueroa Streets. A total of 361,700 sq. ft. of Heavy Industry are used for office purposes, including
the Nissan headquarters.
7) Floor area ratios (FARs) – FARs for non-residential uses were developed using the City of Carson GIS data base (original information provided by the Los
Angeles County Assessors Office). For purposes of estimating FARs, those properties with a “zero” value for either building or land area in the Assessors
Office parcel information have not been included. Also these estimates do not include the following properties (due to the types of facilities on these
properties): Shell/Ashland, ARCO, GATX, Fletcher Oil, and the Los Angeles County Sanitation District property in the southwestern corner of the City.
Chapter 2                                                                     LU-6                                                      Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                 REDEVELOPMENT PLANS
                 The City’s Redevelopment Agency has adopted three redevelopment project areas:
                 Redevelopment Project Area No. 1, Merged and Amended Redevelopment Project Area
                 (formerly Redevelopment Project Area No. 2 and 3), and Redevelopment Project Area
                 No. 4. Project Area No. 1 consists of approximately 2,044 acres, the Merged and
                 Amended Project Area consists of approximately 1,634 acres, and Project Area No. 4
                 consists of approximately 1035 acres. The Redevelopment Plans for all Project Areas are
                 available for review at the City of Carson, Economic Development Group.
                 LIVABLE COMMUNITIES PROGRAM
                 Through grant funding, the South Bay Cities Council of Governments (SBCCOG) has
                 created a guidebook entitled Creating Livable Places. The guidebook, containing
                 background information, a model resolution and reference materials, describes the
                 concepts which create livable communities. It also identifies some of the barriers which
                 impede the creation of such communities and strategies to overcome those barriers. The
                 concepts which are addressed in the guidebook include, among others, integrated
                 communities, design, center focus, public spaces, balanced transportation, diversity,
                 environmental sustainability, public safety, and full community participation.
                 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
                 The City Council approved the City of Carson Economic Development Strategy in 1998.
                 This Strategy contains a Mission Statement, goals, objectives and action steps (specifying
                 the time frame within which the action should occur). The primary focus of the
                 Economic Development Strategy, as described in the Strategy’s Mission Statement, is to
                 “Enhance the quality of life in the City of Carson through promotion of a strong local
                 economy that offers growing employment and business opportunities and supports a
                 healthy and diversified tax base vital to the long-term viability of the City and its
                 citizens.” The Economic Development Strategy is on file at the City of Carson Economic
                 Development Group.
4.0     PLANNED LAND USE FOR THE GENERAL PLAN
4.1     DEVELOPMENT OF ALTERNATIVES
                 AREAS STUDIED FOR PURPOSES OF THE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
                 Because the City of Carson is mature and generally built-out (approximately 9 percent of
                 the City is currently vacant and 8.5 percent is considered underutilized), the focus in
                 developing the Land Use Alternatives was on certain “Study Areas”. These areas were
                 identified through the work efforts and public outreach conducted during the
                 development of the Carson Vision and throughout the General Plan Update process.
                 The alternatives which were developed for purposes of the General Plan Update were
                 prepared with the advice of the General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC). Land use
                 tours were conducted and significant research and discussion occurred in evaluating
                 appropriate alternatives for each of the targeted Study Areas. The results of these efforts
                 were the development of a Proposed Plan and two variations of that plan. Appendix G,
Carson General Plan                                  LU-7                                         Chapter 2

                                                                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
             Study Area Recommendations, contains a written summary of the land use and policy
             recommendations by Study Area and Alternative. The Study Area Location Map, shows
             the locations of the Study Areas evaluated in terms of land use for the General Plan
             Update. Appendix H, General Plan Land Use Alternatives, contains the alternatives
             discussion.
             After the completion of the GPAC recommendations, additional revisions to the existing
             land use were suggested and added to the Land Use Plan. Additional study areas were
             also developed. The Land Use Plan described in this Land Use Element is the plan
             adopted by the City.
4.2     SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
             California Law provides for county agencies called Local Agency Formation
             Commissions which are charged with determining a sphere of influence for each city in
             the State. The purpose of these determinations is to provide for the orderly growth and
             development of urbanizing areas. Once a sphere of influence is designated, the cities can
             plan and zone the areas and logical annexations to the cities can take place.
             Carson’s Sphere of Influence is approximately 700 acres of an unincorporated section of
             Los Angeles County located generally to the northeast of the current City boundaries. It
             was designated by the Los Angeles County Local Agency Formation Commission in
             1973. The unincorporated section is divided into three city spheres of influence—
             Carson; Compton, to the north; and Long Beach, to the east.
             Carson’s Sphere is 95 percent developed with industrial uses. There is one mobile home
             park in the center of the area. The land has no known history of landfill or hazardous
             waste contaminations.
             Annexation proceedings have been initiated by the City in the past but none was
             completed. The latest effort terminated in 1986 when Carson dropped an attempt to
             annex 788 acres, including the Rancho Dominguez Seminary and Del Amo Estates
             Mobile Home Park which are in the Compton Sphere of Influence. Two mobile home
             park homeowners’ associations had requested the annexation.
             The Sphere of Influence is included on the Land Use Plan with appropriate land uses
             designated. These designations reflect the land uses existing.
Chapter 2                                       LU-8                                  Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
4.3     LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                 RESIDENTIAL LAND USES
                 This Land Use Element classifies the residential areas of the City into Low, Medium and
                 High Density residential land use designations. A description of each residential land use
                 designation and its equivalent zoning follows.
                 Low Density Residential (LDR)
                 “Low Density Residential” includes all residential areas composed of single-family
                 detached dwellings and other development considered harmonious with such low density
                 residential development. The maximum density allowed is 8 dwelling units per acre
                 (du/ac). This land use category will be implemented by the RS - Residential, Single-
                 Family; RA - Residential Agriculture; and RM(8) - Residential Multiple Family zones.
                 Medium Density Residential (MD)
                 “Medium Density Residential” is intended to provide for multiple dwelling units, single-
                 family attached and detached dwellings, and other development considered harmonious
                 with such medium density residential development. Residential densities of up to 12
                 du/ac are allowed. This land use category will be implemented by the RM(12) -
                 Residential Multiple Family zone.
                 High Density Residential (HD)
                 “High Density Residential” areas are intended to provide for multiple dwelling units,
                 combinations of multiple- and single-family residential units, and other development
                 considered harmonious with such high density residential development. Residential
                 densities of up to 25 du/ac are allowed. This land use category will be implemented by
                 the RM(25) - Residential Multiple Family zone.
                 Urban Residential (UR)
                 “Urban Residential” is intended to provide for multiple dwelling units and a range of
                 commercial uses, including retail, offices, hospitals, and private community gathering
                 facilities. Residential densities up to 65 du/ac are allowed. The allowable density/
                 intensity for mixed-use development will be determined using an allowable range of FAR
                 (1.0 to 4.0). This land use category will be implemented with a Specific Plan zone.
                 COMMERCIAL LAND USES
                 Commercial land uses encompass those retail and service establishments which are
                 planned to serve neighborhood, city-wide or regional clientele. Below is a description of
                 each commercial land use designation, a discussion of floor-to-area ratios (FARs), and
                 the equivalent zoning for each designation.
Carson General Plan                                  LU-9                                         Chapter 2

                                                                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
          General Commercial (GC)
          This “General Commercial” designation includes both general and neighborhood
          commercial land uses, which provide both highway-oriented and smaller neighborhood
          retail opportunities. The maximum allowable FAR is 0.5, the average FAR which will
          ultimately be built out for this land use is expected to be approximately 0.25 to 0.32.
          This land use designation is implemented by the CN - Commercial, Neighborhood and
          CG - Commercial, General zones.
          Regional Commercial (RC)
          The “Regional Commercial” category includes uses intended to serve a broad population
          base and offer a wide range of services to both the community and the region. Businesses
          in this designation include major department stores, specialty shops, other retail and
          service uses, automobile and other vehicle dealerships, and hotels and motels. Regional
          Commercial is intended to provide for the City’s primary regional shopping center and its
          peripheral areas. Although the maximum allowable FAR is 0.6, the average FAR which
          will ultimately be built out for this land use is expected to be approximately 0.32.
          This land use designation is implemented by the CR - Commercial, Regional zone.
          Office Park (OP)
          The Office Park designation is intended to provide for the development of
          professional/administrative offices and personal services rather than commodities. Site
          development regulations and performance standards are designed to make such uses
          relatively compatible with residential uses. The Office Park is intended to provide a
          harmonious transition to residential development and neighborhoods by: 1) providing
          high quality and attractive buildings that are compatible with existing and anticipated
          development in the area, 2) providing open space, quality landscaping, and berms which
          achieve a park-like setting, and 3) including buffering of parking, loading docks, and
          other similar functions.
          A new zoning designation will be developed to implement this new General Plan land use
          category.
          INDUSTRIAL LAND USES
          Industrial areas are intended to accommodate the manufacturing, processing,
          warehousing and distribution functions of the community. Below is a description of each
          of the three industrial designations and the equivalent zoning for each designation.
Chapter 2                                      LU-10                               Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                 Business Park (BP)
                 The Business Park designation is intended to provide an attractive, high quality
                 industrial/business park primarily for offices, light manufacturing and assembly, and
                 research and development. Warehousing of a small scale (for example, no more than one
                 ground level loading door per x square feet of building) in conjunction with a permitted
                 primary use will be allowed. It may contain a very limited amount of supportive retail
                 and service uses, when those uses are of a scale and design providing support only to the
                 needs of businesses and their employees in the immediate industrial area. These are two
                 scales of Business Park designated in the General Plan: one for large properties that can
                 be planned and constructed as planned industrial/business parks, and two, for small
                 properties that can have adequate landscaping and small scale uses. The small scale BP
                 could allow churches and other institutional uses with a conditional use permit.
                 Both scales of Business Park are intended to provide harmonious transition to residential
                 development and neighborhoods by: 1) conducting all business activities and essentially
                 all storage inside buildings, 2) consisting of low profile, high quality, and attractive
                 buildings that are compatible with existing and anticipated development in the area, 3)
                 providing open space, quality landscaping, and berms that achieve a park-like setting, and
                 4) including buffering of parking, loading doors, and other similar functions. The
                 maximum allowable FAR is 0.5, and the average FAR which will ultimately by built out
                 for this land use is expected to be approximately 0.42.
                 Two zoning designations will be developed to implement this new General Plan land use
                 category. The Zoning Ordinance should provide parameters for the size and intensity of
                 buildings and uses.
                 Light Industrial (LI)
                 The Light Industrial designation is intended to provide for a wide variety of industrial
                 uses and to limit those involving hazardous or nuisance effects. Typical uses are
                 manufacturing, research and development, wholesaling, and warehousing. It may contain
                 a very limited amount of supportive retail and services uses, when those uses are of a
                 scale and design providing support only to the needs of businesses and their employees in
                 the immediate industrial area. Uses identified as not exceeding Group 3, businesses
                 handling acutely or highly hazardous materials, in the Hazardous Materials Disclosure
                 Program pursuant to the Los Angeles County Fire Code would be permitted with proper
                 safeguards. Performance and development standards are intended to allow a wide range
                 of uses as long as those uses will not adversely impact adjacent uses. Any exterior
                 storage and limited operations must be fully screened from any public view, and
                 residential and commercial uses. The maximum allowable FAR is 0.5, and the average
                 FAR which will ultimately be built out for this land use is expected to be approximately
                 0.42.
                 This land use designation is implemented by the ML – Manufacturing, Light zone.
                 Heavy Industrial (HI)
                 The Heavy Industrial designation is intended to provide for the full range of industrial
                 uses that are acceptable within the community, but whose operations are more intensive
                 and may have nuisance or hazardous characteristics, which for reasons of health, safety,
Carson General Plan                                   LU-11                                       Chapter 2

                                                                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
          environmental effects, or general welfare, are best segregated from other uses.
          Extractive, primary processing, construction yards, rail operations, truck yards and
          terminals, and food processing industries are typical of this designation. Uses identified
          as Group 4 or 5, businesses handling acutely or highly hazardous materials in the
          Hazardous Materials Disclosure Program pursuant to the Los Angeles County Fire Code
          would be permitted with proper safeguards. Outdoor storage operations may be
          permitted, but extensive outdoor uses may require a conditional use permit. Performance
          standards still must be met, but the development standards are the minimum necessary to
          assure safe, functional, and environmentally sound activities. Any expansion of existing
          heavy industrial uses adjacent to residential must include buffered setback areas to the
          extent feasible. The designation may contain a very limited amount of supportive retail
          and service uses, when those uses are of a scale and design providing support only to the
          needs of businesses and their employees in the immediate industrial area. The maximum
          allowable FAR is 1.0, and the average FAR upon ultimate buildout is expected to range
          between 0.5 and 0.7.
          This land use designation is implemented by the MH – Manufacturing, Heavy zone.
          OPEN SPACE USES
          The two open space designations under the Plan include “General Open Space” and
          “Recreational Open Space”.
          General Open Space (GOS)
          “General Open Space” consists of land or water that is essentially unimproved for the
          purposes of management of natural resources, production, preservation and/or
          enhancement of natural resources, or public health and safety. The Dominguez Channel,
          the Blimp Port, utility easements, and like uses are found within this land use category.
          This land use designation will be implemented by the OS - Open Space zone.
          Recreational Open Space (ROS)
          The “Recreational Open Space” designation provides for public recreational uses
          designed to meet the active and passive recreational needs of the community. City-owned
          parks, regional parks, golf courses, and other similar uses are allowed in this category.
          A more specific zoning designation, than the present OS - Open Space, will be developed
          to implement this new land use category.
          OTHER LAND USES
          Mixed Use (MU)
          The “Mixed Use” designation provides opportunities for mixtures of commercial, office,
          business park/limited industrial and/or residential uses in the same building, on the same
          parcel, or within the same area. There would be two MU categories—MU-R would allow
          for commercial and residential uses but not business park/limited industrial and MU-BP
          would allow for commercial and business park/limited industrial uses but not residential.
Chapter 2                                    LU-12                                 Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                 The densities and intensities will vary within this land use designation based on actual
                 uses proposed. In general, it is envisioned that the maximum allowable FAR will be 0.5
                 for the non-residential components of any mixed use project. The residential densities
                 will also vary, but are expected to be in the Medium to High Density ranges, but may not
                 exceed 60 du/ac for the Carson Marketplace Specific Plan and 35 du/ac for all remaining
                 mixed use areas. Below is a description of expected square footage and number of
                 dwelling units for each of the Mixed Use areas:
                         The Carson Street Mixed Use Corridor, is designated to be MU-R, with a
                          combination of residential and general commercial uses, as identified in the
                          adopted Zoning Overlay for the area. It is anticipated that there will be an
                          additional 528 dwelling units and 39,600 square feet of commercial and office
                          uses developed over the next 20 years along this corridor. No business
                          park/limited industrial uses would be allowed.
                         All areas southwest of I-405 and north of Torrance Boulevard and the Carson
                          Marketplace Specific Plan site are designated MU-BP, with a combination of
                          regional commercial and business park/ limited industrial uses. No residential
                          uses would be allowed.
                         The Carson Marketplace Specific Plan site is designated MU-R for a
                          combination of residential, general commercial and regional commercial uses.
                          No business park/ limited industrial uses would be allowed.
                         South Bay Pavilion site is designated MU-R, with a combination of regional
                          commercial and residential uses. It is anticipated that it would be compatible
                          with the existing commercial uses to add some high density residential to the
                          eastern and southern portions of the site in place of some of the commercial floor
                          area. No business park/limited industrial uses would be allowed.
                         The area located south of Sepulveda Boulevard, generally between Marbella
                          Avenue and Avalon Boulevard, is designated MU-R with a combination of
                          residential and general commercial uses.
                         The area at the northeast corner of Central Avenue and Victoria Street, part of the
                          Dominguez Hills Village Specific Plan, is designated MU-R for a combination of
                          residential and general commercial uses.
                 A new zoning overlay will be created for each of the Mixed Use areas. These zoning
                 overlays could be patterned after the existing Carson Street Mixed Use Overlay Zone.
                 INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL USES BUFFER (*)
                 The Industrial/Commercial Uses Buffer symbol has been added to the Land Use Plan to
                 indicate those areas of industrial or commercial property, generally a 100-foot strip
                 abutting the property line, which requires structures and uses to be set back and/or walls
                 and landscaping to be provided in order to buffer or protect the residential uses from the
                 impacts of the industrial or commercial uses.
Carson General Plan                                  LU-13                                         Chapter 2

                                                                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
              Public Facilities (PF)
              This land use designation includes a broad range of civic, governmental, institutional, and
              utility related uses in Carson. Within this category are schools, public buildings and
              associated grounds, and California State University at Dominguez Hills.
              It is intended that a new zoning category be created to implement the Public Facilities
              land use designation.
4.4     LAND USE PLAN
              The land use plan, shown in Exhibit LU-2, Land Use Plan (As Amended March 2017), is
              adopted in this Land Use Element.
              LAND USE SUMMARY
              Table LU-2, Land Use Summary, shows the amount of acreage in each land use category
              under the Land Use Plan. Because the City is largely built out, the Plan reflects the fact
              that most of the land in the City is already devoted to industrial and low density
              residential uses. However, two new categories of Mixed Use have been added to provide
              for the new mixed use projects described earlier in this Element.
              The square footage associated with all commercial uses is expected to increase by almost
              3.7 million square feet over the next 20 years. It should be noted that the General and
              Regional Commercial land use categories are projected to decrease in square footage and
              commercial in Mixed Use is anticipated to increase. Sites such as the Dominguez Golf
              Course and the Cal Compact site are located in prime areas for commercial development.
              Under the Land Use Plan there will be a net increase of almost 11.25 million square feet
              of industrial land uses in the City over the next 20 years.
Chapter 2                                          LU-14                            Carson General Plan
LAND USE ELEMENT
                    EXHIBIT LU-2, LAND USE PLAN (AS AMENDED MARCH 2017)
Carson General Plan    LU-15                                   Chapter 2
                                                                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                                           Table LU-2
                                                 Land Use Summary
                                     Land Use                                    Acreages
           Residential
             Low Density                                                        2,463.2 AC.
             Medium Density                                                      129.6 AC.
             High Density                                                        348.9 AC.
             Urban Residential                                                    6.7 AC.
           Commercial
             General Commercial                                                  220.1 AC.
             Regional Commercial                                                 223.3 AC.
           Industrial
             Business Park                                                       285.2 AC.
             Light Industrial                                                   2,113.0 AC.
             Heavy Industrial                                                   2,647.3 AC.
           Other
             Mixed Use – Residential                                              323 AC.
             Mixed Use – Business Park                                           134.3 AC.
             Recreational Open Space                                             314.7 AC.
             General Open Space                                                  225.6 AC.
             Public Facilities                                                   698.1 AC.
           Total                                                               10,133.0 AC.
          More detailed information is contained in Appendix G, Study Area Recommendations,
          and Appendix A, Existing and Buildout Land Use Projections.
5.0 PLANNING FACTORS, GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION
          The acronyms listed below are used for the implementation measures:
                RA/D:         Responsible Agency/Division
                FS:           Funding Source
                TF:           Time Frame
          ISSUE:           ADAPTIVE REUSE OF “BROWNFIELDS”
          There are a number of sites in Carson with contaminated soils and groundwater,
          including not only the 14 former landfills but other properties; such uses should be
          remediated.
          Goal:            LU-1:       Productive reuse of “brownfield” sites.
          Policies: LU-1.1             Continue to explore the opportunities associated with the
                                       establishment of a Brownfield Redevelopment Program.
Chapter 2                                        LU-16                             Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                          LU-1.2      Explore the opportunities associated with the establishment of a
                                      landfill improvement district and/or like options.
                          LU-1.3      Monitor Federal, State and regional programs and funding
                                      sources designed to reclaim brownfields.
                          LU-1.4      As projects are proposed at brownfield sites, establish a task
                                      force to include representatives from the City and State, the
                                      prospective developer, consultant team, and if necessary, County
                                      and/or Federal representatives. The purpose of each task force
                                      will be to ensure appropriate and timely development of the
                                      brownfield site.
                          LU-1.5      Support, monitor and participate in the United States Conference
                                      of Mayors and their Brownfields Redevelopment Expanded
                                      Action Agenda.
                          See also the Goals and Policies in the Economic Development Element.
                 Implementation Measures:
                          LU-IM-1.1:      Systematically identify contaminated sites and prioritize
                                          those sites with the most redevelopment potential. Develop
                                          remediation alternatives for those sites with the most
                                          redevelopment potential. Find resources to prepare each site
                                          for productive and desirable reuse. (Implements LU-1.1)
                                          RA/D:       Planning,   Economic        Development,     City
                                                      Manager’s Office
                                          FS:         General Fund, State and Federal Funds/Grants
                                          TF:         Ongoing, until all contaminated sites are
                                                      redeveloped
                          LU-IM-1.2:      Consider lobbying for legislation which will allow the City
                                          to issue bonds to finance the development of brownfields.
                                          Said bonds to be paid off through tenant fees within the
                                          landfill improvement district(s). (Implements LU-1.2)
                                          RA/D:       Planning,   Economic        Development,     City
                                                      Manager’s Office
                                          FS:         General Fund, State and Federal Funds/Grants
                                          TF:         Ongoing, until all contaminated sites are
                                                      redeveloped
                          LU-IM-1.3:      Continue to monitor federal, state and regional programs and
                                          funding sources to include: HUD’s and EPA’s Brownfields
                                          Economic Development Initiative, the Department of
                                          Transportation’s Brownfields Revitalization Initiative, the
                                          IRS’ and Department of Treasury’s Environmental Cleanup
                                          Cost Brownfields Tax Deduction, and similar programs.
                                          (Implements LU-1.3)
Carson General Plan                              LU-17                                        Chapter 2

                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
                             RA/D:      Planning,     Economic       Development,       City
                                        Manager’s Office
                             FS:        General Fund, State and Federal Funds/Grants
                             TF:        Ongoing, until all contaminated sites are
                                        redeveloped
                 LU-IM-1.4:  City Staff shall establish a task force as projects are
                             proposed at brownfield sites, to include representatives from
                             the City and State, developer, consultant team, and if
                             necessary, county and/or federal representatives. Each task
                             force will ensure that permits are secured in a timely manner,
                             financing is in place and new sources of funding are
                             identified, environmental compliance/remediation of the site
                             is achieved, and that state and local approval processes are
                             coordinated. (Implements LU-1.4)
                             RA/D:      Planning,     Economic       Development,       City
                                        Manager’s Office
                             FS:        General Fund, State and Federal Funds/Grants
                             TF:        Ongoing, until all contaminated sites are
                                        redeveloped
                 LU-IM-1.5:  Encourage the Federal government to enact the following
                             measures:
                                Liability protection provided to innocent parties
                                 involved in brownfield redevelopment,
                                Tax incentives provided to attract potential investors to
                                 brownfield sites,
                                Increased federal program resources to assist cities with
                                 site assessment, cleanup, redevelopment, infrastructure
                                 improvements, and related needs,
                                Increased regulatory flexibility and latitude in the use of
                                 federal resources to address brownfields needs of cities,
                                 and
                                Other similar measures. (Implements LU-1.5)
                             RA/D:      Planning,     Economic       Development,       City
                                        Manager’s Office
                             FS:        General Fund, State and Federal Funds/Grants
                             TF:        Ongoing, until all contaminated sites are
                                        redeveloped
                                                                                      
          ISSUE: EFFECTIVE DEVELOPMENT OF UNDERUTILIZED PROPERTIES AND
                 REDEVELOPMENT OF THOSE PROPERTIES WHICH DETRACT FROM THE
                 COMMUNITY
Chapter 2                          LU-18                                 Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                 Abandoned buildings should be rehabilitated or removed. It is important that
                 incompatible and non-conforming uses, such as scrap yards, which detract from the
                 community be removed or relocated.
                 Goal:      LU-2:      Rehabilitation and/or removal of abandoned buildings and
                                       facilities.
                 Policies: LU-2.1      Aggressively enforce the Property Maintenance Ordinance in
                                       order to maintain properties in transition, abandoned residential,
                                       commercial and industrial buildings and properties.
                            LU-2.2     Develop an incentive rehabilitation program to complement
                                       mandatory code enforcement and property maintenance
                                       programs.
                 Implementation Measures:
                            LU-IM-2.1:     Use code enforcement to require owners of all abandoned
                                           buildings and/or structures that pose safety hazards to adhere
                                           to applicable zoning and building code standards.
                                           (Implements LU-2.1)
                                           RA/D:        Planning
                                           FS:          General Fund
                                           TF:          Ongoing
                            LU-IM-2.2:     Examine the potential to allow the City to fine those parties
                                           not in compliance with the City’s Ordinance. (Implements
                                           LU-2.1 and 2.2)
                                           RA/D:        Planning
                                           FS:          General Fund and property owner fines
                                           TF:          Ongoing
                            LU-IM-2.3:     In the incentive rehabilitation program, explore opportunities
                                           to provide low-interest loans and other incentives to assist
                                           property owners in the redevelopment and/or rehabilitation
                                           of their properties. (Implements LU-2.2)
                                           RA/D:        Planning
                                           FS:          General Fund
                                           TF:          Ongoing
Carson General Plan                                LU-19                                        Chapter 2

                                                                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
          Goal:     LU-3:      Removal of incompatible and non-conforming uses              which
                               detract from the aesthetics and safety of the community.
          Policies: LU-3.1     Continue to aggressively enforce the Non-Conforming Use
                               Ordinance in order to eliminate non-conforming and/or
                               incompatible land uses, structures and conditions.
                    LU-3.2     Through the zoning ordinance, control uses such as salvage
                               yards, automobile dismantling, and scrap metal recycling
                               operations which are not compatible with existing and
                               anticipated development.
          Implementation Measures:
                    LU-IM-3.1:     Use code enforcement to require owners of non-conforming
                                   uses to adhere to the Non-Conforming Use Ordinance.
                                   (Implements LU-3.1)
                                   RA/D:      Planning
                                   FS:        General Fund
                                   TF:        Ongoing
          Goal:     LU-4:      Implementation of the Redevelopment Plan to enhance the
                               redevelopment project areas.
          Policies: LU-4.1     Direct Redevelopment Agency investments to those economic
                               activities and locations with the greatest potential economic
                               return.
                    LU-4.2     Consider amending the boundaries of the Redevelopment Project
                               Areas to take full advantage of redevelopment tools.
                    LU-4.3     Bring the site assembly tools and marketing efforts of
                               redevelopment to bear on the revitalization of the Carson Street
                               Corridor and the Northwest Industrial Corridor, and to other
                               appropriate areas.
                    LU-4.4     Use redevelopment financing in conjunction with code
                               enforcement efforts to assist in the rehabilitation of both non-
                               residential and residential developments.
                    LU-4.5     Prioritize and coordinate redevelopment area public
                               improvements with those in the City’s Capital Improvement
                               Program.
Chapter 2                                LU-20                                 Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                 Implementation Measure:
                             LU-IM-4.1:      Require a fiscal impact analysis for all new commercial and
                                             industrial projects in excess of ten acres to ensure that
                                             governmental service costs are covered by anticipated
                                             project revenues or that a finding of special circumstance is
                                             applied. (Implements LU-4.1 through 4.5)
                                             RA/D:       Planning
                                             FS:         Developer
                                             TF:         Ongoing
                                                                                                       
                 ISSUE:      EXPANSION OF THE COMMERCIAL BASE
                 Commercial opportunities lacking in the City should be sought, including quality
                 restaurants and retail and commercial recreation choices.
                 Goal:       LU-5:       Maximize the City’s market potential in order to enhance and
                                         retain shopping and entertainment opportunities to serve the
                                         population, increase revenues to the City, and provide new
                                         employment opportunities.
                 Policies: LU-5.1        Coordinate Redevelopment and Planning activities and resources
                                         to maximize commercial opportunities.
                             LU-5.2      Implement and expand strategies to market, attract, and/or retain
                                         retail commercial areas and encourage businesses to participate.
                             LU-5.3      Identify unique economic opportunities, such as niche markets,
                                         that will allow the City to capitalize on its location, its cultural
                                         diversity, and the tourism industry in the region.
                             LU-5.5      Utilize redevelopment planning and the City’s Capital
                                         Improvement Program to improve infrastructure and streetscapes
                                         throughout the City and redevelopment project areas.
                             LU-5.6      Provide rehabilitation assistance in targeted commercial districts
                                         to enable the upgrading of commercial properties.
                             See also the Goals and Policies in the Economic Development Element.
Carson General Plan                                 LU-21                                           Chapter 2

                                                                               LAND USE ELEMENT
          Implementation Measures:
                   LU-IM-5.1:   Develop strategies to focus development in targeted areas,
                                i.e., Carson Street, 223rd Street Corridor, Cal Compact Site
                                (157-acre landfill), and other important areas within the City.
                                These strategies should, at a minimum address: the amount
                                and location of land designated for such uses, target areas,
                                and tools necessary to implement such strategies.
                                (Implements LU-5.1 and 5.2)
                                RA/D:       Planning, Economic Development
                                FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                TF:         Ongoing
                   LU-IM-5.2:   Periodically evaluate which retail categories are
                                experiencing leakage. And approach existing retailers within
                                these categories (specifically the higher-scale restaurants and
                                retailer) and encourage their relocation to, or expansion in,
                                Carson. (Implements LU-5.1 through 5.4)
                                RA/D:       Planning, Economic Development
                                FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                TF:         Ongoing
                   LU-IM-5.3:   Encourage higher-scale restaurants to locate in clusters in
                                areas targeted for specialty retail. (Implements LU-5.1
                                through 5.4)
                                RA/D:       Planning, Economic Development
                                FS:         General Fund
                                TF:         Ongoing
                   LU-IM-5.4:   Monitor development of “catalyst” land uses (e.g., hotels,
                                regional office space, etc.) to identify “follow-on”
                                development opportunities for related land uses (e.g.,
                                entertainment and recreation facilities to serve hotel guests
                                and business hotels to serve office users). (Implements LU-
                                5.1 through 5.4)
                                RA/D:       Planning, Economic Development
                                FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                TF:         Ongoing
                   LU-IM-5.5:   Continue to coordinate with the Chambers of Commerce,
                                Los Angeles County economic development groups, and
                                other business associations to retain and attract businesses.
                                (Implements LU- 5.1 through 5.4)
                                RA/D: Economic Development
                                FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                TF:         Ongoing
Chapter 2                              LU-22                                Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                            LU-IM-5.6:      Encourage support services as part of industrial/ commercial
                                            development (i.e., child care, convenience shopping,
                                            personal services, restaurants, etc.). (Implements LU-5.1, 5.2
                                            and 5.4)
                                            RA/D:      Planning, Economic Development
                                            FS:        General Fund, Development Fees
                                            TF:        Ongoing
                            LU-IM-5.7:      Use redevelopment tools to assemble land, assist
                                            development and provide for on-going area improvement.
                                            (Implements LU-5.1 through 5.6)
                                            RA/D:      Economic Development
                                            FS:        Redevelopment Fees
                                            TF:        Ongoing
                            LU-IM-5.8:      Encourage specialty retail development to concentrate in
                                            targeted areas of the City to enable “critical mass” thresholds
                                            of such uses to be established. (Implements LU-5.2 through
                                            5.4)
                                            RA/D:      Planning, Economic Development
                                            FS:        General Fund
                                            TF:        Ongoing
                            LU-IM-5.9:      Target, through the Capital Improvement Program, those
                                            areas and/or structures in most need of improvement,
                                            focusing on targeted redevelopment project areas.
                                            (Implements LU-5.5 and 5.6)
                                            RA/D:      Planning, Economic Development
                                            FS:        General Fund, Redevelopment funds
                                            TF:        Ongoing
                            LU-IM-5.10:     Provide informational material to the owners of properties in
                                            targeted commercial areas identifying the types of assistance
                                            available and work with them in the upgrading of their
                                            properties. (Implements LU- 5.6)
                                            RA/D:      Planning, Economic Development
                                            FS:        General Fund, Redevelopment funds
                                            TF:        Ongoing
                                                                                                     
                 ISSUE:     A BALANCE OF USES
                 A land use plan which provides a balance of residential, commercial, industrial,
                 educational, recreational and civic facilities which meet the needs of the citizens of
                 Carson.
Carson General Plan                               LU-23                                            Chapter 2

                                                                               LAND USE ELEMENT
          Goal:     LU-6:  A sustainable balance of residential and non-residential
                           development and a balance of traffic circulation throughout the
                           City.
          Policies: LU-6.1 Monitor development trends in Carson to ensure that future
                           development/redevelopment provides for the needs of the
                           community.
                    LU-6.2 Achieve a sustainable land use balance through provision of
                           incentives for desired uses; coordination of land use and
                           circulation patterns; and promotion of a variety of housing types
                           and affordability.
                    LU-6.3 Consider establishing minimum land use density requirements in
                           certain areas such as mixed use zones to provide more efficient,
                           consistent, and compatible development patterns while also
                           promoting greater potential for pedestrian and transit-oriented
                           development.
                    LU-6.4 Coordinate redevelopment and planning activities and resources
                           to balance land uses, amenities, and civic facilities.
                    LU-6.5 Coordinate strategies with the County, Southern California
                           Association of Governments (SCAG), South Bay Cities Council
                           of Governments (SBCCG), and other appropriate agencies
                           and/or organizations to meet housing and employment needs.
                    LU-6.6 Attract land uses that generate revenue to the City of Carson,
                           while maintaining a balance of other community needs such as
                           housing, open space, and public facilities.
                    LU-6.7 Implement and monitor the development intensities identified
                           earlier in this Element. Periodically review these intensities and
                           densities based on market demand and other conditions to
                           confirm their appropriateness.
                    LU-6.8 Manage truck-intensive uses.
Chapter 2                             LU-24                                Carson General Plan
LAND USE ELEMENT
                 Implementation Measures:
                          LU-IM-6.1:   Review the General Plan and Land Use Map to identify the
                                       effect of land development and uses in the community on
                                       City revenue and costs of providing public facilities and
                                       services. (Implements LU-6.1, 6.4, 6.6, 6.7, and 6.8)
                                       RA/D:      Planning
                                       FS:        General Fund
                                       TF:        Annually
                          LU-IM-6.2:   Provide incentives for desired commercial and industrial
                                       uses. (Implements LU-6.1, 6.2 and 6.6)
                                       RA/D:      Planning, Economic Development
                                       FS:        General Fund
                                       TF:        Ongoing
                          LU-IM-6.3:   Coordinate land use and circulation patterns to ensure proper
                                       circulation capacity and infrastructure. (Implements LU-6.1,
                                       6.2, and 6.8)
                                       RA/D:      Planning, Public Works
                                       FS:        General Fund
                                       TF:        Ongoing
                          LU-IM-6.4:   Promote a variety of housing types and affordability to meets
                                       the development goals of the Housing Element, and provide
                                       needed housing opportunities to support employment
                                       growth. (Implements LU-6.1, 6.2, and 6.5)
                                       RA/D:      Planning
                                       FS:        General Fund
                                       TF:        Ongoing
                          LU-IM-6.5:   Periodically review the General Plan intensities and densities
                                       of development. This review should examine market demand
                                       and other conditions to confirm the appropriateness of these
                                       densities and intensities. When necessary, establish
                                       minimum land use density requirements. (Implements LU-
                                       6.1, 6.3, and 6.6 through 6.8)
                                       RA/D:      Planning, Economic Development
                                       FS:        General Fund
                                       TF:        Annually, or as necessary on a project-by-project
                                                  basis
                          LU-IM-6.6:   Conduct systematic monitoring of the impact and intensity
                                       of development in Carson and areas around the City to
                                       ensure that affected public agencies can provide necessary
Carson General Plan                          LU-25                                           Chapter 2
                                                                                    LAND USE ELEMENT
                                      facilities and services in support of that development.
                                      (Implements LU-6.1, 6.4, 6.6, and 6.8)
                                      RA/D:       Planning, Public Works
                                      FS:         General Fund, Development fees
                      LU-IM-6.7:      Review carefully any zone change and/or General Plan
                                      Amendment to permit development or modify intensity.
                                      Factors to be considered include, but are not limited to: the
                                      maximum intensity allowed pursuant to the General Plan;
                                      circulation patterns; environmental constraints; and
                                      compatibility with surrounding land uses. (Implements LU-
                                      6.7 and 6.8)
                                      RA/D:       Planning
                                      FS:         General Fund
                                      TF:         Ongoing on a project-by-project basis
                      LU-IM-6.8:      Analyze the Zoning Ordinance for truck-intensive uses,
                                      determine how such uses may impact other land uses, traffic,
                                      and truck routes, and make changes as necessary to the uses
                                      permitted and the review processes required. Such changes
                                      shall include a jobs and fiscal impact report to determine
                                      affects of the proposed changes to uses permitted and review
                                      process required. (Implements LU-6.8)
                                      RA/D:       Planning
                                      FS:         General Fund
                                      TF:         2003-05
                                                                                              
          ISSUE:      INCOMPATIBLE LAND USES
          Incompatible land uses immediately adjacent to one another, such as residential and
          industrial uses, may significantly hinder the health of a community. Uses should be
          appropriately buffered or incompatibilities addressed through redesignation of uses in
          the area.
          Goal:       LU-7:       Adjacent land uses that are compatible with one another.
          Policies: LU-7.1        Periodically review, and amend if necessary, the City’s Zoning
                                  Ordinance to ensure the compatibility of uses allowed within
                                  each zoning district.
                      LU-7.2      Locate truck intensive uses in areas where the location and
                                  circulation pattern will provide minimal impacts on residential
                                  and commercial uses.
                      LU-7.3      Promote the use of buffers between more intensive industrial
                                  uses and residential uses.
Chapter 2                                    LU-26                               Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                          LU-7.4     Through the discretionary review process, ensure that the siting
                                     of any land use which handles, generates, and/or transports
                                     hazardous substances will not negatively impact existing
                                     sensitive receptor land uses.
                          LU-7.5     Monitor existing uses, and carefully review all new proposals to
                                     expand intensive commercial and industrial uses.
                          LU-7.6     Coordinate with adjacent landowners, cities and the County in
                                     developing compatible land uses for areas adjacent to the City’s
                                     boundaries.
                          LU-7.7     Coordinate with California State University at Dominguez Hills
                                     in the planning of its property to ensure compatible land uses.
                 Implementation Measures:
                          LU-IM-7.1:      Amend the Zoning Ordinance to accommodate the Office
                                          Park, Business Park, Mixed Use, General Open Space, and
                                          Recreational Open Space land use designations. And amend
                                          the Zoning Map to be consistent with the adopted General
                                          Plan Map. In addition, review and amend the Zoning
                                          Ordinance to: clarify permitted and conditionally permitted
                                          uses in all districts (i.e., churches and other uses); and to
                                          address non-conforming uses. (Implements LU-7.1)
                                          RA/D:       Planning
                                          FS:         General Fund
                                          TF:         Within one year
                          LU-IM-7.2:      Establish zoning standards that properly designate uses
                                          appropriate for Office Park, Business Park, Light Industrial
                                          and Heavy Industrial areas. (Implements LU-7.1)
                                          RA/D:       Planning
                                          FS:         General Fund
                                          TF:         Within one year, and periodically updated
                          LU-IM-7.3:      Where a discretionary review may be required, address
                                          compatibility issues (e.g., maneuverability of trucks on site,
                                          scheduling and hours of operation, visual screening, noise,
                                          etc.). (Implements LU-7.2)
                                          RA/D:       Planning
                                          FS:         Development
                                          TF:         Ongoing
                          LU-IM-7.4:      Review and amend, as necessary, the Zoning Ordinance to
                                          provide consistency with new State legislation and court
                                          decisions. (Implements LU-7.1 and 7.2)
Carson General Plan                              LU-27                                          Chapter 2

                                                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
                     RA/D:      Planning
                     FS:        General Fund
                     TF:        Annually
          LU-IM-7.5: Review and amend, as necessary, the City’s Subdivision
                     Ordinance to provide consistency with new State legislation
                     and court decisions, and to make other desired changes to
                     provisions of the ordinance. (Implements LU-7.1 and 7.2)
                     RA/D:      Planning, Public Works
                     FS:        General Fund
                     TF:        Annually
          LU-IM-7.6: Use buffers such as the Business Park land use designation
                     and the Commercial Uses/Industrial Buffer symbol between
                     more intensive industrial uses and residential uses. Require
                     that commercial and industrial development which adjoins
                     residential uses be adequately screened and buffered from
                     the residential neighborhood(s). (Implements LU-7.4 and
                     7.6)
                     RA/D:      Planning
                     FS:        General Fund and Development Fees
                     TF:        Annually
          LU-IM-7.7: Utilize the site development permit process and the
                     California Environmental Quality act in the review of
                     proposed development projects to promote compatibility and
                     minimize environmental impacts. Where uses are marginally
                     compatible, require a Conditional Use Permit and consider
                     special mitigation measures. (Implements LU-7.3 through
                     7.8)
Chapter 2                  LU-28                               Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                RA/D:      Planning
                                                FS:        Development Fees
                                                TF:        Ongoing
                              LU-IM-7.8:        Continue to enforce the Zoning and other ordinances to
                                                achieve the desired level of regulation. (Implements LU- 7.3
                                                through 7.8)
                                                RA/D:      Planning
                                                FS:        General Fund
                                                TF:        Ongoing
                              LU-IM-7.9:        Develop landscape requirements for public and private
                                                development projects to promote greater visual and
                                                functional compatibility with residential development.
                                                (Implements LU-7.4 and 7.6)
                                                RA/D:      Planning
                                                FS:        General Fund
                                                TF:        Within two years
                                                                                                      
                 ISSUE:       MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS
                 There is a need for mixed use developments which provide a variety of uses, including
                 residential, retail, office, limited industrial, and recreational. Such projects should
                 provide an integrated development theme, quality design, easy access to public
                 transportation, and a safe environment.
                 Goal:        LU-8:        Promote mixed use development where appropriate.
                 Policies: LU-8.1          Amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide for those Mixed Use
                                           areas identified on the General Plan Land Use Plan.
                              LU-8.2       Continue to monitor the success of mixed use projects within the
                                           Carson Street mixed use corridor and promote mixed use
                                           projects at appropriate sites within this area.
                              LU-8.3       Locate higher density residential uses in proximity to
                                           commercial centers in order to encourage pedestrian traffic and
                                           provide a consumer base for commercial uses.
                 Implementation Measures:
                              LU-IM-8.1:        Amend the Zoning ordinance to include those Mixed Use
                                                areas identified on the General Plan Land Use plan,
                                                specifically:
                                                   The area formerly occupied by Cal Compact (157-acre
                                                    landfill), along the 405 Freeway; uses to be permitted
Carson General Plan                                   LU-29                                         Chapter 2

                                                                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
                                        include a mix of High Density Residential, General
                                        Commercial and Regional Commercial.
                                       The Carson Street Corridor between Avalon Boulevard
                                        and the western City Limits; uses to be permitted include
                                        a mix of General Commercial, and Medium and High
                                        Density Residential.
                                       The area formerly occupied by the Samerika Hall
                                        northwest of the intersection of Avalon Boulevard and
                                        223rd Street; uses to be permitted include a mix of
                                        General Commercial, and Low, Medium and/or High
                                        Density Residential.
                                       The South Bay Pavilion site; uses to be permitted
                                        include Regional Commercial and Medium and High
                                        Density Residential.
                                    (Implements LU-8.1 through 8.3)
                                    RA/D:      Planning
                                    FS:        General Fund
                                    TF:        Within one year
                                                                                            
          ISSUE:     PROPERTY ENHANCEMENT
          Property maintenance is important in Carson. In both residential neighborhoods and
          non-residential areas, focus should be placed on property maintenance and
          improvement.
          Goal:      LU-9:      Eliminate all evidence of property deterioration throughout
                                Carson.
          Policies: LU-9.1      Aggressively enforce the City’s codes.
                     LU-9.2     Develop incentive programs for the improved appearance of
                                residential, commercial and industrial areas.
                     LU-9.3     Continue to promote and expand programs such as the Carson
                                Beautiful Program which recognize excellence in property
                                upkeep in residential areas.
                     LU-9.4     Continue to promote programs which offer loans and grants for
                                home repairs.
                     LU-9.5     Develop design standards to address permanent and effective
                                screening of areas in transition and heavy industrial uses such as
                                outdoor storage yards, pallet yards, salvage yards, auto
                                dismantling yards, and similar uses.
Chapter 2                                 LU-30                               Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                          LU-9.6     Continue to maintain graffiti suppression and removal programs.
                          LU-9.7     Maintain and upgrade the City’s parks, eliminating evidence of
                                     vandalism, wear and deterioration.
                          LU-9.8     Maintain City properties in compliance with applicable
                                     regulations and adhere to design and maintenance standards as a
                                     model for private development.
                 Implementation Measures:
                          LU-IM-9.1:     Strengthen the City’s code enforcement program. To this
                                         end, conduct windshield surveys in order to identify zoning
                                         and code enforcement infractions on all times of day and
                                         days of the week. Also, consider the development of a
                                         program by which fines are imposed if properties are
                                         repeatedly not maintained. (Implements LU-9.1)
                                         RA/D:       Planning
                                         FS:         General Fund
                                         TF:         Ongoing
                          LU-IM-9.2:     Develop firm and fair code enforcement policies understood
                                         and supported by residents and business owners.
                                         (Implements LU-9.1)
                                         RA/D:       Planning
                                         FS:         General Fund
                                         TF:         Ongoing
                          LU-IM-9.3:     Adopt a property maintenance ordinance. (Implements LU-
                                         9.1)
                                         RA/D:       Planning
                                         FS:         General Fund
                                         TF:         Within two years
                          LU-IM-9.4:     Implement the housing rehabilitation policies adopted in the
                                         Carson Housing Element. (Implements LU-9.1 through 9.4)
                                         RA/D: Planning
                                         FS:         General Fund
                                         TF:         Ongoing
                          LU-IM-9.5:     In areas where deferred maintenance is visible, assist with:
                                             Maintenance loans or grants,
                                             Rehabilitation loans or grants,
                                             Tool banks, and/or
                                             Instructional programs in property maintenance skills
                                              and techniques. (Implements LU-9.2 and 9.4)
Carson General Plan                             LU-31                                         Chapter 2

                                                                                LAND USE ELEMENT
                                   RA/D:      Planning
                                   FS:        General Fund, State and Federal monies
                                   TF:        Ongoing
                     LU-IM-9.6:    Support and expand public programs, such as Neighborhood
                                   Pride and the Homes and Gardens Improvement Programs.
                                   To this end, publicize the loans and grants available, as well
                                   as the achievements of neighborhoods and non-residential
                                   areas which have improved maintenance and appearance.
                                   (Implements LU-9.2 through 9.4)
                                   RA/D:      Planning, Public Information, Public Services
                                   FS:        General Fund, State and Federal monies
                                   TF:        Ongoing
                     LU-IM-9.7:    Develop a design and improvement plan based on the City
                                   Capital Improvement Plan including strengthened
                                   landscaping, identification graphics, and other physical
                                   improvements to enhance major public thoroughfares and
                                   activity areas. (Implements LU-9.3)
                                   RA/D:      Planning, Public Works
                                   FS:        General Fund
                                   TF:        Within two years, and annually updated with
                                              budget process
                     LU-IM-9.8:    Review and amend the City’s Zoning Ordinance to include
                                   the screening and landscaping of commercial and/or
                                   industrial properties which have been abandoned.
                                   (Implements LU-9.5)
                                   RA/D:      Planning
                                   FS:        General Fund and Development Fees
                                   TF:        Within two years
                     LU-IM-9.9:    Review and amend the City’s Zoning Ordinance to address
                                   the permanent and effective screening of heavy industrial
                                   uses such as outdoor storage yards, pallet yards, salvage
                                   yards, auto dismantling yards, and similar uses. (Implements
                                   LU-9.5)
                                   RA/D:      Planning
                                   FS:        General Fund and Development Fees
                                   TF:        Within two years
                                                                                           
          ISSUE:     ALAMEDA CORRIDOR
          While there are distinct advantages to the Alameda Corridor, there are also
          disadvantages. Traffic, noise and economic impacts to businesses and residential
          neighborhoods immediately adjacent are among the primary issues.
Chapter 2                                LU-32                               Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                 Goal:        LU-10:      Development along the Alameda Corridor which is beneficial to
                                          residents, property owners, businesses, and the City.
                 Policies: LU-10.1        Continue to work with regional and State agencies to ensure
                                          adequate transportation facilities along the Corridor to serve the
                                          adjacent areas.
                              LU-10.2     Work with the existing applicable task forces and prepare a
                                          special study for those areas adversely impacted by the
                                          development of the Corridor.
                              LU-10.3     Promote the benefits of the Alameda Corridor to businesses and
                                          industries considering relocating to Carson.
                 Implementation Measures:
                              LU-IM-10.1:     Prepare a special study for those area(s) adversely impacted
                                              by the development of the Corridor, specifically that area
                                              east of the Alameda Corridor, between Dominguez Street
                                              and the southern boundary of the City. Provide appropriate
                                              mitigation for the impacts associated with the Corridor on
                                              the neighborhood. (Implements LU-10.2)
                                              RA/D:      Planning
                                              FS:        General Fund
                                              TF:        Within two years
                              See also LU-IM-85.
                              LU-IM-10.2:     Develop a program which specifically identifies and markets
                                              the benefits of the Alameda Corridor within the City of
                                              Carson. (Implements LU-10.3)
                                              RA/D: Economic Development, Development Services
                                              FS:        General Fund
                                              TF:        Within two years
                                                                                                      
                 ISSUE:       DEVELOPMENT OF A “SIGNATURE PROJECT”
                 It is important to develop a focal point within the community, such as a “Main Street”
                 along the Carson Street Corridor or a “Signature Project” along the I-405 Freeway.
                 Quality retail and restaurant uses, as well as entertainment uses such as movie theaters,
                 performing arts center, or other commercial recreational uses would locate in such an
                 area. It would be an area serving the entire region, for which the City would become
                 known.
                 Goal:        LU-11:      Development of one or more “Signature Project” to create a
                                          focal point or points for the City.
Carson General Plan                                 LU-33                                          Chapter 2

                                                                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
          Policies: LU-11.1        Target potential sites or areas for the development of signature
                                   projects.
                       LU-11.2     Encourage development of desired uses such as quality retail,
                                   restaurant uses, and entertainment in targeted areas.
                       See also the Goals and Policies in the Economic Development Element.
          Implementation Measures:
                       LU-IM-11.1:     Determine which sites or areas would be most appropriate
                                       for a “Signature Project” in Carson. Pursue development at
                                       these site(s) or area(s) which would support the purpose of
                                       creating such a project. Sites for consideration include, but
                                       are not limited to: Carson Street and the site formerly
                                       occupied by Cal Compact (157-acre landfill). (Implements
                                       LU-11.1)
                                       RA/D:      Planning, Economic Development
                                       FS:        General Fund
                                       TF:        Within two years
                       LU-IM-11.2:     Determine what type of facilities/uses would be desirable in
                                       a “Signature Project.” This determination should be based on
                                       market considerations as well as community support.
                                       (Implements LU-11.2)
                                       RA/D:      Planning, Economic Development
                                       FS:        General Fund
                                       TF:        Within two years
                       LU-IM-11.3:     Consider offering public incentives, such as assistance in the
                                       assembly of land, to promote the development of a project.
                                       (Implements LU-11.1)
                                       RA/D:      Planning, Economic Development
                                       FS:        General Fund, Redevelopment Funds
                                       TF:        As needed
                                                                                                
          ISSUE:       CITY IMAGE
          There are a number of unattractive and/or nonconforming land uses located along highly
          visible freeway corridors which impact the public’s perception of the community. Many
          of these properties are located in areas which can be considered “gateways” into the
          City. Appropriate screening, landscaping and buffering should be encouraged in order to
          improve the City’s image. In addition, entries into the City and key streets should be
          enhanced with landscaping and entry statements as appropriate.
          Goal:        LU-12:      Create a visually attractive appearance throughout Carson.
Chapter 2                                    LU-34                                 Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                 Policies: LU-12.1   Develop and implement a Citywide Urban Design Plan.
                           LU-12.2   Adopt a “Carson Green” program to encourage public/private
                                     partnerships in the landscaping of the community.
                           LU-12.3   Review landscape plans for new development to ensure that
                                     landscaping relates well to the proposed land use, the scale of
                                     structures, and the surrounding area.
                           LU-12.4   Amend the landscaping requirements in the Zoning Ordinance to
                                     enhance the appearance of the community and to provide for the
                                     use of trees to provide shade.
                           LU-12.5   Improve City appearance by requiring landscaping to screen,
                                     buffer and unify new and existing development. Mandate
                                     continued upkeep of landscaped areas.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           LU-IM-12.1:   Develop a Citywide Urban Design Plan which addresses:
                                             Site planning and design,
                                             Architectural design guidelines,
                                             Landscape programs,
                                             Entries into the city,
                                             View corridors such as the I-405 and I-110 Corridors,
                                             Streetscape programs (to include street furnishings,
                                              lighting, walls and fencing, monumentation),
                                             Design guidelines appropriate for each area of the City,
                                             Financing, and
                                             Priorities. (Implements LU-12.1)
                                         RA/D:       Planning
                                         FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                         TF:         Within three years
                           LU-IM-12.2:   Provide economically feasible          Urban   Design     Plan
                                         implementation strategies by:
                                             Establishing public/private partnerships,
                                             Researching funding sources, and
                                             Prioritizing design projects to be scheduled within the
                                              City’s Capital Improvement Program. (Implements LU-
                                              12.1)
                                         RA/D:       Planning
                                         FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                         TF:         Ongoing
Carson General Plan                             LU-35                                          Chapter 2

                                                                    LAND USE ELEMENT
          LU-IM-12.3: Foster neighborhood       participation    in   the  program.
                      (Implements LU-12.2)
                      RA/D:      Planning, Public Information, Public Services
                      FS:        General Fund
                      TF:        Ongoing
          LU-IM-12.4: Encourage business organizations to support and participate
                      in the program. (Implements LU-12.2)
                      RA/D:      Planning, Public Information, Public Services
                      FS:        General Fund
                      TF:        Ongoing
          LU-IM-12.5: Collaborate with the School District and local civic
                      organizations to celebrate Arbor Day by planting trees on
                      public lands. (Implements LU-12.2)
                      RA/D:      Planning, Public Information, Public Services
                      FS:        General Fund
                      TF:        Ongoing
          LU-IM-12.6: Require new development to incorporate street tree planting
                      mature enough to shade and beautify the area. (Implements
                      LU-12.3)
                      RA/D: Planning
                      FS:        Development
                      TF:        Ongoing
          LU-IM-12.7: Require new development processed as a Planned Unit
                      Development to ensure permanent maintenance of
                      landscaped areas through maintenance agreements,
                      “Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions”, or similar
                      contracts guaranteeing perennial maintenance. (Implements
                      LU-12.3 and 12.5)
                      RA/D:      Planning
                      FS:        Development
                      TF:        Ongoing
          LU-IM-12.8: Address tree preservation and the removal and replacement
                      of mature trees in the landscape section(s) of the City’s
                      Ordinance. (Implements LU-12.4)
                      RA/D:      Planning
                      FS:        General Fund
                      TF:        Within three years
          LU-IM-12.9: Enhance landscaping requirements and maintenance
                      standards in the landscape section(s) of the City’s Ordinance.
                      (Implements LU-12.4)
Chapter 2                   LU-36                                 Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                                          RA/D:       Planning
                                          FS:         General Fund
                                          TF:         Within three years
                           LU-IM-12.10: Encourage drought tolerant plant species, water conservation
                                          and related features in the landscape section(s) of the City’s
                                          Ordinance. (Implements LU-12.4)
                                          RA/D:       Planning
                                          FS:         General Fund
                                          TF:         Within three years
                           LU-IM-12.11: Require exposed structural sidewalls to be screened with
                                          landscaping. (Implements LU-12.5)
                                          RA/D:       Planning
                                          FS:         Development
                                          TF:         Ongoing
                           LU-IM-12.12: Require landscaping to provide visual continuity along a
                                          street, even where the buildings are in different zones or land
                                          use districts. (Implements LU-12.5)
                                          RA/D: Planning
                                          FS:         Development
                                          TF:         Ongoing
                           LU-IM-12.13: When conflicting land uses adjoin, require a dense landscape
                                          screen to mitigate the friction between land uses.
                                          (Implements LU-12.5)
                                          RA/D:       Planning
                                          FS:         Development
                                          TF:         Ongoing
                 Goal:     LU-13:    Encourage interesting and attractive streetscapes throughout
                                     Carson.
                 Policies: LU-13.1   Promote a rhythmic and ceremonial streetscape along the City’s
                                     arterial roadways, continuing the use of landscaped medians.
                           LU-13.2   Develop a street tree planting and replacement program for the
                                     City’s arterial roadways.
                           LU-13.3   Continue and, when possible, accelerate the undergrounding of
                                     utility lines throughout the City.
                           LU-13.4   Encourage architectural variation of building and parking
                                     setbacks along the streetscape to create visual interest, avoid
                                     monotony and enhance the identity of individual areas.
                                     Encourage pedestrian orientation by appropriate placement of
                                     buildings.
Carson General Plan                              LU-37                                          Chapter 2

                                                                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
                   LU-13.5   Continue to require landscaping treatment along any part of a
                             building site which is visible from City streets.
                   LU-13.6   Consider the use of contrasting paving for pedestrian crosswalks
                             to add visual interest to the streetscape and create pedestrian
                             amenity.
                   LU-13.7   Ensure proper maintenance of parkways along arterial streets and
                             landscaping of private property visible from the public right-of-
                             way.
          Implementation Measures:
                   LU-IM-13.1:   Examine the potential of extending special median
                                 treatments along the entire lengths of important arterials and
                                 prioritize these treatments. (Implements LU-13.1)
                                 RA/D:       Planning, Public Works
                                 FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                 TF:         Ongoing
                   LU-IM-13.2:   Encourage new developments along arterials scheduled for
                                 median extension to provide landscaped medians adjacent to
                                 the development. (Implements LU-13.1)
                                 RA/D:       Planning, Public Works
                                 FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                 TF:         Ongoing
                   LU-IM-13.3:   Require a comprehensive landscape and streetscape program
                                 to be developed for critical corridors such as Carson Street,
                                 Main Street, Avalon Boulevard, and Wilmington Avenue
                                 (with these corridors given priority). The program should
                                 include guidelines for banners, signage, landscaping,
                                 lighting, and street furniture. In addition, consideration
                                 should be given to: the incorporation of gardens and
                                 landscape areas in both public and private developments;
                                 pedestrian orientation; and public transit opportunities.
                                 (Implements LU-13.2)
                                 RA/D:       Planning, Public Works
                                 FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                 TF:         Within three years
                   LU-IM-13.4:   Examine the potential to develop the following in an effort
                                 to facilitate the beautification of important corridors:
                                     Benefit Assessment District,
                                     Lighting and Maintenance Assessment District,
                                     Parking District,
Chapter 2                              LU-38                                  Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            Business Association,
                                            Street Overlay District, and
                                            Merchant’s Association. (Implements LU-13.2)
                                         RA/D:       Planning, Public Works
                                         FS:         General Fund, Fees
                                         TF:         Within three years
                           LU-IM-13.5:   Continue to require the undergrounding of utilities through
                                         the City’s standard list of conditions. (Implements LU-13.3)
                                         RA/D: Planning
                                         FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                         TF:         Ongoing
                           LU-IM-13.6:   Continue to pursue funding sources for the undergrounding
                                         of utilities throughout the City. (Implements LU-13.3)
                                         RA/D:       Planning
                                         FS:         General Fund, other funding sources
                                         TF:         Ongoing
                           LU-IM-13.7:   Require electrical vaults which are placed above ground to
                                         be aesthetically screened. (Implements LU-13.3)
                                         RA/D:       Planning
                                         FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                         TF:         Ongoing
                           LU-IM-13.8:   Require that all sides of a building visible from City streets
                                         display fully finished architectural detail, including: finished
                                         doors, and windows and exterior surfaces identical to, or
                                         which complement, the front of the building. (Implements
                                         LU-13.4)
                                         RA/D:       Planning
                                         FS:         Development
                                         TF:         Ongoing
                 Goal:     LU-14:    Enhance freeway corridors and major arterials which act as
                                     gateways into the City of Carson.
                 Policies: LU-14.1   Work with Caltrans to provide and maintain an attractive
                                     freeway environment in Carson, including access ramps.
                           LU-14.2   Require new commercial or industrial development adjacent to
                                     and visible from freeways and freeway ramps to incorporate full
                                     architectural and landscape treatment of the building on the
                                     freeway side.
                           LU-14.3   Seek all available funds and consider using redevelopment funds
                                     to enhance freeway portals into the City.
Carson General Plan                            LU-39                                            Chapter 2

                                                                               LAND USE ELEMENT
                   LU-14.4   Provide entry markers with landscaping on the major arterials.
          Implementation Measures:
                   LU-IM-14.1:  Provide and properly maintain           appropriate    freeway
                                landscaping. (Implements LU-14.1)
                                RA/D:       Caltrans with cooperation of Planning, Public
                                            Works
                                FS:         State and Federal monies, General Fund
                                TF:         2003-05
                   LU-IM-14.2:  Enhance the landscaping near freeway on- and off-ramps to
                                announce the driver’s entry into Carson. (Implements LU-
                                14.1)
                                RA/D:       Planning, Public Works
                                FS:         General Fund, state and federal monies
                                TF:         Ongoing
                   LU-IM-14.3:  Improve the surfaces of freeway structures visible to
                                travelers with scoring, tile, landscaping, or other treatments
                                to improve the raw, unfinished appearance of these
                                structures. (Implements LU-14.1)
                                RA/D:       Caltrans with cooperation of Planning, Public
                                            Works
                                FS:         State and Federal monies, General Fund
                                TF:         Ongoing
                   LU-IM-14.4:  Require the design of new buildings visible from the freeway
                                and its ramps to include:
                                    Variation in plane and texture sufficient to prevent
                                     monotonous or massive appearance from the freeway,
                                    Adequate landscaping on all parts of the site visible from
                                     the freeway,
                                    Architectural accent through use of trim materials,
                                     accent color, pop-out and recessed relief features,
                                    Fully finished window details, and
                                    Concealment of mechanical equipment on the roof.
                                     (Implements LU-14.2)
                                RA/D:       Planning
                                FS:         Development
                                TF:         Ongoing
                   LU-IM-14.5:  Design and fund attractive entry markers and areas for the
                                major arterials.
Chapter 2                              LU-40                                Carson General Plan

LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              RA/D:      Planning, Engineering
                                              FS:        General Fund, Gas Tax, grant funds
                                              TF:        2003-05
                                                                                                     
                 ISSUE:      LIVABLE COMMUNITIES
                 As part of a nationwide effort to address urban sprawl, neighborhood safety, pedestrian
                 access and environmental protection, the South Bay Cities Council of Governments,
                 which the City of Carson is a part, has developed a program which identifies planning
                 concepts to be used creating Livable Communities.
                 Goal:       LU-15:      Promote development in Carson which reflects the “Livable
                                         Communities” concepts.
                 Policies: LU-15.1       Encourage the location of housing, jobs, shopping, services and
                                         other activities within easy walking distance of each other.
                             LU-15.2     Maintain a diversity of housing types to enable citizens from a
                                         wide range of economic levels and age groups to live in Carson.
                             LU-15.3     Ensure that community transportation facilities are connected to
                                         a larger transit network.
                             LU-15.4     Develop a center focus within the community that combines
                                         commercial, civic, cultural and recreational uses.
                             LU-15.5     Ensure that the design of public spaces encourages the attention
                                         and presence of people at all hours of the day and night.
                             LU-15.6     Ensure development of pedestrian-oriented improvements which
                                         provide better connections between and within all developments
                                         while reducing dependence on vehicle travel.
                             LU-15.7     Provide for the efficient use of water through the use of natural
                                         drainage, drought tolerant landscaping, and use of reclaimed
                                         water, efficient appliances and water conserving plumbing
                                         fixtures.
                             LU-15.8     Ensure that the street orientation, placement of buildings and the
                                         use of shading in existing and new developments contribute to
                                         the energy efficiency of the community.
                 Implementation Measures:
                             LU-IM-15.1:      Locate as many activities as possible within easy walking
                                              distance of transit stops. (Implements LU-15.1)
Carson General Plan                                 LU-41                                          Chapter 2

                                                                         LAND USE ELEMENT
                           RA/D:      Planning, Public Works
                           FS:        General Fund
                           TF:        Ongoing
          LU-IM-15.2:      Promote a variety of housing types and affordability to meets
                           the development goals of the Housing Element, and provide
                           needed housing opportunities to support employment
                           growth. (Implements LU-15.2)
                           RA/D:      Planning
                           FS:        General Fund
                           TF:        Ongoing
          LU-IM-15.3:      Continue to work with the appropriate regional agencies to
                           develop the regional transportation network, careful to retain
                           the character of the City. (Implements LU-15.3)
                           RA/D:      Planning
                           FS:        General Fund
                           TF:        Ongoing
          Please refer to LU-IM-15.1 through LU-IM-15.3 for implementation relating
          to Policy LU-15.6.
          LU-IM-15.4:      Review projects to ensure an ample supply of specialized
                           open space in the form of squares, greens and parks whose
                           frequent use is encouraged through placement and design.
                           (Implements LU-15.7)
                           RA/D:      Planning, Parks and Recreation
                           FS:        Development
                           TF:        Ongoing
          LU-IM-15.5:      Require streets design to include: promotion of pedestrian
                           and bicycle use, creation of attractive and pedestrian friendly
                           areas through the implementation of traffic calming
                           techniques, human scale design of buildings, use of trees,
                           landscaping and lighting, reduction of road widths, the use of
                           diagonal parking, and similar measures. (Implements LU-
                           15.8)
                           RA/D:      Planning, Public Works
                           FS:        Redevelopment funds, Development Fees
                           TF:        Ongoing
          LU-IM-15.6:      Encourage materials and methods of construction which are
                           specific to the region and show compatibility with the
                           climate. (Implements LU-15.8)
                           RA/D:      Planning
                           FS:        Development
                           TF:        Ongoing
Chapter 2                        LU-42                                 Carson General Plan
LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                                                    
                 ISSUE:       SPECIAL STUDY AREAS
                 There are a number of areas in the City which offer special opportunities for
                 development and redevelopment based on their size, location, access, or freeway
                 visibility. These areas require more detailed study than that provided in the General
                 Plan.
                 Goal:        LU-16:     Clear direction for development in each of the Special Study
                                         Areas.
                 Policies: LU-16.1       Evaluate the importance and value to the City of each of the
                                         Special Study Areas.
                              LU-16.2    Based on City priorities, determine whether a specific plan,
                                         redevelopment plan, urban design plan, streetscape improvement
                                         program, or other plan or program is appropriate for the
                                         identified area. The City should then embark upon such a study.
                 Implementation Measures:
                              LU-IM-16.1:    Special Study Areas to be evaluated include, but are not
                                             limited to those described below:
                                                 Carson Street (I-110 Freeway to Avalon Blvd.),
                                                 Carson Street (north side of the street between the
                                                  Alameda Corridor and Santa Fe Ave.),
                                                 Eastern side of the Alameda Corridor between
                                                  Dominguez Street and the southern boundary of the
                                                  City,
                                                 Cal Compact site (157-acre landfill),
                                                 Scottsdale Townhomes,
                                                 Main Street Industrial Corridor,
                                                 Shell/Ashland site, and the
                                                 South Bay Pavilion area.
                                             (Implements LU-16.1)
                                             RA/D:       Planning
                                             FS:         General Fund, Development
                                             TF:         Ongoing
                              LU-IM-16.2:    Studies of these areas should address the following, as
                                             appropriate: signage, infrastructure, financing, special curb
                                             treatment (e.g., pinched curbs, enhanced pacing at crossings,
                                             etc.), banners, enhanced landscaping, hardscape features, etc.
                                             In addition, the following should be addressed in the
                                             referenced areas:
Carson General Plan                                 LU-43                                        Chapter 2

                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
               On Carson Street, east of the Alameda Corridor, the
                enhancement of the commercial uses and the use of
                redevelopment funds to rehabilitate the storefronts
                should also be considered.
               Along the eastern side of the Alameda Corridor between
                Dominguez Street and the southern boundary of the
                City, land uses should provide as much flexibility as
                possible        to       more         easily       facilitate
                development/redevelopment. Previous studies of this
                area should be reviewed and, as appropriate,
                incorporated into any special study.
               At the Scottsdale Townhomes, review and, as
                appropriate incorporate the recommendations contained
                in Appendix G relating to this area. Recommendations
                include: use of open fencing; renovation of common
                areas; addition of access; development of socially-
                minded programs; and fostering of partnerships between
                Fannie Mae, lenders, and the Redevelopment Agency.
               Along the east side of the Main Street Industrial
                Corridor, resubdivide portions of the residential/non-
                residential edge to protect the residential neighborhood.
            (Implements LU-16.2)
            RA/D:      Planning
            FS:        General Fund,      Development,       Redevelopment
                       Funds
            TF:        Ongoing
                                                                      
Chapter 2         LU-44                                 Carson General Plan

                   CHAPTER 3
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                         CHAPTER 3
                  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
GUIDING PRINCIPLE
                 The City of Carson is committed to pursuing, retaining, and promoting quality
                 and sustainable economic development and jobs, at both the local and regional
                 level, through the utilization of the City’s natural advantages which include the
                 City’s strategic location in the South Bay to the ports; access to freeways and
                 airports, and the Alameda Corridor; its multi-cultural neighborhoods; its potential
                 for international trade; and the California State University, Dominguez Hills
                 campus; and a diverse and skilled labor force.
1.0     INTRODUCTION
                 The purpose of the Economic Development Element is to provide guidance for
                 economic development with the City of Carson in order to attain an economically
                 viable and self-sustaining community. In this sense, economically viable means
                 providing a range of housing and employment opportunities that meet the needs of
                 residents and workers alike, attracting families and businesses to create demand for
                 planned land uses, and establishing and funding public service levels that preserve or
                 enhance Carson’s quality of life.
                 The Economic Development Element is linked primarily to the Land Use and
                 Housing Elements. Land use policy, in which the City takes an active role in
                 defining development intensity, balance and mix of land uses, is fundamental to
                 economic growth and economic well being. Land use policy enables the City to plan
                 in advance for secondary effects of development, including employment growth and
                 infrastructure requirements. Carson’s housing policy is linked to economic
Carson General Plan                                ED-1                                       Chapter 3

                                                                     ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
             development planning in that economic relationships exist between housing types
             and employment opportunities, as well as between housing densities and the cost to
             maintain City service levels. With regard to attracting commerce and industry, as
             well as maintaining mobility for corporate activities, the Transportation and
             Infrastructure Element is also important to the economic development strategy.
2.0     STATE LAW REQUIREMENTS
             Authority for the Economic Development Element is found in State Government
             Code Section 65303, which allows cities and counties to add optional elements
             beyond the State-mandated elements. Once adopted, an optional element carries
             the same legal weight as any other of the elements as required by State Government
             Code Section 65300.5. Although the Economic Development Element is not a
             required element in the General Plan, the City has prepared one in order to
             consolidate and codify a growing body of policy concerning the economic and fiscal
             viability of Carson.
3.0 SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
             This section of the Economic Development Element is based upon Market Analysis,
             General Plan Update, City of Carson, prepared by Robert Charles Lesser & Co.
             (RCL), dated April 3, 2000. This report in its entirety is included as Appendix I.
             The objective of the market analysis was to: 1) evaluate the local and regional real
             estate markets as they relate to specific economic development issues and goals
             important to the City, and 2) identify market-driven opportunities for real estate
             development that the City may wish to encourage. Data have been updated with the
             2000 Census data where possible and some other data have also been updated. The
             remainder of the findings and projections come from the Lesser Market Analysis
             prepared with earlier data.
3.1     POPULATION AND INCOME TRENDS
             Carson’s socioeconomic trends are generally favorable. The City’s total 2000
             population of 89,730 has increased by more than five percent since 1990. While this
             is less than Los Angeles County’s growth rate of 5.8 percent, it is slightly greater
             than that of the South Bay. The City also has a greater percentage of school age
             children under 18 compared to the South Bay; however, its distribution is similar to
             that of Los Angeles County.
             Carson’s 2000 median household income of $52,284 exceeds the County’s average of
             $40,949, however Carson’s per capita income of $17,107 is significantly lower than
             the County’s average of $21,000. This lower per capita income may be attributed to
             the larger average household size of 3.59 (and average family size of 3.92) compared
             to 2.87 in Los Angeles County.
             Carson’s households are distributed across the various income ranges, with 31
             percent of households making in excess of $35,000/year. The South Bay has a much
Chapter 3                                     ED-2                              Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                 higher percentage of households earning more than $100,000 per year than does
                 Carson.
3.2     BUSINESS CLIMATE
                 Carson has a favorable business climate as evidenced by its existing policies. The
                 cost of doing business in Carson is much lower than that in other South Bay cities.
                 Carson has one of the lowest business license fees in the South Bay and imposes no
                 utility-user, gross receipts or parking taxes. Carson is the only city in the South Bay
                 with no utility-user tax. The City also has one of the lowest development and
                 planning fee structures in the area.
3.3     LAND AVAILABILITY
                 While Carson is an urban community and almost fully developed, approximately 10
                 percent of its land is still available for development. The City has 937 acres of
                 vacant land and 234 acres of underutilized land, which is discussed in more detail in
                 Section 3.1, Land Use, in the Existing Conditions Report.
                 The largest areas of vacant land, defined as land that is clear of all buildings,
                 structures, and appurtenant facilities, are located to the east and north of Cal State
                 Dominguez Hills and a 157-acre site of contaminated land adjacent to the I-405
                 freeway. The largest underutilized parcels are located at the southwest corner of
                 Wilmington Avenue and Del Amo Boulevard. Underutilized properties are defined
                 by the Existing Conditions Report as:
                         Large parcels occupied by a business or residential dwellings that utilize 50
                          percent or less of the site.
                         Large parcels utilized for storage of junk and salvage materials, small vacant
                          buildings, scattered oil wells, storage of trucks and similar vehicles, or
                          agricultural farming operations.
                 However, many of these underutilized and vacant parcels are brownfields and will
                 require environmental remediation before development can occur. The City has an
                 abundance of brownfields largely because Los Angeles County permitted landfills in
                 the area, prior to the City’s incorporation in 1968. While remediation can be costly,
                 the South Bay’s lack of developable space provides an opportunity for Carson’s
                 remediation of these sites.
3.4     REDEVELOPMENT PLANS
                 The City’s Redevelopment Agency has adopted three redevelopment project areas:
                 Redevelopment Project Area No. 1, Merged and Amended Redevelopment Project
                 Area (formerly Redevelopment Project Area No. 2 and 3), and Redevelopment
                 Project Area No. 4. Project Area No. 1 consists of approximately 2,044 acres, the
                 Merged and Amended Project Area consists of approximately 1,634 acres, and
                 Project Area No. 4 consists of approximately 1035 acres. The Redevelopment Plans
Carson General Plan                                  ED-3                                        Chapter 3

                                                                       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
              for all Project Areas are available for review at the City of Carson, Economic
              Development Group.
3.5     REGIONAL TRENDS
              The Southern California economy remained exceptionally strong through the
              second quarter of 1999. Job creation totaled 81,400 in Los Angeles County in 1998,
              or 2.1 percent, following employment increases of 42,000 and 76,600 in 1996 and
              1997, respectively.
              Employment gains in software development and services, construction, and business
              services as a whole have offset job losses in the manufacturing sector, particularly in
              the aerospace industry. Although entertainment industry job growth was lackluster
              in the first half of 1998, with some film production moving to lower cost areas, such
              as Canada, the second half of 1998 and early 1999 showed signs of revitalization in
              the entertainment sector.
              The Los Angeles County employment outlook is positive, with the County expected
              to add an average of 62,000 jobs annually through 2005. Although interest rate and
              fuel increases may have a negative affect on the economy in the near future, the
              economy has seen the longest economic growth period in history.
3.6     LOCAL TRENDS
              The South Bay has similarly enjoyed robust economic activity. Although the region
              was greatly impacted by a significant loss of aerospace jobs, the area has largely
              recovered through the addition of advanced technology and international trade
              employment. In 1999, employment was expected to have increased by 3.8 percent,
              bringing total employment in the South Bay to 453,500.
3.7     MARKET ANALYSIS
              This section contains a detailed overview of the following land uses:
                      Industrial;
                      Retail; and
                      Office.
              Each land use section includes a basic market summary of the South Bay and
              Carson sub-market, and analyzes demand and development potential. All support
              data is summarized in a series of exhibits contained in Appendix I.
3.7.1   INDUSTRIAL
              SUPPLY TRENDS AND CONDITIONS, 2000-2002
              Los Angeles County’s industrial market remains vigorous. As of the third quarter
              1999, vacancies were down to 3 percent. The market has tightened significantly over
Chapter 3                                        ED-4                             Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                 the past several years. Just a year ago, vacancies were 6 percent in Los Angeles and
                 in 1992 were as high as 12 percent. The lack of prime industrial space has put a
                 stain on the market, as demand for space has been greater than available supply.
                 Driven by rapid employment growth, resurgence in international trade activity, and
                 an improving public infrastructure system, Los Angeles County is well positioned for
                 continued industrial activity.
                 The South Bay is holding steady in the industrial market with second quarter 2002
                 vacancies of 4.7 percent. Similar to Los Angeles County, the South Bay also had
                 vacancies of 13 percent in the early 1990s. Much of the South Bay’s recovery has
                 been due to existing firm expansions and in-migration of domestic and foreign
                 companies involved in international trade. Although there have been new buildings
                 constructed primarily at Watson and Carson Companies’ Dominguez Technology
                 Center, the Harbor Gateway Commerce Center in Torrance, and the Harbor City
                 Business Park in Harbor City, this space will expand the total supply by only 0.5
                 percent. As a result, the South Bay’s vacancy rate should continue to remain low.
                 The City of Carson’s industrial space lies within the Carson sub-market, which has
                 been defined by the major brokerage firms as encompassing Carson, Compton, and
                 Rancho Dominguez. This sub-market has 83 million square feet of industrial space
                 and comprises 45 percent of the South Bay market and 10 percent of Los Angeles
                 County. Carson is approximately 43 percent of the Carson, Compton, Rancho
                 Dominguez sub-market.
                 Industrial uses have provided jobs to residents and aided in the economic well being
                 of the City. They have also contributed tax revenues to provide health, safety, and
                 social services to residents. Carson’s industrial market has been predominately
                 comprised of manufacturing, warehousing, and distribution uses. According to a
                 study by the Los Angeles Regional Technology Alliance, only 48 out of 1,000
                 technology related businesses in the South Bay are located within Carson.
                 Land scarcity and rising lease rates are forcing some companies from the South Bay
                 to areas where land prices are more affordable. The South Bay should however
                 continue to have a strong demand for industrial space given the region’s strategic
                 location. Expansion plans at Los Angeles International Airport, and the Los
                 Angeles and Long Beach seaports should also increase the potential to attract
                 companies to the area, especially in the distribution and warehousing operations.
                 DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
                 The demand for industrial space is holding steady. The industrial demand
                 methodology used by Robert Charles Lesser & Co. focuses on employment growth
                 projections by sector. The net absorption of new industrial space in Los Angeles
                 County in 1998 was 11.8 million square feet. In 1997, Los Angeles County net
                 absorption was 25 million square feet, and 11.8 million in 1996. Given employment
                 growth projections by industry, RCL projected the 1999 net absorption of industrial
                 space to total approximately 13.8 million square feet. For the 1999-2005 period,
                 RCL projected that the annual average industrial absorption is 9.9 million square
Carson General Plan                                ED-5                                      Chapter 3

                                                                           ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
               feet. During the past five quarters, industrial activity has fluctuated between 10
               million and 13 million square feet.
               Of the total Los Angeles demand, the South Bay is anticipated to capture
               approximately 23 percent or 1.8 million square feet of industrial space per year. Of
               this, Carson is expected to capture 317,000 square feet or 20 to 25 acres of industrial
               space per year.
               There should be continued demand for new modernized facilities in Carson. Some
               of the City’s newer industrial developments have combined office space with light
               industrial, warehouse facilities and manufacturing. Watson Land Company and
               Carson Companies have been at the forefront at developing these new “flex” spaces.
               These flex spaces will be an asset in keeping the City’s industrial space competitive,
               since a large portion of the existing industrial inventory is outdated and unable to
               accommodate many of the emerging industries.
               Manufacturing and warehousing space will continue to be in great demand in
               Carson; however, whether the City has the ability to attract higher quality research
               and development as well as high technology uses remains unknown. High
               technology companies generally tend to cluster around research institutions and
               other like industries, seek highly amenitized areas with executive housing and a
               highly educated labor pool. Carson does not possess these characteristics. The City
               will need to be proactive in order to attract these industries. While several
               technology related companies have recently moved to the area, the firm’s appear to
               be using space in Carson primarily for distribution or warehousing purposes.
               In the South Bay, current long-range land developments include 300 acres at
               Watson and Carson Companies’ Dominguez Technology Center in Carson and
               unincorporated Los Angeles County; the Harbor Gateway project in Torrance; and
               the 105-acre Northrop Grumman mixed use development in Hawthorne, which
               includes 30 acres of retail as well as office and light industrial uses. The Dominguez
               Technology Center will be adding over 3 million square feet of new industrial space
               to the area within the five year period 2000-2005.
3.7.2   OFFICE
               SUPPLY TRENDS AND CONDITIONS, 2000
               The South Bay office market, defined as the area encompassing Long Beach on the
               south to El Segundo on the north, is comprised of nearly 30 million square feet of
               office space, and represents 19 percent of the total space in Los Angeles County. In
               the last three years, this market’s absorption amounted to 19 percent of Los Angeles
               County, which is equivalent to its share of the County’s inventory.
               Carson has a small office market that consists of approximately five percent of the
               total South Bay market. The City has only 1.6 million square feet of office space
               and has averaged 10,000 square feet of net absorption per year from 1990 to 1998.
               Most of the space is also relatively old.
Chapter 3                                         ED-6                                 Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                 Demand for office space in the South Bay continues to be strong, with the largest
                 gains in net absorption occurring in El Segundo. The South Bay however has not
                 fully recovered as overall vacancies are at 15 percent. Although vacancies have
                 decreased since the mid-20 percent levels of the early 1990s, this is still relatively
                 high. Certain sub-markets are strong and there has been some new construction in
                 El Segundo and Long Beach. However, demand for space in Carson has not been
                 high. Vacancies have remained at the 20 percent level as of third quarter 1999 and
                 have fluctuated between 16 and 25 percent since 1990.
                 South Bay office rents have been on the rise. El Segundo and Long Beach have
                 typically obtained the highest rents in the South Bay. Per the First Quarter 1999
                 Grubb and Ellis report, rents averaged $1.85 in the South Bay, while Carson rents
                 averaged only $1.40 per square foot per month, full service gross.
                 DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
                 The net absorption of new office space in Los Angeles County in 1998 was 4.2
                 million square feet, 3.2 million square feet in 1997, and 2.6 million square feet in
                 1996. Given employment growth projects by industry, RCL projected the 1999 net
                 absorption of office space to total approximately 5.3 million square feet. For the
                 1999-2005 period, RCL projected the annual average industrial absorption to be 3.6
                 million square feet.
                 Of the Los Angeles County total demand, the South Bay is anticipated to capture
                 approximately 12 percent or 430,000 per year. Of this, Carson is only expected to
                 capture 16,500 square feet of office space per year.
                 In short, office development opportunities are limited in Carson. Carson comprises
                 a small market and does not have adequate support services, amenities, or
                 commercial appeal to attract a substantial number of tenants to the area.
3.7.3   RETAIL
                 The South Bay offers numerous shopping alternatives to residents and workers, with
                 the major retail centers concentrated in Torrance and Long Beach. Six super
                 regional centers are present in the South Bay, as well as major power centers.
                 While Carson appears to be importing much of its retail sales from visitors and non-
                 locals, there seems to be unmet resident and worker retail needs. As a
                 predominately industrial community, many of the basic retail needs of residents,
                 such as apparel, food and restaurants may have been neglected and overlooked by
                 the market in the past. Expanding the retail market by targeting these areas may be
                 important in reaching the retail development goals of the City.
                 RETAIL SALES OVERVIEW, 2000
                 In 1997, Carson had approximately $748 million in retail sales, representing 3.4
                 percent of Los Angeles County’s total sales of $217 billion. Taxable retail sales in
Carson General Plan                                ED-7                                       Chapter 3

                                                                       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
              Carson grew an average of 2.0 percent annually in current dollars between 1990 and
              1997, lower than Los Angeles County’s growth rate of 2.6 percent. In constant
              dollars (1997), there has been a slight decrease in taxable sales for this period in
              Carson (average annual change of -0.4 percent), compared to a 1.1 percent decrease
              in Los Angeles County’s sales overall.
              Retail categories that have shown the strongest gains in Carson since 1990 are:
                     General Merchandise (6.4 percent average annual change),
                     Home Furnishing and Appliances (27.0 percent), and
                     Building Material and Farming Implements (5.3 percent).
              Leaders for California overall since 1990 are:
                     General Merchandise Stores (2.9 percent),
                     Eating and Drinking Places (2.8 percent),
                     Service Station (2.9 percent), and
                     Specialty Retail Stores (5.2 percent).
              The City of Carson "imports" retail sales from visitors and non-locals. Of the
              $748,295,000 in taxable sales, RCL estimates that visitors and non-locals contribute
              $270,785,000, or 36 percent of the total. Only the Eating and Drinking Places, Drug
              Store, Packaged Liquor, Apparel, and Food categories show leakage of sales outside
              City limits. Carson residents most likely travel to surrounding cities including
              Torrance and Long Beach to dine and shop for these basic goods.
              The categories with the highest volume of sales from visitors are:
                     General Merchandise with $46,174,000,
                     Auto Dealers and Auto Supplies with $101,911,000, and
                     Other Retail with $69,171,000.
3.7.4   POWER CENTERS AND CHAIN RETAILERS
              SUPPLY CONDITIONS, 2000
              For the purpose of this Element, a power center is defined as a grouping of retail
              stores. Power centers typically range from 250,000 and 500,000 square feet gross
              leaseable area, with several category-specific, narrowly focused, but deeply
              merchandised anchors with 25,000 square feet or more. The emergence of power
              centers is a response to the evolution and repositioning of older regional centers and
              the consumers’ changing shopping patterns, as they become more value and travel
              conscious.
              Carson has two new power centers, Carson Town Center, which includes Super
              Kmart and Burger King, and Carson Depot Center, which includes Home Depot,
              Albertsons, Staples, McDonald’s and Starbucks. Other uses are anticipated at the
              Carson Town Center, however, they are in the early development stages. There are
Chapter 3                                       ED-8                              Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                 two other power centers within a five-mile trade area, including the Long Beach
                 Town Center and the Crossroads Shopping Center in Torrance.
                 The inventory of major chain retailers in the South Bay includes a wide variety of
                 stores, however the majority are located outside of Carson, primarily within regional
                 shopping centers, including the Del Amo Fashion Center, The Galleria at South
                 Bay, and the Long Beach Plaza as well as at the major power centers described
                 above. Although Carson has a regional shopping center, the South Bay Pavilion,
                 many of the in-line stores within the center are local and representative of the major
                 chains. This center has recently sold and many physical and use changes are
                 proposed.
                 Several large commercial or mixed use developments are on the drawing board,
                 including the 157-acre site at the I-405, the Gateway to Carson, and a project which
                 includes a BENI grant for site remediation.
                 DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
                 Strictly analyzing the volume of sales and inventory of power centers quantitatively,
                 the trade area within the City would appear to be oversupplied, with $219 million in
                 estimated sales compared to a demand potential of $92 million. The larger five-mile
                 Carson trade area, however, would appear to be undersupplied, with $219 million in
                 estimated sales compared to a demand potential of $574 million.
                 Projections indicate the population of this trade area will increase from 488,000 to
                 509,000 by the year 2004, which will further increase this demand.
                 Complementing the quantitative demand approach, the local and subregional
                 inventory list includes many categories completely underrepresented by brand-name
                 retailers. Local residents have expressed a lack of satisfaction with the selection and
                 quality of merchandise offered in Carson, and have stated that they would welcome
                 new retail to the area.
                 The successful introduction of power center-type tenants would favorably augment
                 the City’s retail sales base. Residents would benefit, as they would not be forced to
                 shop in Torrance or Long Beach as often. However, with the introduction of the
                 chain store tenants, this positive overall impact would be mitigated by the loss of
                 sales at smaller local businesses.
3.7.5   NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING AND GROCERY STORES
                 SUPPLY CONDITIONS, 2000
                 Carson’s major neighborhood shopping centers are centralized on Carson Street,
                 west from the I-405 freeway and Sepulveda Boulevard. There are four stores
                 representing two major grocery chains within the City, one of which is considerably
                 smaller than the industry average. Grocery stores are location sensitive and most
                 consumers shop at stores closest to their residence. As a result, the clustering that is
Carson General Plan                                 ED-9                                        Chapter 3

                                                                         ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
              currently prevalent in Carson may pose inconveniences to most residents. Two
              other grocery stores included in this analysis are not major chains. They were
              included since they appear to fill a need for residents living along the periphery of
              the City and they are fairly large in size.
              DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
              The City of Carson is currently undersupplied by approximately three grocery stores
              given the size of its population and per capita income level.
              The resident retail demand versus reported sales analysis in 1997 reinforces the
              need for additional neighborhood shopping centers. Approximately $7.1 million in
              taxable retail sales for food was leaking outside City limits.
3.7.6   RESTAURANTS
              SUPPLY CONDITIONS, 2000
              Carson has a handful of major chain restaurants and limited “sit-down” dining
              locations. The majority of dining opportunities are fast food and limited numbers of
              mid-range, family-style restaurants, such as Tony Romas, International House of
              Pancakes, and Sizzler. Residents and businesses agree that Carson has few
              restaurants that could be considered fine dining. In terms of taxable sales,
              restaurants and bars in Carson make up 7.4 percent of total retail stores compared
              to 13 percent within the State of California. This indicates a disproportionate lack
              of potential dining opportunities within the City.
              DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
              Demand for restaurants was conducted by analyzing both resident and employee
              spending patterns. It is important to include employee figures in the analysis, since
              Carson has such a large daytime population. Although there are no published
              reports indicating industrial worker spending patterns at restaurants, the
              International Council of Shopping Center estimates for office worker was used as a
              proxy. Accordingly, Carson may support an additional 315,000 square feet of
              additional eating and drinking establishments including, 171,000 square feet of fast
              food dining, 74,000 square feet of restaurants that serve beer and wine, and 69,000
              square feet of fine dining.
              Examining restaurant taxable sales by category (with or without alcohol sales on
              premises), Carson’s inventory is heavily weighted toward restaurants that do not
              serve alcohol compared to the County and State ratios. Taxable sales at restaurants
              without alcoholic beverages make up 75 percent of Carson’s total, compared to 55
              percent for Los Angeles County and 44 percent for California. Taxable sales at
              restaurants that serve all types of liquor comprise only 7 percent of Carson’s total,
              compared to 22 percent for Los Angeles County and 31 percent for California.
              These figures substantiate the opinions described above regarding the lack of fine or
              family dining opportunities.
Chapter 3                                        ED-10                             Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
3.7.7   MOVIE THEATERS
                 SUPPLY CONDITIONS, 2000
                 Carson does not have any movie theaters within the City’s limit. A drive-in theater
                 existed previously, but it has been closed for many years. The closest theater is 4
                 miles from City Hall and located in the City of Torrance. Within the primary 5-mile
                 trade area, there are six theaters with 18 traditional style screens and 36 stadium
                 seats. In the secondary trade area, which includes theaters within a 7-mile trade
                 area, there are an additional four theaters or 37 traditional style screens.
                 DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
                 An unmet demand for new movie theaters exists in the five-mile trade area. The
                 unmet demand is estimated at 20 screens. Current development trends are to build
                 movie theaters in complexes of eight screens or more, although in larger markets,
                 theater complexes of 24 screens and greater are common. This translates into one
                 or two new movie theater complexes in the area.
                 Movie theaters function as excellent anchors for a retail shopping/entertainment
                 center that also includes family and better-quality restaurants and specialty retail. A
                 movie theater has synergy with restaurants.
                 Movie theater developers, in general, want to build at least eight screens to achieve
                 efficiencies in development costs. A new eight-screen movie theater with the latest
                 sound equipment and possible stadium-style seating represents an opportunity that
                 would serve the City and surrounding communities. Any new theater built in
                 Carson should strive to feature the most up-to-date systems in order to compete
                 effectively with theaters in neighboring cities.
3.8     MARKET CONCLUSIONS
                 Based upon the Market Analysis prepared by Robert Charles Lesser & Co., the
                 economic development outlook for the City of Carson is generally favorable from an
                 overall market perspective. The strongest development potential lies in the
                 industrial market, although there may be opportunities in retail. The regional and
                 local economy appears to be favorable in the short-term. Combined with the
                 shortage of developable land in the South Bay and Carson’s locational advantages,
                 the City has an opportunity to promote economic development activities.
                 Market conclusions for industrial, office and retail sectors are provided in the
                 following paragraphs.
3.8.1   INDUSTRIAL
                 Industrial potential should increase in the long term by 300,000 square feet of space
                 per year (20 to 25 years at a 0.32 floor area ratio), with further stimulus provided by
                 the expansion of the nearby Los Angeles and Long Beach Ports and the Los Angeles
                 International Airport, improvements planned for truck and rail traffic due to the
                 Alameda Corridor, and the lack of developable land in the South Bay.
Carson General Plan                                ED-11                                        Chapter 3

                                                                       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
               Industrial land supply in Los Angeles County is near exhaustion. This provides
               Carson with an opportunity to capitalize on its land holdings and redevelop
               underutilized and vacant properties to meet demands for new industrial space.
               Warehousing and distribution uses should continue to hold the strongest demand
               due to Carson’s locational advantage to major transportation systems. Attraction of
               higher-end technology and research and development companies will continue to be
               challenging due to the lack of amenities, such as restaurants, shopping areas and
               entertainment, executive housing, and a highly educated work forced as compared
               to other subregions in Southern California.
3.8.2   OFFICE
               Office opportunities in Carson are limited. The South Bay office market is largely
               concentrated in El Segundo, Long Beach and Torrance. Carson comprises a small
               market and does not have enough support services, amenities or appeal to attract a
               substantial number of tenants to the area. Vacancy rates remain high, and rental
               rates have not appreciated greatly.
               The precluding conclusions should be understood as representing a continuation of
               general market trends. Impacting major market directions is difficult, but aggressive
               cities can affect the share of the market that they can attract. This is possible by
               working with local landowners.
3.8.3   RETAIL
               New retail development opportunities are possible. The key is to provide large sized
               sites (minimum 20 to 30 acres), which have regional visibility and accessibility,
               preferably from a freeway. In this manner, the City will be able to respond to
               developers and chain stores pursuing a market penetration strategy. Additional
               retail opportunities can also be further encouraged by working with large tenant
               holders.
               Carson has the opportunity to generate sales tax revenues and capture additional
               sales of apparel, restaurants, movie theaters and grocery food stores. Local demand
               for these goods is leaking to surrounding cities, especially Torrance and Long
               Beach. Carson should consider proactively encouraging the development of retail
               projects, especially at new locations and existing centers that appear to be
               underutilized to meet the needs of current residents and workers.
4.0     PLANNING ISSUES, GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION
               The acronyms listed below are used for the implementation measures:
                    RA/D:    Responsible Agency/Division
                    FS:      Funding Source
                    TF:      Time Frame
Chapter 3                                       ED-12                             Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                 ISSUE:      CARSON IS NOT CAPTURING THE POTENTIAL RESIDENT DEMAND WITHIN
                             THE CITY
                 Citizens have expressed a desire to have a greater variety of commercial uses in Carson,
                 including quality retail, restaurants and commercial recreation uses. Enhancing the
                 physical image and services offered within the City, as well as encouraging job and
                 housing opportunities, can lead to an improvement in the quality of life.
                 Goal:       ED-1:        Strengthen existing City services and support systems.
                 Policies: ED-1.1         Evaluate existing City services and programs to determine
                                          whether they are adequately meeting the needs of residents.
                             ED-1.2       Encourage the development of quality housing.
                             ED-1.3       Promote the development of cultural activities and events.
                             ED-1.4       Strengthen the physical image of Carson through visual
                                          enhancement along freeway corridors, major traffic routes,
                                          and areas adjoining residential neighborhoods. To this end:
                                             Aggressively pursue code enforcement activities;
                                             Develop good design standards; and
                                             Establish a City identity.
                             ED-1.5       Enhance the City’s website to include more extensive
                                          economic development information and interactive tools to
                                          promote and evaluate properties, development, and other
                                          business opportunities in Carson.
                             ED-1.6       Provide appropriate infrastructure to support economic
                                          development.
                 Implementation Measures:
                             ED-IM-1.1        Require each City division to review its programs for
                                              conformity with the goals and policies of the General
                                              Plan. (Implements Policies ED-1.1, ED-1.2, ED-1.3, ED-
                                              1.6)
                                              RA/D:      All Agencies and Divisions
                                              FS:        General Fund
                                              TF:        Annually
                             ED-IM-1.2        Require each City division to prioritize and schedule the
                                              appropriate implementation measures included in the
                                              General Plan. (Implements Policies ED-1.1, ED-1.2, ED-
                                              1.3, ED-1.6)
Carson General Plan                                 ED-13                                        Chapter 3

                                                                ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                  RA/D:       All Agencies and Divisions
                                  FS:         General Fund
                                  TF:         Annually
                    ED-IM-1.3     Develop design standards and guidelines and special
                                  plans for targeted areas, such as Carson Street,
                                  Automobile Row, and others. (Implements Policy ED-1.4)
                                  RA/D:       Planning, Economic Development
                                  FS:         General Fund
                                  TF:         2002-2003
                    ED-IM-1.4     Develop economic development materials to be included
                                  on the City’s website. (Implements Policy ED-1.5)
                                  RA/D:       Economic Development
                                  FS:         Redevelopment
                                  TF:         2003-2004
          Goal:     ED-2:     Encourage a variety of commercial activities to enhance and
                              retain shopping opportunities to serve the population and
                              increase sales tax revenues.
          Policies: ED-2.1    Pursue categories of resident retail demand which are not
                              being met within the City. To this end, initiate strategies to
                              market, attract, and retain targeted types of retail
                              commercial uses, including expanded use of the City’s
                              website.
                    ED-2.2    Continue to enhance the City’s public relations/marketing
                              program to improve communications through the business
                              community and the City.
                    ED-2.3    Provide rehabilitation assistance in targeted commercial
                              districts to enable the upgrade of commercial properties.
          Implementation Measures:
                    ED-IM-2.1     Annually monitor, in the Annual Report on the General
                                  Plan, the extent and location of development and
                                  changes occurring within the City, in order to measure
                                  the degree to which needed balance between land uses
                                  allocated in the General Plan is maintained. (Implements
                                  Policy ED-2.1)
                                  RA/D:       Planning
                                  FS:         General Fund
                                  TF:         Annually
Chapter 3                                ED-14                            Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                           ED-IM-2.2     Annually evaluate and target underutilized and/or older
                                         centers and develop strategies with the owners and
                                         tenants to revitalize these areas. (Implements Policy ED-
                                         2.3)
                                         RA/D:      Redevelopment, Housing and Neighborhoods
                                         FS:        Redevelopment, Community Development
                                                    Block Grant
                                         TF:        2004-2005 and Annually
                           ED-IM-2.3     Focus on upgrading older centers in order to encourage
                                         new or expanding businesses to relocate to these areas.
                                         (Implements Policy ED-2.3)
                                         RA/D:      Redevelopment, Business Development
                                         FS:        Redevelopment, Community Development
                                                    Block Grant
                                         TF:        2004-2005
                           ED-IM-2.4     Encourage the concentration of commercial clusters
                                         which can create “agglomeration economies” and
                                         encourage new and/or expanding businesses into existing
                                         vacant space. (Implements Policy ED-2.1)
                                         RA/D:      Redevelopment, Business Development
                                         FS:        Redevelopment
                                         TF:        2004-2006
                 Goal:     ED-3:     Maximize the City’s market potential, in order to enhance
                                     and retain retail opportunities to serve the population,
                                     increase City revenues, as well as provide new employment
                                     opportunities.
                 Policies: ED-3.1    Continue to implement, and expand when necessary,
                                     strategies to market, attract, and/or retain retail commercial
                                     areas. These strategies should, at a minimum, address target
                                     areas and the tools necessary to implement such strategies.
                           ED-3.2    Identify and pursue areas of retail demand leakage.
                           ED-3.3    Develop a comprehensive economic development program
                                     and initiate strategies to retain existing businesses, as well as
                                     markets, and attract new office, commercial and industrial
                                     activity.
                           ED-3.4    Continue to maintain, and expand as necessary, the City’s
                                     marketing and business retention/attraction program to
                                     effectively compete with neighboring cities in attracting and
Carson General Plan                            ED-15                                         Chapter 3

                                                               ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                             retaining regional businesses. Said program to include
                             business outreach programs, business assistance programs,
                             business incentives, use of public/private partnerships to
                             promote business relations, and other programs and/or
                             incentives.
                   ED-3.5    Identify unique economic opportunities, such as niche
                             markets, that will allow the City to capitalize on the City’s
                             location in Southern California, the community’s cultural
                             diversity, and the tourism industry in the region.
                   ED-3.6    Capitalize on potential physical and market linkages among
                             land uses.
                   ED-3.7    Continue to enhance the City’s public relations program in
                             order to improve communications through the business
                             community and the City.
                   ED-3.8    Maximize secondary industrial activity providing services to
                             existing industrial and commercial establishments in Carson.
                   ED-3.9    Leverage public improvements to facilitate economic
                             development.
                   ED-3.10   Provide rehabilitation assistance in targeted commercial
                             districts to enable the upgrade of commercial properties.
          Implementation Measures:
                   ED-IM-3.1     Examine the potential to rezone land to accommodate
                                 projected market demand for all types of economic
                                 activity. (Implements Policy ED-3.1)
                                 RA/D:       Planning
                                 FS:         General Fund
                                 TF:         Ongoing
                   ED-IM-3.2     Develop strategies to focus development in targeted
                                 areas. (Implements Policy ED-3.1)
                                 RA/D:       Redevelopment
                                 FS:         Redevelopment
                                 TF:         2005-2006
                   ED-IM-3.3     Actively market large vacant parcels. (Implements Policy
                                 ED-3.1)
                                 RA/D:       Redevelopment
                                 FS:         Redevelopment
                                 TF:         Ongoing
Chapter 3                               ED-16                              Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                           ED-IM-3.4 Use redevelopment tools to assemble land, assist
                                     development and provide for on-going area
                                     improvement. (Implements Policy ED-3.3)
                                     RA/D:      Redevelopment
                                     FS:        Redevelopment
                                     TF:        Ongoing
                           ED-IM-3.5 Encourage specialty retail development to concentrate in
                                     targeted areas of the City to enable “critical mass”
                                     thresholds of such uses to be established. (Implements
                                     Policies ED-3.2, ED-3.3)
                                     RA/D:      Redevelopment, Business Development
                                     FS:        Redevelopment
                                     TF:        Ongoing
                           ED-IM-3.6 Periodically evaluate which retail categories are
                                     experiencing leakage and approach existing retailers
                                     within these categories and encourage their relocation to
                                     Carson, especially sit-down restaurants. (Implements
                                     Policy ED-3.2)
                                     RA/D:      Business Development, Redevelopment
                                     FS:        Redevelopment
                                     TF:        2003-2004 and Ongoing
                           ED-IM-3.7 Enhance the streamlined permit process. (Implements
                                     Policy ED-3.3)
                                     RA/D:      Planning, Engineering, Building and Safety
                                     FS:        General Fund
                                     TF:        2002-2003 and Ongoing
                           ED-IM-3.8 Encourage support services as part of industrial/
                                     commercial development, e.g., child care, convenience
                                     shopping, personal services, and restaurants. (Implements
                                     Policy ED-3.8)
                                     RA/D:      Planning, Business Development
                                     FS:        Application Fees
                                     TF:        Ongoing
                           ED-IM-3.9 Continue to cooperate with the Chamber of Commerce,
                                     economic development groups, and other business
                                     associations to retain and attract businesses. (Implements
                                     Policies ED-3.4, ED-3.5, ED-3.7)
                                     RA/D:      Business Development
                                     FS:        General Fund, Redevelopment
                                     TF:        Ongoing
Carson General Plan                        ED-17                                       Chapter 3

                                                                     ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                       ED-IM-3.10      Monitor market information in nearby communities
                                       where businesses have relocated, in order to more
                                       effectively compete with these communities and retain
                                       the current retail, office and industrial firms located in
                                       the City. (Implements Policy ED-3.4)
                                       RA/D:      Business Development
                                       FS:        General Fund, Redevelopment
                                       TF:        Ongoing
                       ED-IM-3.11      Monitor and respond to inquiries received by the
                                       Chamber of Commerce, other business associations and
                                       various City departments. (Implements Policies ED-3.4,
                                       ED-3.7)
                                       RA/D:      Business Development
                                       FS:        Redevelopment
                                       TF:        2003-2004 and Ongoing
                       ED-IM-3.12      Continue to provide informational material to the owners
                                       of potential rehabilitation properties identifying the types
                                       of assistance available and work with them in the
                                       upgrading of their properties. (Implements Policy ED-
                                       3.10)
                                       RA/D:      Housing and Neighborhood
                                       FS:        CDBG, Other Grants
                                       TF:        Ongoing
                                                                                              
          ISSUE:       POTENTIALLY MISSED REVENUES
          Carson may not be generating revenues to its full potential. The City should explore
          options to increase resources.
          Goal:        ED-4:       Maintain and increase net fiscal gains to the City.
          Policies: ED-4.1         Evaluate existing City services and programs and compare
                                   efficiency and net result of providing the programs and
                                   services.
                       ED-4.2      Research and pursue State and Federal grants as well as
                                   foundation grants for specific community and capital
                                   projects.
                       ED-4.3      Support public/private efforts and link infrastructure and
                                   service costs with development projects.
Chapter 3                                    ED-18                               Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                           ED-4.4    Encourage development         opportunities    that increase
                                     economic gains to the City.
                           ED-4.5    Update the inventory of available land and vacant building
                                     space and market these sites to the business community.
                           ED-4.6    Market the City of Carson through all available and
                                     appropriate means.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           ED-IM-4.1    Require, when appropriate, fiscal impact analyses from
                                        new development. (Implements Policy ED-4.3)
                                        RA/D:      Planning
                                        FS:        Environmental Application Fees
                                        TF:        Ongoing
                           ED-IM-4.2    Monitor the fiscal impact of development activity on an
                                        annual basis to determine the optimal phasing of new
                                        development, or redevelopment, based on its net positive
                                        or negative fiscal impact, where possible. (Implements
                                        Policy ED-4.4)
                                        RA/D:      Planning, Redevelopment, City Manager
                                        FS:        Application Fees
                                        TF:        2004-2005 and Annually
                           ED-IM-4.3    Evaluate alternative revenue sources for the City.
                                        (Implements Policy ED-4.4)
                                        RA/D:      City Manager
                                        FS:        General Fund
                                        TF:        2004-2005
                           ED-IM-4.4    Develop an Economic Five Year Plan, including a variety
                                        of economic incentives to generate a balance of projects
                                        that will contribute to the local economy. (Implements
                                        Policies ED-4.1, ED-4.4, ED-4.5, ED-4.6)
                                        RA/D:      City Manager, Redevelopment
                                        FS:        General Fund, Redevelopment
                                        TF:        2004-2005
                                                                                           
Carson General Plan                           ED-19                                      Chapter 3

                                                                         ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
          ISSUE:       EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE LABOR FORCE
          There is a need to create more skilled jobs for the citizens of Carson and abate the impact
          of lost jobs related to the amortization of non-conforming uses. In addition, the labor
          force in Carson should be appropriately developed through job training programs and
          business schools.
          Goal:        ED-5:        Creation of       employment        opportunities   and    career
                                    advancement.
          Policies: ED-5.1          Understand employment trends and needs of local
                                    businesses by linking residents and businesses together
                                    through an Employment Resources Program.
                       ED-5.2       Support a local labor force with training programs to provide
                                    skill requirements for current and prospective employers.
                                    Cooperate with the University and educational organizations
                                    within the City to develop job training programs and training
                                    for Carson’s youth.
                       ED-5.3       Promote opportunities for research and development
                                    incubators within the City.
                       ED-5.4       Encourage local industries and businesses to hire local
                                    people.
          Implementation Measures:
                       ED-IM-5.1         Create an Employment Resources Program. (Implements
                                         Policies ED-5.1 and ED-5.2)
                                         RA/D:     Employment Development
                                         FS:       General Fund, Grants
                                         TF:       2004-2005
                       ED-IM-5.2         Work with owners of property which would lend itself to
                                         development of or conversion to research and
                                         development incubator use. (Implements Policy ED-5.3)
                                         RA/D:     Redevelopment, Business Development
                                         FS:       Redevelopment
                                         TF:       2004-2005
                       ED-IM-5.3         Request industries and businesses to contact the City’s
                                         Job Clearinghouse when recruiting for employees.
                                         (Implements Policy ED-5.4)
                                         RA/D:     Planning, Job Clearinghouse
                                         FS:       Application Fees
                                         TF:       Ongoing
                                                                                                
Chapter 3                                     ED-20                                Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                 ISSUE:       BUSINESS INCENTIVES
                 The City should not only continue to promote the advantages for businesses in Carson, but
                 also examine the potential to provide financial assistance, expedited permit processing, as
                 well as incentives for new businesses to move into Carson.
                 Goal:        ED-6:        Promote and assist and provide incentives for the growth and
                                           vitality of existing businesses.
                 Policies: ED-6.1          Assess the needs, limitations, and concerns of existing
                                           businesses and develop or enhance programs to increase
                                           their competitiveness.
                              ED-6.2       Educate both the residential and business communities in the
                                           advantages of shopping within the City limits and supporting
                                           local businesses.
                              ED-6.3       Continue to facilitate the process of operating a business
                                           within Carson through:
                                              A business database;
                                              Employment Center; and
                                              Streamlining and expediting the permit process.
                              ED-6.4       Monitor the conditions and status of dated shopping centers
                                           and smaller, underutilized commercially-zoned parcels.
                              ED-6.5       Provide assistance to local businesses with building
                                           improvement programs and enhance and expand these
                                           programs.
                              ED-6.6       Provide technical assistance to small businesses and
                                           coordinate with outside business organizations to support the
                                           specific needs of small business.
                 Implementation Measures:
                              ED-IM-6.1        Develop a program to increase competitiveness which
                                               includes:
                                                   “Buy in Carson” business-to-business directory;
                                                   Links from the City’s website to Carson business web
                                                    sites;
                                                   Business Visitation Program;
                                                   Annual Business Awards Program;
                                                   Technical Assistance Program; and
                                                   Building Rehabilitation Program.
                                                    (Implements Policies ED-6.1)
Carson General Plan                                   ED-21                                        Chapter 3

                                                                 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                  RA/D:      Business Development
                                  FS:        Redevelopment, General Fund
                                  TF:        2004-2006
                    ED-IM-6.2     Continue to promote and enhance the “Buy in Carson”
                                  program. (Implements Policy ED-6.2)
                                  RA/D:      Business Development
                                  FS:        General Fund
                                  TF:        Ongoing
                    ED-IM-6.3     Address the concerns of existing businesses by:
                                     Providing a welcome packet to new businesses;
                                     Promoting marketing workshops;
                                     Developing marketing letters;
                                     Promoting small business assistance programs; and
                                     Improving communications lines between business
                                      and City officials on issues of concern.
                                  (Implements Policies ED-6.3, ED-6.4, ED-6.5, ED-6.6)
                                  RA/D:      Business Development
                                  FS:        General Fund
                                  TF:        2003-2005
          Goal:     ED-7:     Attract new wealth and job-creating businesses to Carson.
          Policies: ED-7.1    Encourage the diversification of land uses, while not
                              alienating existing businesses or industries requiring space in
                              Carson.
                    ED-7.2    Improve the actual and perceived image of the City through
                              improved design standards, amenities, security, continuing
                              public improvements and positive advertising campaigns.
          Implementation Measures:
                    ED-IM-7.1     Develop improved amenities and standards, including:
                                     Provide parking improvements in strip retail centers;
                                     Encourage the development of services to support
                                      the industrial and commercial office base; and
                                   Create specialized districts and nodes.
                                  (Implements Policy ED-7.2)
                                  RA/D:      Planning, Business Development
                                  FS:        General Fund, Redevelopment
                                  TF:        2005-2006
                                                                                         
Chapter 3                               ED-22                               Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                 ISSUE:       COORDINATION OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE REGION
                 To provide economies of scale and enhance economic development opportunities, the City
                 should coordinate economic development activities with State and regional agency efforts.
                 Goal:        ED-8:       Coordinate economic development within the region to
                                          enhance opportunities.
                 Policies: ED-8.1         Identify State and regional agencies conducting economic
                                          development activities.
                              ED-8.2      Coordinate activities with State and regional agency efforts.
                 Implementation Measures:
                              ED-IM-8.1        Develop a program to link the City with the appropriate
                                               State and regional activities. (Implements Policies ED-8.1,
                                               ED-8.2)
                                               RA/D:     Redevelopment, Business Development
                                               FS:       Redevelopment
                                               TF:       2004-2005
                                                                                                      
                 ISSUE:       ATTRACTION OF NICHE INDUSTRIES AND/OR BUSINESSES
                 The City should focus on the attraction of specialized businesses and industries to Carson.
                 Such industries and businesses may include the motion picture industry, banking,
                 regional tourism, as well as other unique or niche industries and businesses. To this end,
                 the City should promote available land and facilities within Carson to demonstrate the
                 City’s desirability.
                 Goal:        ED-9:       Attract specialized businesses and industries to Carson to
                                          provide diversity in the City’s economic base.
                 Policies: ED-9.1         Identify target or niche industries or companies that would
                                          be suitable for Carson and that are looking for large areas of
                                          space, to diversify the City’s economic base.
                              ED-9.2      Understand the needs, limitations, and concerns of targeted
                                          industries and companies. Develop programs to attract them
                                          to Carson in order to effectively compete with neighboring
                                          cities. To this end, develop and maintain a comprehensive
                                          database program and marketing program for the City.
Carson General Plan                                 ED-23                                          Chapter 3

                                                                       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
          Implementation Measures:
                       ED-IM-9.1      Use broker contacts, relationships in the business
                                      community and regional organizations, as well as a
                                      community survey to help identify target industries.
                                      Evaluate the business and other license requirements for
                                      the identified target businesses and revise, if appropriate.
                                      (Implements Policies ED-9.1, ED-9.2, ED-9.3)
                                        RA/D:      Business Development, Redevelopment
                                        FS:        Redevelopment
                                        TF:        2002-2004
                                                                                                
          ISSUE:       DEVELOPMENT OF A “SIGNATURE PROJECT”
          It is important to develop a focal point within the community. This may include a “Main
          Street” along the Carson Street Corridor or a “Signature Project” along the I-405
          Freeway. Quality retail and restaurant uses, as well as entertainment uses such as movie
          theaters, performing arts center, or other commercial recreational uses would locate in
          such an area.
          Goal:        ED-10:      Develop one or more “Signature Projects” to create focal
                                   points and identity for the City.
          Policies: ED-10.1        Determine the type of facilities/uses the community would
                                   like to see in a “Signature Project.”
                       ED-10.2     Encourage development of desired uses such as quality retail,
                                   restaurant uses, and entertainment in targeted areas.
                       ED-10.3     Consider offering public         incentives    to  promote      the
                                   development of a project.
          Implementation Measures:
                       ED-IM-10.1       Evaluate all potential “Signature Projects” and assess the
                                        feasibility and timing of each. Prioritize potential projects
                                        and determine which ranks first for implementation.
                                        (Implements Policy ED-10.1)
                                        RA/D:      Redevelopment, Planning
                                        FS:        Redevelopment
                                        TF:        2002-2004
                       ED-IM-10.2       Develop plans for one or more “Signature Projects,”
                                        including land uses, public and private improvements,
Chapter 3                                    ED-24                                 Carson General Plan

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                incentives, and funding. (Implements Policies ED-10.2 and
                                                ED-10.3)
                                                RA/D:      Redevelopment, Planning
                                                FS:        Redevelopment
                                                TF:        2002-2004
                                                                                                       
                 ISSUE:      REUSE OF “BROWNFIELDS”
                 The City has large expanses of underutilized and vacant lands. However, most of these
                 lands consist of brownfields and require remediation before development can occur. The
                 City has great potential for increased revenues to the City by actively encouraging cleanup
                 and making land available for redevelopment.
                 Goal:       ED-11:        Adaptive reuse and redevelopment of “brownfields”.
                 Policies: ED-11.1         Encourage the redevelopment and cleanup of underutilized
                                           and contaminated land.
                             ED-11.2       Maintain proper infrastructure levels and flexible financing
                                           options to encourage redevelopment.
                             ED-11.3       Understand and promote available land inventory and
                                           initiate strategies to develop balanced land use planning.
                             ED-11.4       Encourage development of compatible uses and phase out
                                           non-conforming uses.
                             ED-11.5       Consider forming an assessment district to include
                                           brownfields and landfills which would address methane
                                           collection systems and monitoring of groundwater.
                 Implementation Measures:
                             ED-IM-11.1         Identify all current State and Federal funding programs
                                                for remediation, to perform studies and remediate
                                                contaminated sites. (Implements Policy ED-11.1)
                                                RA/D:      Redevelopment
                                                FS:        Redevelopment, Federal Grants
                                                TF:        2002-2003
                             ED-IM-11.2         Contact remediation experts and developers to assist in
                                                these redevelopment efforts. (Implements Policy ED-11.1)
Carson General Plan                                   ED-25                                         Chapter 3

                                                    ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                       RA/D:      Redevelopment
                       FS:        Redevelopment, Federal Grants
                       TF:        2002-2003
            ED-IM-11.2 Develop a Land/Building Inventory Program as well as a
                       Brownfields Redevelopment Program. (Implements
                       Policy ED-11.3)
                       RA/D:      Redevelopment
                       FS:        Redevelopment, Federal Grants
                       TF:        2002-2004
            ED-IM-11.3 Expand the Problem Areas Study of the General Plan
                       effort to assist with the phasing out of nonconforming
                       uses. (Implements Policy ED-11.4)
                       RA/D:      Planning
                       FS:        General Fund
                       TF:        2003-2005
            ED-IM-11.4 Research the feasibility of forming a brownfields
                       assessment district. (Implements Policy ED-11.5)
                       RA/D:      Redevelopment, Engineering
                       FS:        Redevelopment, General Fund
                       TF:        2004-2005
                                                                             
Chapter 3                    ED-26                              Carson General Plan

                                CHAPTER 4
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                          CHAPTER 4
          TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
GUIDING PRINCIPLE
                 The City of Carson is committed to providing a safe and efficient circulation
                 system that improves the flow of traffic while enhancing pedestrian safety,
                 promoting commerce, and providing for alternative modes of transportation. The
                 City is committed to maintaining and improving all forms of infrastructure
                 including water, sewer and storm drainage facilities, as well as communication
                 and other technological facilities to provide a sustainable system.
1.0     INTRODUCTION
                 The purpose of this Element is to document the methods and results of the analysis
                 of the existing and projected future circulation conditions in the City of Carson. As
                 part of the General Plan, this document outlines Transportation and Infrastructure
                 System policies and describes the future circulation system needed to support the
                 Land Use Element. In addition, the Element addresses public utilities and
                 infrastructure.
2.0     STATE LAW REQUIREMENTS
                 The pertinent Government Code sections relating to the Transportation and
                 Infrastructure Element are as follows:
                     “Government Code Section 65302(b): (The general plan shall include) a
                     circulation element consisting of the general location and extent of existing and
Carson General Plan                                 TI-1                                          Chapter 4

                                                                 TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                  proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local
                  public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the land use element of the plan.
                  Government Code Section 95303: The general plan may . . . address any other
                  subjects which, in the judgment of the legislative body, relate to the physical
                  development of the county or city.”
3.0 SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
3.1     EXISTING CIRCULATION SYSTEM
              The City of Carson is served by the existing network of roadways shown in Exhibit
              TI-1, Existing Road Network. The existing street network is essentially a modified
              grid system of north/south and east/west roadways. The primary north/south
              roadways are Figueroa Street, Broadway, Main Street, Avalon Boulevard, Central
              Avenue, Wilmington Avenue, Alameda Street, and Santa Fe Avenue. The primary
              east/west streets are Alondra Boulevard, Gardena Boulevard, Artesia Boulevard,
              Albertoni Street, Walnut Street, Victoria Street, University Drive, Del Amo
              Boulevard, Carson Street, 223rd Street, Sepulveda Boulevard and Lomita
              Boulevard. The characteristics (Master Plan street classification, number of lanes,
              roadway widths and right-of-way dimensions) of each of these roadways, as well as
              some additional collector streets, are described in Table TI-1, Street Classifications
              and Characteristics.
              RELATION TO THE REGIONAL ROADWAY SYSTEM
              The Artesia Freeway (SR-91) to the north, the Long Beach Freeway (I-710) to the
              east, the Harbor Freeway (I-110) to the west and the San Diego Freeway (I-405)
              provide regional access to the City of Carson. Access to the freeways is provided via
              an extensive freeway ramp system connecting the City’s major arterials to the
              freeways.
              EXISTING DAILY TRAFFIC VOLUME ON EXISTING STREET NETWORK
              The characteristics of key arterial roadways in the City of Carson have been
              summarized in Table TI-1 and daily roadway traffic volume flow is shown in Exhibit
              TI-2, Traffic Flow Map. The existing daily traffic volumes were obtained by the City
              of Carson as part of the City’s traffic count program. Traffic counts were collected
              in 2001.
Chapter 4                                            TI-2                                Carson General Plan



   TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                               Table TI-1
                                         Street Classifications and Characteristics
                                                                                              No. of
                                                                                                                      Roadway
                                                                                              Lanes    Right-of-
      Street Name                            Segment                        Classification1                             Width
                                                                                              Each     way (feet)3
                                                                                                                        (feet)3
                                                                                            Direction2
192nd Street             Main Street to Avalon Boulevard                  Collector              1         80             64
213th Street             Main Street to Avalon Boulevard                  Collector              1       50 - 60        24-40
213th Street             405 Freeway to Wilmington Avenue                 Collector              1       50 - 60          40
213th Street             Avalon Boulevard to 405 Freeway                  Collector              1       50 - 70        24 -30
214th Street             Figueroa Street to Main Street                   Collector              1         60           30 -36
220th Street             Vera Street to Wilmington Avenue                 Collector              1       50 - 60       24 - 40
220th Street             Figueroa Street to Lucerne Street                Collector              1       46 - 60       32 - 40
223rd Street             West City Limit to East City Limit               Major Highway          2      42 - 116       28 - 84
228th Street             West City Limit to Avalon Boulevard              Collector              1       33 - 60       28 - 40
234th Street             Figueroa Street to Main Street                   Collector              1         60             36
Acarus Avenue            Vera Street to Carson Street                     Collector              1         60             40
Alameda Street           Lomita Boulevard to Del Amo Boulevard            Major Highway          1      50 - 145       44 - 114
Albertoni Street         Figueroa Street to Sudbury Drive                 Secondary Highway      2        100             84
Albertoni Street         Sudbury Drive to Central Avenue                  Collector              2         60             34
Alondra Boulevard        Figueroa Street to East City Limit               Major Highway        2, 35      100             80
Artesia Boulevard (East) Avalon Boulevard to Central Avenue               Collector              1         48             34
Avalon Boulevard         South City Limits to Alondra Boulevard           Major Highway          2      47 - 150      28 - 130
Bonita Street            Watson Center Road to Carson Street              Collector              1       57 - 80       35 - 60
Carson Street            West City Limit to Santa Fe Avenue               Major Highway          2      83 - 100       44 - 86
Central Avenue           Del Amo Boulevard to North City Limits           Major Highway          2      40 - 100       20 - 84
Del Amo Boulevard        West City Limit to East City Limit               Major Highway        1, 25   100 - 108       44 - 90
Dolores Street           Sepulveda Boulevard to 213th Street              Collector              1       50 - 80       18 - 60
Dominguez Street         Wilmington Avenue to Santa Fe Avenue             Collector            1, 25     66 - 84       30 - 68
Figueroa Street          South City Limits to Alondra Boulevard           Major Highway          2     100 - 200       40 - 84
Gardena Boulevard        Figueroa Street to Avalon Boulevard              Secondary Highway      2       60 - 80       16 - 64
Grace Avenue             228th Street to 213th Street                     Collector              1       55 - 60       23 - 40
Lomita Boulevard         West City Limit to City West of Avalon Boulevard Major Highway          2     100 - 182       80 - 84
Lomita Boulevard         Wilmington Avenue to Alameda Street              Major Highway          1     100 - 810       22 - 82
Lucerne Street           Watson Center Road to    220th Street            Collector              1       50 - 80       26 - 60
Main Street              Lomita Boulevard to Alondra Boulevard            Major Highway          2      80 - 100       40 - 84
Martin Street            Carson Street to 213th Street                    Collector              1       50 - 60       28 - 40
Moneta Avenue            228th Street to 214th Street                     Collector              1         60             40
   Carson General Plan                                              TI-5                                           Chapter 4
                                                                                   TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                          Table TI-1 [continued]
                                            Street Classifications and Characteristics
                                                                                                       No. of
                                                                                                                             Roadway
                                                                                                       Lanes     Right-of-
      Street Name                               Segment                         Classification1                               Width
                                                                                                       Each      way (feet)3
                                                                                                                              (feet)3
                                                                                                     Direction2
Santa Fe Avenue             405 Freeway to Del Amo Boulevard                 Secondary Highway            2       80 - 112    44 - 84
Sepulveda Boulevard         West City Limit to East City Limit               Major Highway            1, 2, 35    50 -100     36 - 88
University Drive            Avalon Boulevard to Wilmington Avenue            Secondary Highway          1, 25       100         80
Vera Street                 Carson Street to 213th Street                    Collector                    1          60         21
Victoria Street             West City Limit to Wilmington Avenue             Major Highway              1, 25     66 - 100    20 - 84
Walnut Street [4]           Figueroa Street to Main Street                   Collector                    1          50         30
Walnut Street (East)        Avalon Boulevard to Central Avenue               Secondary Highway            2          80         64
Watson Center Road          Avalon Boulevard to Wilmington Avenue            Collector                    1          80         60
Wilmington Avenue           Lomita Boulevard to Victoria Street              Major Highway                2       66 - 145   26 - 105
Notes:
1 – Source: City of Carson Master Plan of Highways, amended May 17, 1982
2 – Source: South Bay COG Sub regional Model Database and field observation
3 – Source: LA County Roads Department, Classification of road Surfaces Database
4 – Downgraded to Collector Street per Resolution No. 85-020, General Plan Amendment on February 4, 1985.
5 – Number of lanes varies
   Chapter 4                                                          TI-6                                      Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
3.2     CURRENT MASTER PLAN OF STREETS
                 The current Carson Master Plan of Streets was adopted in 1981 as part of the City’s
                 General Plan and is shown on Exhibit TI-3, 1981 Master Plan of Highways. The
                 Master Plan of Streets designates roadways as one of five street classifications,
                 according to function. The five classifications are:
                         Local Streets,
                         Collector Streets,
                         Secondary Highways,
                         Major Highways, and
                         State Highways and Freeways.
                 The function and brief description of each classification is provided in the following
                 paragraphs.
                 LOCAL STREETS
                 Local streets principally provide vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle access to property
                 abutting the public right-of-way. Cross sections of local streets vary, depending on
                 the abutting land uses, parking requirements, street trees, and other considerations.
                 Where both sides of the street are served equally in residential areas, the common
                 right-of-way width for a local street is from 48 feet to 60 feet with a 36- to 40-foot
                 pavement width.
                 In multi-family areas, where there is significant parking demand throughout the day,
                 a minimum of 40 feet of pavement may be required, to provide two moving lanes of
                 traffic in addition to street parking on both sides. In commercial and industrial
                 areas, a minimum pavement width of 40 feet is necessary. In industrial areas,
                 consideration of the predominant type of trucking, and whether or not maneuvering
                 of trailers must be provided, may require a pavement width of 44 feet or more.
                 Local streets can be expected to carry less than 1,500 vehicles per day. All other
                 streets in Carson not otherwise classified are local streets.
                 COLLECTOR STREETS
                 The collector street is intended to serve as an intermediate route to handle traffic
                 between local streets and arterials. In addition, collector streets provide access to
                 abutting property. Collector streets are anticipated to carry traffic volumes between
                 2,000 to 5,000 vehicles per day, but some carry as many as 10,000 vehicles per day.
                 A collector street may have one or two through lanes in each direction and curb
                 parking is often provided. The primary function of the collector street is to collect
                 vehicles from the local street system and transport them to the arterial system as
                 efficiently as possible. Collector streets in Carson require a minimum right-of-way
                 width of 60 feet.
Carson General Plan                                TI-7                                         Chapter 4


TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                 SECONDARY HIGHWAYS
                 Secondary highways are similar to major highways in function. They connect traffic
                 from collectors to the major freeway system. They move large volumes of
                 automobiles, trucks and buses, and link principal elements within the City to other
                 adjacent regions. These streets also handle intra-city trips in other adjacent regions.
                 These roadways carry approximately 10,000 to 25,000 vehicles per day. Four to six
                 through lanes are provided along with single or double left-turn lanes at major
                 signalized intersections. Curb parking is often prohibited during peak periods.
                 Secondary highways in Carson require a minimum right-of-way of 80 feet.
                 MAJOR HIGHWAYS
                 Major highways function to connect traffic from collectors to the major freeway
                 systems as well as to provide access to adjacent land uses. They move large volumes
                 of automobiles, trucks and buses, and link principal elements within the City to
                 other adjacent regions. These facilities typically handle inter-city vehicular trips in
                 the magnitude of 25,000 or more vehicles per day. Typically, curb parking is
                 prohibited during peak periods. Raised medians to separate opposing flows are
                 typical and access control, (i.e., driveways and minor intersecting streets) is often
                 minimized.
                 Separate left-turn lanes at major signalized intersections are required with double
                 left-turn lanes often provided. Separate right-turn lanes, which may also serve as
                 bus loading areas, are provided at locations where warranted by high turn volumes.
                 Major highways in Carson require rights-of-way of 100 feet or more.
                 STATE HIGHWAYS AND FREEWAYS
                 Freeways are controlled access, high-speed roadways with grade-separated
                 interchanges intended to expedite movement between distant areas in the region.
                 Planning, design, construction and maintenance of freeways in California are the
                 responsibility of the Department of Transportation (Caltrans). As a result, they fall
                 outside of the jurisdiction of the City of Carson. The freeway system serving the
                 City of Carson includes the Artesia Freeway (SR-91), Long Beach Freeway (I-710),
                 San Diego Freeway (I-405) and the Harbor Freeway (I-110). Alameda Street will
                 become a State Highway.
                 STREETS IN INDUSTRIAL AREAS
                 There are certain collectors that serve industrial areas, including the entrance,
                 interior and loop streets, which generate high traffic volumes by employees during
                 peak hours. Additionally, these streets accommodate industrial truck loading and
                 unloading. Therefore, these industrial streets should provide minimum right-of-way
                 of 84 feet, with the exception of minor interior industrial streets with less traffic
                 flow, such as industrial cul-de-sacs, which should provide a minimum right-of-way of
                 64 feet.
Carson General Plan                                TI-9                                        Chapter 4
                                                           TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                                 On August 6, 2013, the City Council
                                                                 adopted the Master Plan of Bikeways,
3.3     BICYCLE ROUTES                                           which replaces Section 3.3, Bicycle Routes.
             DEFINITIONS
             The following bicycle route definitions were identified in the 1981 Circulation
             Element, Master Plan of Bikeways, and are still applicable. These include, in
             parentheses, the Caltrans standard designation, recognized Statewide.
             Bicycle Path (Class I). This facility is a special path for exclusive use of bicycles that
             is completely separated from the motor vehicle traffic by space or a physical barrier.
             Bicycle paths are often provided in recreational areas such as parks and on beaches.
             Bicycle Lane (Class II). A bicycle facility where a portion of the paved roadway area
             is marked as a lane for use by bicycles only. It is identified by BIKE LANE signing,
             pavement marking and lane line markings. Usually, special ordinances are
             necessary to legally define the exclusive use of bicycle traffic and to exclude mopeds
             and infringement by motor vehicles.
             Bicycle Route (Class III). A bicycle facility designated within a public right-of-way.
             The purpose of the bike route is primarily that of transportation, allowing the
             bicyclist to travel from one point in the City to another. A shared bicycle route is a
             street identified as a bicycle facility by BIKE ROUTE signing only. No special
             markings on the pavement are provided.
             BICYCLE PLAN
             The Bicycle Plan, shown on Exhibit TI-4, Bicycle Plan, includes the facilities listed in
             the 1981 Plan. Several segments have been added to and a few deleted from the
             1981 Plan.
             The following roadway and other segments are designated Bike Path (Class I)
             facilities:
                     Bonita Street – between Sepulveda Boulevard and Carson Street (existing in
                      Calas Park);
                     Central Avenue – between University Drive and 169th Street (existing
                      University to Radbard Street);
                     169th Street – between Billings Drive and Central Avenue;
                     Walnut Street – between Figueroa Street and Main Street; and
                     Dominguez Channel
             The following roadway segments are designated Bike Lane (Class II) facilities:
                     Avalon Boulevard – between Del Amo Boulevard and 169th Street;
                     Central Avenue – between Del Amo Boulevard and University Drive
                      (existing);
                     Santa Fe – between Del Amo Boulevard and I-405;
                     Del Amo Boulevard – between Figueroa Street and Santa Fe Avenue
                      (existing between Wilmington and Avalon);
Chapter 4                                      TI-10                                Carson General Plan

                                 On August 6, 2013, the City Council
                                 adopted the Master Plan of Bikeways,
                                 which replaces Section 3.3, Bicycle Routes.
This plan superseded by Chapter 6 and
Figure 6.1 of the Master Plan of Bikeways.
                                                                 TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                             Carson Street – between Bonita Street and Alameda Street; and
On August 6, 2013,           Chico Street—between 213th Street and Del Amo Boulevard (existing);
the City Council             University Drive—between Avalon Boulevard and Wilmington (existing);
adopted the Master           Sepulveda Boulevard—between Figueroa Street and the east City boundary;
Plan of Bikeways,             and
which replaces               192nd Street—between Avalon Boulevard and Main Street.
Section 3.3, Bicycle
Routes.               The following roadway segments are designated Bike Route (Class III) facilities:
                             Main Street – between 213th Street and Walnut Street;
                             Dolores Street – between Sepulveda Boulevard and 213th Street (existing
                              between Sepulveda Boulevard and Carson Street);
                             Victoria Street – between Figueroa Street and Wilmington Avenue;
                             Turmont Street – between Avalon Boulevard and Wilmington Avenue
                              (existing);
                             213th Street – between Main Street and Wilmington Avenue;
                             Carson Street – between Alameda Street and Santa Fe Avenue;
                             223rd Street – between Figueroa Street and Bonita Street;
                             Torrance Boulevard—between Main Street and the west City boundary; and
                             Vera Street—between Carson Boulevard and 213th Street.
         3.4     TRANSIT FACILITIES
                      Public transportation in the City of Carson is provided primarily by the Carson
                      Circuit, Torrance Transit, and the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation
                      Authority (MTA) bus lines. There is also limited service from Long Beach Transit
                      and Gardena Municipal Bus Lines. Following are brief descriptions of the major
                      lines and routes in the project area, which are illustrated on Exhibit TI-5, Bus
                      Routes.
                      CARSON CIRCUIT TRANSIT SYSTEM
                         Route A (Cal State Dominguez Hills) serves the northern Carson area in the
                          vicinity of Cal State Dominguez Hills. Route A operates around Dominguez
                          Hills Village and on Victoria Street between Avalon Boulevard and Central
                          Avenue, Avalon Boulevard between Victoria Street and Del Amo Boulevard,
                          Del Amo Boulevard between Avalon Boulevard and Wilmington Avenue,
                          University Avenue between Avalon Boulevard and Wilmington Avenue, and
                          Turmont Street between Leapwood Avenue and Wilmington Avenue.
                         Route B (Keystone) serves the southwestern Carson area in the vicinity of
                          Carson High School. Primary routes served by Route B include Main Street
                          between Carson Street and 234th Street, Moneta Street between Carson Street
                          and 228th Street, and Carson Street between Moneta Avenue and Avalon
                          Boulevard.
         Chapter 4                                     TI-12                             Carson General Plan


                                                           TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                 Route C (Scottsdale) primarily serves the Avalon Boulevard corridor between
                  Del Amo Boulevard to the north and Sepulveda Boulevard to the south.
                 Route D (Metro Blue Line 1) and Route G (Metro Blue Line 2) serve the central
                  Carson area from Avalon Boulevard to the eastern City border. Route D travels
                  in a clockwise pattern while Route G travels in a counterclockwise route. Both
                  lines operate on Del Amo Boulevard between Avalon Boulevard and Santa Fe
                  Avenue, in a circuitous pattern from Del Amo Boulevard to the Avalon
                  Boulevard/Carson Street intersection, and Avalon Boulevard from Del Amo
                  Boulevard to Carson Street.
                 Route E (Turmont) serves the area just south, east and west of Cal State
                  Dominguez Hills. Primary routes served by Route E include Avalon Boulevard
                  between Victoria Street and Del Amo Boulevard, University Drive between
                  Avalon Boulevard and Wilmington Avenue, and Turmont Street between
                  Avalon Boulevard and Wilmington Avenue.
                 Route F (Business Center South) serves the south central Carson area. Primary
                  routes served by Route F include Bonita Street between 213th Street and Watson
                  Center Road, 213th Street between Avalon Boulevard and Martin Street, and
                  Wilmington Avenue between Watson Center Road and 233rd Street.
                 Route H (Hemingway Park) serves the north central Carson area. Primary
                  routes served by Route H include Avalon Boulevard between Alondra
                  Boulevard and Del Amo Boulevard and Alondra Boulevard between Avalon
                  Boulevard and the northeastern City border.
              All Carson Circuit routes converge on the South Bay Pavilion so transfers are easy.
              Senior and disabled citizens ride free.
        TORRANCE TRANSIT BUS LINES
                 Route 3 operates between downtown Long Beach and the Redondo Beach Pier.
                  In the Carson area, primary routes served by Route 3 include Carson Street
                  between Vermont Avenue and Avalon Boulevard, Avalon Boulevard between
                  Carson Street and 223rd Street, 223rd Street between Avalon Boulevard and
                  Dolores Street, Dolores Street between 223rd Street and Sepulveda Boulevard,
                  and Sepulveda Boulevard between Dolores Street and Wilmington Boulevard.
                 Route 6 operates between the Metro Blue Line Artesia Station and the Del Amo
                  Center Transit Terminal Park and Ride. In the Carson area, primary routes
                  served by Route 6 include Victoria Street between Vermont Avenue and
                  Central Avenue, Central Avenue between Victoria Street and Walnut Street,
                  and Walnut Street from Central Avenue east to the Metro Blue Line Artesia
                  Station.
              Senior and disabled citizens’ fares are discounted.
Chapter 4                                       TI-14                              Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
        MTA BUS LINES
                   MTA Line 53 operates between Cal State Dominguez Hills and Downtown Los
                    Angeles. In the Carson area, the primary route served by Line 53 is Central
                    Avenue near Cal State Dominguez Hills.
                   MTA Line 127 operates between Cal State Dominguez Hills, Compton,
                    Paramount, Bellflower and Downey. In the Carson area, the primary route
                    served by Line 127 is Avalon Boulevard between Cal State Dominguez Hills and
                    Alondra Boulevard, and Alondra Boulevard between Avalon Boulevard and
                    Wilmington Avenue.
                   MTA Line 130 operates between Redondo Beach and the Fullerton park and
                    ride lot located on Orangethorpe Avenue. In the Carson area, Line 130
                    traverses Victoria Street between Vermont Avenue to the west and Central
                    Avenue to the east.
                   MTA Line 202 operates between Wilmington and the Rosa
                    Parks/Imperial/Wilmington Station in Willowbrook. In the Carson area, the
                    primary route served by Line 202 is Avalon Boulevard between Lomita
                    Boulevard and Carson Street, Carson Street between Avalon Boulevard and
                    Alameda Street, and Alameda Street between Carson Street and Del Amo
                    Boulevard.
                   MTA Line 205 operates between Willowbrook and San Pedro. In the Carson
                    area, Line 205 runs along 192nd Street between Main Street and Avalon
                    Boulevard, Avalon Boulevard between 192nd Street and Del Amo Boulevard,
                    Del Amo Boulevard between Avalon Boulevard and Wilmington Avenue, and
                    Wilmington Avenue between Del Amo Boulevard and the SR-91 Freeway.
                   MTA Lines 446/447 operate between downtown Los Angeles and San Pedro. In
                    the Carson area, Lines 446/447 travel along Avalon Boulevard between the
                    northern and southern borders of the City.
                 Senior and disabled citizens’ fares are discounted.
        MTA METRO RAIL LINES
                   Metro Blue Line operates between Long Beach and Downtown Los Angeles. In
                    the Carson area, the closest Blue Line stations are Artesia and Del Amo. The
                    Artesia station is located at 1920-1/2 Acacia Avenue in Compton. The Del Amo
                    station is located at 20220 Santa Fe Avenue in Los Angeles.
                   Metro Green Line operates between Redondo Beach and Norwalk. While the
                    Green Line does not run through Carson, the Green Line does connect with the
                    Blue Line at the Rosa Parks (Imperial/Wilmington) station located at 11651
                    Wilmington Avenue in Los Angeles.
Carson General Plan                                TI-15                                 Chapter 4

                                                            TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
        LONG BEACH TRANSIT
                   Routes 191, 192, 193, and 194 all serve the far east side of the City of Carson,
                    connecting the Del Amo Blue Line Station via Santa Fe Avenue to the Long
                    Beach Civic Center.
               Senior and disabled citizens’ fares are discounted.
        GARDENA MUNICIPAL BUS LINES
                   Line 3 operates between Compton and the South Bay Center in Torrance. In
                    the Carson area, the primary routes served by Line 3 include Gardena
                    Boulevard between Vermont Avenue and Avalon Boulevard, Avalon Boulevard
                    between Alondra Boulevard and Gardena Boulevard, and Alondra Boulevard
                    between Avalon Boulevard and Wilmington Avenue.
               Senior and disabled citizens’ fares are discounted.
3.5     SPECIALIZED SHUTTLE SERVICES
               CARSON NORTH/SOUTH SHUTTLE
               The City of Carson North/South Shuttle runs in one direction every forty minutes
               from Super K-Mart on Figueroa Avenue and Torrance Boulevard, north on Main
               Street to Victoria Street, back south on Main Street to Sepulveda Boulevard, and
               loops back north on Figueroa Street to Super K-Mart. It connects to the Carson
               Circuit, Torrance Transit and MTA bus lines. Senior and disabled citizens ride free
               and the regular fare is $.50.
               DIAL-A-RIDE SERVICE
               Economical taxi service is available to Carson seniors and/or disabled citizens
               twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. Accessible mini-vans are available for
               wheelchair users. Service is provided anywhere within the City limits and to specific
               medical and social service appointments at satellite locations outside the City in
               Torrance, San Pedro, Gardena, Harbor City, Long Beach, Wilmington and Lomita.
               ACCESS SERVICES
               Access Services is another dial-a-ride specialized transportation service for disabled
               citizens throughout Los Angeles County. It is not administered by the City of
               Carson. It has a fleet of specially equipped vans and taxis offering curb-to-curb
               services.
Chapter 4                                        TI-16                              Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
3.6     TRUCK ROUTES
                 CURRENT CITY TRUCK ROUTES
                 The City has many trucks on its streets due to the types of industrial and commercial
                 uses in the City. There are no specific counts of trucks as opposed to other types of
                 vehicles on City streets but it is estimated that trucks make up 10-25% of the
                 vehicles over 24 hours. The volume of trucks, the impacts of truck traffic on land
                 uses, and the conflict between trucks and other vehicles are major issues for the
                 City.
                 The City of Carson has designated truck routes and truck parking zones where
                 vehicles in excess of three tons may travel and park. These routes and parking zones
                 are shown in Exhibit TI-6, Truck Routes. The purpose of regulating truck routes and
                 truck parking zones is to provide access for large trucks on streets designed to
                 accommodate them and to protect residential streets from unwanted truck traffic.
3.7     EXISTING TRAFFIC OPERATIONS ANALYSIS
                 The ground traffic counts provide the roadway segment volumes used in the existing
                 conditions analysis of the volume-to-capacity ratio for the roadway level of service.
                 The assumed capacities on roadway links were based on the standards used by the
                 County of Los Angeles and modified for special conditions in Carson. The
                 capacities reflect the maximum number of vehicles per hour that can reasonably be
                 carried on the roadway under prevailing traffic conditions. The capacities reflect
                 the presence of intersections that reduce link capacities by assigning traffic signal
                 time to each intersection street. The assumed roadway capacities of each type of
                 facility are shown in Table TI-2, Roadway Capacities.
                                                         Table TI-2
                                                   Roadway Capacities
                                                                           Hourly Capacity
                                     Facility Type
                                                                           (veh. /lane/hour)
                   Two way major arterial                                         750
                   Two way secondary arterial                                     750
                   Collector and local streets                                    750
                 Level of Service (LOS) terms are used to qualitatively describe prevailing conditions
                 and their effect on traffic. Broadly interpreted, the LOS concept denotes any one of
                 a number of differing combinations of operating conditions that may take place as a
                 roadway is accommodating various traffic volumes. The LOS is related to the
                 volume-to-capacity ratio (V/C). To determine the V/C ratio, the average daily
                 traffic volume on a particular roadway link is divided by the link capacity. There are
Carson General Plan                                TI-17                                       Chapter 4

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                    six defined Levels of Service, A through F, which describe conditions ranging from
                    “ideal” to “worst” as defined in Table TI-3, Level of Service Descriptions.
                                                              Table TI-3
                                                 Level of Service Descriptions
                                                                                                                       Volume to
   Level of
                                                              Description                                               Capacity
   Service
                                                                                                                          Ratio
                  Excellent operation. All approaches to the intersection appear quite open, turning
      A                                                                                                                  0 - 0.60
                  movements are easily made, and nearly all drivers find freedom of operation.
                  Very good operation. Many drivers begin to feel somewhat restricted within platoons of
      B           vehicles. This represents stable flow. An approach to an intersection may occasionally be            0.61 - 0.70
                  fully utilized and traffic queues start to form.
                  Good operation. Occasionally drivers may have to wait more than 60 seconds, and back-
      C                                                                                                                0.71 – 0.80
                  ups may develop behind turning vehicles. Most drivers feel somewhat restricted.
                  Fair operation. Cars are sometimes required to wait more than 60 seconds during short
      D           peaks. There are no long-standing traffic queues. This level is typically associated with            0.81 - 0.90
                  design practice for peak periods.
                  Poor operation. Some long-standing vehicular queues develop on critical approaches to
      E                                                                                                                0.91 - 1.00
                  intersections. Delays may be up to several minutes.
                  Forced flow. Represents jammed conditions. Backups from locations downstream or on
                  the cross street may restrict or prevent movement of vehicles out of the intersection
      F                                                                                                                 Over 1.01
                  approach lanes; therefore, volumes carried are not predictable. Potential for stop and go
                  type traffic flow.
  Source:   Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C., 1985 and Interim Materials
            on Highway Capacity, NCHRP Circular 212, 1982.
                    The analysis of the existing AM and PM peak volumes on arterial operating
                    conditions was conducted by comparing the peak traffic volumes and estimated
                    capacity for each roadway. The results of this analysis are summarized in Table TI-
                    4, Existing AM Peak Hour Level of Service, and TI-5, Existing PM Peak Hour Level
                    of Service and presented graphically on Exhibit TI-7, Existing Level of Service.
                    Tables TI-4 and TI-5 reveal that the majority of roadways in the City of Carson
                    operate at LOS “D” or better. The following three roadway segments currently
                    operate at LOS E or F:
                               Wilmington Avenue from 223rd Street to I-405 Freeway (AM/PM Peak);
                               Wilmington Avenue from Carson Street to 213th Street (AM Peak);
                               223rd Street from Wilmington Avenue to Alameda Street (PM Peak).
Carson General Plan                                               TI-19                                                    Chapter 4

                                                                       TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                         Table TI-4
                                        Existing AM Peak Hour Level of Service
                                                                        Number of    Existing                Level of
                            Segment                           Capacity                           V/C Ratio
                                                                           Lanes      Volume                  Service
       Street                                      Class         per
                                                                Lane   NB/     SB/ NB/     SB/  NB/    SB/  NB/     SB/
                    From                To
                                                                        EB     WB   EB     WB   EB     WB   EB      WB
213th St      Main St           Avalon Blvd       Collector      450     1       1  350     286 0.78   0.64  C       B
213th St      Avalon St         Chico St          Collector      450     2       2  283     281 0.31   0.31  A       A
213th St      Chico St          Wilmington Ave    Collector      450     1       1  117     90  0.26   0.20  A       A
220th St      Main St           Avalon Blvd       Collector      450     1       1  135     242 0.30   0.54  A       A
223rd St      Figueroa St       Main St            Major         750     2       2  646     857 0.43   0.57  A       A
223rd St      Main St           Avalon Blvd        Major         750     2       2  762     795 0.51   0.53  A       A
223rd St      Avalon St         Wilmington Ave     Major         750     2       2  594     669 0.40   0.45  A       A
223rd St      Wilmington Ave    Alameda St         Major         750     2       2  688     745 0.46   0.50  A       A
228th St      Main St           Avalon Blvd       Collector      450     1       1  127     149 0.28   0.33  A       A
Alameda St    Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd     Major         750     2       2  314     584 0.21   0.39  A       A
Alameda St    Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St           Major         750     2       2  451     689 0.30   0.46  A       A
Alameda St    I-405 Fwy         Carson St          Major         750     2       2  525     472 0.35   0.31  A       A
Alameda St    Carson St         Dominguez St       Major         750     2       2  340     395 0.23   0.26  A       A
Albertoni St  Figueroa St       Main St          Secondary       600     2       2  390     451 0.33   0.38  A       A
Albertoni St  Main St           Avalon Blvd      Secondary       600     2       2  506     654 0.42   0.55  A       A
Albertoni St  Avalon St         SR-91 Fwy        Secondary       600     2       2  530     319 0.44   0.27  A       A
Alondra Blvd  Figueroa St       Main St            Major         750     3       3  309     444 0.14   0.20  A       A
Alondra Blvd  Main St           Avalon Blvd        Major         750     3       3  339     512 0.15   0.23  A       A
Avalon Blvd   Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd     Major         750     2       2  471     399 0.31   0.27  A       A
Avalon Blvd   Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St           Major         750     2       2  875     509 0.58   0.34  A       A
Avalon Blvd   223rd St          Carson St          Major         750     2       2  891     727 0.59   0.48  A       A
Avalon Blvd   Carson St         213th St           Major         750     3       3  960     786 0.43   0.35  A       A
Avalon Blvd   213th St          I-405 Fwy          Major         750     3       3  976     900 0.43   0.40  A       A
Avalon Blvd   Dominguez St      Del Amo Blvd       Major         750     3       3  900     932 0.40   0.41  A       A
Avalon Blvd   Del Amo Blvd      University Dr      Major         750     3       3  752     652 0.33   0.29  A       A
Avalon Blvd   University Dr     Victoria St        Major         750     3       3  737     991 0.33   0.44  A       A
Avalon Blvd   Victoria St       Albertoni St       Major         750     3       3  898     765 0.40   0.34  A       A
Avalon Blvd   SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd       Major         750     3       3  943     759 0.42   0.34  A       A
Avalon Blvd   Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd       Major         750     3       3  819     699 0.36   0.31  A       A
Broadway      Main St           Victoria St        Major         750     2       2  307     131 0.20   0.09  A       A
Broadway      Victoria St       Albertoni St       Major         750     2       2  351     194 0.23   0.13  A       A
Broadway      SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd       Major         750     2       2  351     255 0.23   0.17  A       A
Broadway      Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd       Major         750     2       2  366     262 0.24   0.17  A       A
Carson St     Figueroa St       Main St            Major         750     2       2  769     865 0.51   0.58  A       A
Carson St     Main St           Avalon Blvd        Major         750     2       2  790     958 0.53   0.64  A       B
Carson St     Avalon St         I-405 Fwy          Major         750     2       2 1155    1054 0.77   0.70  C       C
Carson St     I-405 Fwy         Wilmington Ave     Major         750     2       2  776     579 0.52   0.39  A       A
Carson St     Wilmington Ave    Alameda St         Major         750     2       2  561     949 0.37   0.63  A       B
Carson St     Alameda St        Santa Fe Ave       Major         750     2       2  446     846 0.30   0.56  A       A
    Chapter 4                                               TI-20                               Carson General Plan
    TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                  Table TI-4 [continued]
                                          Existing AM Peak Hour Level of Service
                                                                         Number of    Existing                  Level of
                              Segment                           Capacity                          V/C Ratio
                                                                            Lanes      Volume                    Service
      Street                                         Class         per
                                                                  Lane   NB/    SB/ NB/     SB/  NB/    SB/    NB/     SB/
                      From                To
                                                                         EB     WB   EB     WB   EB     WB     EB      WB
Central Ave     Del Amo Blvd      Turmont St         Major         750    2       2  272     338 0.18   0.23    A       A
Central Ave     Turmont St        University Dr      Major         750    2       2  397     316 0.26   0.21    A       A
Central Ave     University Dr     Victoria St        Major         750    2       2  612     360 0.41   0.24    A       A
Del Amo Blvd    Figueroa St       Main St            Major         750    2       2  153     279 0.10   0.19    A       A
Del Amo Blvd    Main St           Avalon Blvd        Major         750    2       2   0       0  0.00   0.00    A       A
Del Amo Blvd    Avalon St         Central Ave        Major         750    2       2  459     678 0.31   0.45    A       A
Del Amo Blvd    Central Ave       Wilmington Ave     Major         750    2       2  420     379 0.28   0.25    A       A
Dolores St      Sepulveda Blvd    228th St          Collector      450    1       1  64      143 0.14   0.32    A       A
Figueroa St     Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd     Major         750    2       2  261     270 0.17   0.18    A       A
Figueroa St     Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St           Major         750    2       2  173     203 0.12   0.14    A       A
Figueroa St     223rd St          Carson St          Major         750    2       2  762     189 0.51   0.13    A       A
Figueroa St     Carson St         Torrance Blvd      Major         750    2       2  646     196 0.43   0.13    A       A
Figueroa St     Torrance Blvd     Del Amo Blvd       Major         750    2       2 1226     446 0.82   0.30    D       A
Figueroa St     Del Amo Blvd      I-405 Fwy          Major         750    2       2  782     670 0.52   0.45    A       A
Figueroa St     I-405 Fwy         Victoria St        Major         750    2       2  900     584 0.60   0.39    A       A
Figueroa St     Victoria St       SR-91 Fwy          Major         750    2       2  533     441 0.36   0.29    A       A
Figueroa St     SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd       Major         750    2       2  477     422 0.32   0.28    A       A
Figueroa St     Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd       Major         750    2       2  475     470 0.32   0.31    A       A
Gardena Blvd    Figueroa St       Main St          Secondary       600    2       2  176     297 0.15   0.25    A       A
Gardena Blvd    Main St           Avalon Blvd      Secondary       600    2       2  213     151 0.18   0.13    A       A
Lomita Blvd     Figueroa St       Main St            Major         750    2       2  838     973 0.56   0.65    A       B
Lomita Blvd     Main St           Avalon Blvd        Major         750    2       2  736     826 0.49   0.55    A       A
Lomita Blvd     Wilmington Ave    Alameda St         Major         750    1       1  324     305 0.43   0.41    A       A
Main St         Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd     Major         750    2       2  937     637 0.62   0.42    B       A
Main St         Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St           Major         750    2       2  633     515 0.42   0.34    A       A
Main St         223rd St          Carson St          Major         750    2       2  850     672 0.57   0.45    A       A
Main St         Carson St         213th St           Major         750    2       2  855     637 0.57   0.42    A       A
Main St         213th St          Torrance Blvd      Major         750    2       2  830     521 0.55   0.35    A       A
Main St         Torrance Blvd     Del Amo Blvd       Major         750    2       2  720     490 0.48   0.33    A       A
Main St         Del Amo Blvd      I-405 Fwy          Major         750    2       2  727     603 0.48   0.40    A       A
Main St         I-405 Fwy         Broadway           Major         750    2       2  841     619 0.56   0.41    A       A
Main St         Broadway          Victoria St        Major         750    2       2  501     421 0.33   0.28    A       A
Main St         Victoria St       Albertoni St       Major         750    2       2  544     377 0.36   0.25    A       A
Main St         SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd       Major         750    2       2  685     451 0.46   0.30    A       A
Main St         Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd       Major         750    2       2  516     477 0.34   0.32    A       A
Moneta Ave      228th St          223rd St          Collector      450    1       1  146     112 0.32   0.25    A       A
Santa Fe Ave    Carson St         Dominguez St     Secondary       600    2       2  718     793 0.60   0.66    A       B
Santa Fe Ave    Dominguez St      Del Amo Blvd     Secondary       600    2       2  688     833 0.57   0.69    A       B
Sepulveda Blvd  Figueroa St       Main St            Major         750    2       2  728     832 0.49   0.55    A       A
Sepulveda Blvd  Main St           Avalon Blvd        Major         750    2       2  932     720 0.62   0.48    B       A
    Carson General Plan                                       TI-21                                          Chapter 4
                                                                       TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                 Table TI-4 [continued]
                                         Existing AM Peak Hour Level of Service
                                                                        Number of    Existing                Level of
                             Segment                          Capacity                           V/C Ratio
                                                                           Lanes      Volume                  Service
       Street                                      Class         per
                                                                Lane   NB/     SB/ NB/     SB/  NB/    SB/  NB/     SB/
                     From                To
                                                                        EB     WB   EB     WB   EB     WB   EB      WB
Sepulveda Blvd Avalon St         Wilmington Ave     Major        750     2       2  794     634 0.53   0.42  A       A
Sepulveda Blvd Wilmington Ave    Alameda St         Major        750     2       2  410     359 0.27   0.24  A       A
Sepulveda Blvd Alameda St        Intermodal         Major        750     2       2  458     558 0.31   0.37  A       A
Torrance Blvd  Figueroa St       Main St          Secondary      600     2       2  297     427 0.25   0.36  A       A
University Dr  Avalon St         Central Ave      Secondary      600     2       2  277     303 0.23   0.25  A       A
University Dr  Central Ave       Wilmington Ave   Secondary      600     2       2  301     166 0.25   0.14  A       A
Victoria St    Figueroa St       Main St            Major        750     2       2  765     824 0.51   0.55  A       A
Victoria St    Main St           Avalon Blvd        Major        750     2       2  613     618 0.41   0.41  A       A
Victoria St    Avalon St         Tamcliff Ave       Major        750     2       2  595     491 0.40   0.33  A       A
Victoria St    Tamcliff Ave      Central Ave        Major        750     2       2  324     376 0.22   0.25  A       A
Victoria St    Central Ave       Wilmington Ave     Major        750     1       1  395     262 0.53   0.35  A       A
Wilmington Ave Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd     Major        750     2       2  495     496 0.33   0.33  A       A
Wilmington Ave Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St           Major        750     2       2  841     768 0.56   0.51  A       A
Wilmington Ave 223rd St          I-405 Fwy          Major        750     2       2 1107    1507 0.74   1.00  C       F
Wilmington Ave I-405 Fwy         Carson St          Major        750     2       2  892     692 0.59   0.46  A       A
Wilmington Ave Carson St         213th St           Major        750     2       2 1359     775 0.91   0.52  E       A
Wilmington Ave 213th St          Del Amo Blvd       Major        750     2       2 1003     684 0.67   0.46  B       A
Wilmington Ave Del Amo Blvd      University Dr      Major        750     2       2  880     917 0.59   0.61  A       B
Wilmington Ave University Dr     Victoria St        Major        750     3       3  810    1183 0.36   0.53  A       A
    Chapter 4                                               TI-22                               Carson General Plan
    TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                            Table TI-5
                                          Existing PM Peak Hour Level of Service
                                                                          Number of     Existing                   Level of
                              Segment                            Capacity                             V/C Ratio
                                                                             Lanes       Volume                     Service
      Street                                          Class         per
                                                                   Lane   NB/     SB/ NB/      SB/  NB/     SB/  NB/     SB/
                      From                To
                                                                          EB      WB   EB      WB   EB      WB    EB     WB
213th St        Main St           Avalon Blvd        Collector      450    1       1  364      398  0.81    0.88   D      D
213th St        Avalon St         Chico St           Collector      450    2       2  418      337  0.46    0.37   A      A
213th St        Chico St          Wilmington Ave     Collector      450    1       1  124      217  0.28    0.48   A      A
220th St        Main St           Avalon Blvd        Collector      450    1       1  271      224  0.60    0.50   B      A
223rd St        Figueroa St       Main St             Major         750    2       2  1025     614  0.68    0.41   B      A
223rd St        Main St           Avalon Blvd         Major         750    2       2  971      647  0.65    0.43   B      A
223rd St        Avalon St         Wilmington Ave      Major         750    2       2  836      689  0.56    0.46   A      A
223rd St        Wilmington Ave    Alameda St          Major         750    2       2  1587     517  1.06    0.34   F      A
228th St        Main St           Avalon Blvd        Collector      450    1       1  127      117  0.28    0.26   A      A
Alameda St      Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd      Major         750    2       2  607      527  0.40    0.35   A      A
Alameda St      Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St            Major         750    2       2  873      545  0.58    0.36   A      A
Alameda St      I-405 Fwy         Carson St           Major         750    2       2  524      499  0.35    0.33   A      A
Alameda St      Carson St         Dominguez St        Major         750    2       2  427      438  0.28    0.29   A      A
Albertoni St    Figueroa St       Main St           Secondary       600    2       2  541      325  0.45    0.27   A      A
Albertoni St    Main St           Avalon Blvd       Secondary       600    2       2  1004     303  0.84    0.25   D      A
Albertoni St    Avalon St         SR-91 Fwy         Secondary       600    2       2  883      258  0.74    0.22   C      A
Alondra Blvd    Figueroa St       Main St             Major         750    3       3  396      399  0.18    0.18   A      A
Alondra Blvd    Main St           Avalon Blvd         Major         750    3       3  552      419  0.25    0.19   A      A
Avalon Blvd     Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd      Major         750    2       2  476      591  0.32    0.39   A      A
Avalon Blvd     Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St            Major         750    2       2  668      881  0.45    0.59   A      A
Avalon Blvd     223rd St          Carson St           Major         750    2       2  922      1003 0.61    0.67   B      B
Avalon Blvd     Carson St         213th St            Major         750    3       3  1076     1266 0.48    0.56   A      A
Avalon Blvd     213th St          I-405 Fwy           Major         750    3       3  1201     1369 0.53    0.61   A      B
Avalon Blvd     Dominguez St      Del Amo Blvd        Major         750    3       3  1087     1156 0.48    0.51   A      A
Avalon Blvd     Del Amo Blvd      University Dr       Major         750    3       3  919      918  0.41    0.41   A      A
Avalon Blvd     University Dr     Victoria St         Major         750    3       3  1142     1015 0.51    0.45   A      A
Avalon Blvd     Victoria St       Albertoni St        Major         750    3       3  852      1060 0.38    0.47   A      A
Avalon Blvd     SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd        Major         750    3       3  1005     1074 0.45    0.48   A      A
Avalon Blvd     Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd        Major         750    3       3  1013     901  0.45    0.40   A      A
Broadway        Main St           Victoria St         Major         750    2       2  120      377  0.08    0.25   A      A
Broadway        Victoria St       Albertoni St        Major         750    2       2  232      331  0.15    0.22   A      A
Broadway        SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd        Major         750    2       2  276      317  0.18    0.21   A      A
Broadway        Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd        Major         750    2       2  315      333  0.21    0.22   A      A
Carson St       Figueroa St       Main St             Major         750    2       2  1270     935  0.85    0.62   D      B
Carson St       Main St           Avalon Blvd         Major         750    2       2  1234     968  0.82    0.65   D      B
Carson St       Avalon St         I-405 Fwy           Major         750    2       2  1346     1033 0.90    0.69   D      B
Carson St       I-405 Fwy         Wilmington Ave      Major         750    2       2  864      714  0.58    0.48   A      A
Carson St       Wilmington Ave    Alameda St          Major         750    2       2  829      649  0.55    0.43   A      A
Carson St       Alameda St        Santa Fe Ave        Major         750    2       2  871      515  0.58    0.34   A      A
Central Ave     Del Amo Blvd      Turmont St          Major         750    2       2  380      356  0.25    0.24   A      A
Central Ave     Turmont St        University Dr       Major         750    2       2  287      426  0.19    0.28   A      A
Central Ave     University Dr     Victoria St         Major         750    2       2  395      399  0.26    0.27   A      A
    Carson General Plan                                        TI-23                                        Chapter 4
                                                                         TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                 Table TI-5 [continued]
                                         Existing PM Peak Hour Level of Service
                                                                          Number of      Existing                      Level of
                             Segment                            Capacity                                  V/C Ratio
                                                                             Lanes        Volume                       Service
      Street                                         Class         per
                                                                  Lane    NB/     SB/ NB/       SB/     NB/     SB/  NB/    SB/
                     From                To
                                                                          EB      WB   EB       WB      EB      WB   EB     WB
Del Amo Blvd   Figueroa St       Main St             Major         750     2       2  309       205     0.21    0.14  A       A
Del Amo Blvd   Main St           Avalon Blvd         Major         750     2       2    0        0      0.00    0.00  A       A
Del Amo Blvd   Avalon St         Central Ave         Major         750     2       2  691       740     0.46    0.49  A       A
Del Amo Blvd   Central Ave       Wilmington Ave      Major         750     2       2  477       554     0.32    0.37  A       A
Dolores St     Sepulveda Blvd    228th St           Collector      450     1       1  128        99     0.28    0.22  A       A
Figueroa St    Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd      Major         750     2       2  286       256     0.19    0.17  A       A
Figueroa St    Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St            Major         750     2       2  363       316     0.24    0.21  A       A
Figueroa St    223rd St          Carson St           Major         750     2       2  602       283     0.40    0.19  A       A
Figueroa St    Carson St         Torrance Blvd       Major         750     2       2  410       346     0.27    0.23  A       A
Figueroa St    Torrance Blvd     Del Amo Blvd        Major         750     2       2  1078      499     0.72    0.33  C       A
Figueroa St    Del Amo Blvd      I-405 Fwy           Major         750     2       2  381       1152    0.25    0.77  A       C
Figueroa St    I-405 Fwy         Victoria St         Major         750     2       2  663       733     0.44    0.49  A       A
Figueroa St    Victoria St       SR-91 Fwy           Major         750     2       2  459       511     0.31    0.34  A       A
Figueroa St    SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd        Major         750     2       2  465       534     0.31    0.36  A       A
Figueroa St    Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd        Major         750     2       2  559       509     0.37    0.34  A       A
Gardena Blvd   Figueroa St       Main St           Secondary       600     2       2  269       302     0.22    0.25  A       A
Gardena Blvd   Main St           Avalon Blvd       Secondary       600     2       2  250       250     0.21    0.21  A       A
Lomita Blvd    Figueroa St       Main St             Major         750     2       2  1285      702     0.86    0.47  D       A
Lomita Blvd    Main St           Avalon Blvd         Major         750     2       2  812       753     0.54    0.50  A       A
Lomita Blvd    Wilmington Ave    Alameda St          Major         750     1       1  417       335     0.56    0.45  A       A
Main St        Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd      Major         750     2       2  780       691     0.52    0.46  A       A
Main St        Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St            Major         750     2       2  658       755     0.44    0.50  A       A
Main St        223rd St          Carson St           Major         750     2       2  697       1023    0.46    0.68  A       B
Main St        Carson St         213th St            Major         750     2       2  695       922     0.46    0.61  A       B
Main St        213th St          Torrance Blvd       Major         750     2       2  250       953     0.17    0.64  A       B
Main St        Torrance Blvd     Del Amo Blvd        Major         750     2       2  491       828     0.33    0.55  A       A
Main St        Del Amo Blvd      I-405 Fwy           Major         750     2       2  679       774     0.45    0.52  A       A
Main St        I-405 Fwy         Broadway            Major         750     2       2  603       1017    0.40    0.68  A       B
Main St        Broadway          Victoria St         Major         750     2       2  458       599     0.31    0.40  A       A
Main St        Victoria St       Albertoni St        Major         750     2       2  398       640     0.27    0.43  A       A
Main St        SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd        Major         750     2       2  516       653     0.34    0.44  A       A
Main St        Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd        Major         750     2       2  494       515     0.33    0.34  A       A
Moneta Ave     228th St          223rd St           Collector      450     1       1  105       138     0.23    0.31  A       A
Santa Fe Ave   Carson St         Dominguez St      Secondary       600     2       2  933       911     0.78    0.76  C       C
Santa Fe Ave   Dominguez St      Del Amo Blvd      Secondary       600     2       2  1042      832     0.87    0.69  D       B
Sepulveda Blvd Figueroa St       Main St             Major         750     2       2  838       855     0.56    0.57  A       A
Sepulveda Blvd Main St           Avalon Blvd         Major         750     2       2  837       860     0.56    0.57  A       A
Sepulveda Blvd Avalon St         Wilmington Ave      Major         750     2       2  713       778     0.48    0.52  A       A
Sepulveda Blvd Wilmington Ave    Alameda St          Major         750     2       2  373       415     0.25    0.28  A       A
Sepulveda Blvd Alameda St        Intermodal          Major         750     2       2  738       812     0.49    0.54  A       A
    Chapter 4                                                 TI-24                                  Carson General Plan
    TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                  Table TI-5 [continued]
                                          Existing PM Peak Hour Level of Service
                                                                         Number of     Existing                   Level of
                              Segment                           Capacity                             V/C Ratio
                                                                            Lanes       Volume                     Service
       Street                                        Class         per
                                                                  Lane   NB/     SB/ NB/      SB/  NB/     SB/  NB/     SB/
                      From                To
                                                                         EB      WB   EB      WB   EB      WB    EB     WB
Torrance Blvd   Figueroa St       Main St           Secondary      600    2       2  532      353  0.44    0.29   A      A
University Dr   Avalon St         Central Ave       Secondary      600    2       2  326      275  0.27    0.23   A      A
University Dr   Central Ave       Wilmington Ave    Secondary      600    2       2  172      319  0.14    0.27   A      A
Victoria St     Figueroa St       Main St             Major        750    2       2  1093     732  0.73    0.49   C      A
Victoria St     Main St           Avalon Blvd         Major        750    2       2  913      541  0.61    0.36   B      A
Victoria St     Avalon St         Tamcliff Ave        Major        750    2       2  812      726  0.54    0.48   A      A
Victoria St     Tamcliff Ave      Central Ave         Major        750    2       2  653      595  0.44    0.40   A      A
Victoria St     Central Ave       Wilmington Ave      Major        750    1       1  325      480  0.43    0.64   A      B
Wilmington Ave  Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd      Major        750    2       2  372      659  0.25    0.44   A      A
Wilmington Ave  Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St            Major        750    2       2  801      930  0.53    0.62   A      B
Wilmington Ave  223rd St          I-405 Fwy           Major        750    2       2  1174     1616 0.78    1.08   C      F
Wilmington Ave  I-405 Fwy         Carson St           Major        750    2       2  719      947  0.48    0.63   A      B
Wilmington Ave  Carson St         213th St            Major        750    2       2  938      1325 0.63    0.88   B      D
Wilmington Ave  213th St          Del Amo Blvd        Major        750    2       2  885      1006 0.59    0.67   A      B
Wilmington Ave  Del Amo Blvd      University Dr       Major        750    2       2  1013     933  0.68    0.62   B      B
Wilmington Ave  University Dr     Victoria St         Major        750    3       3  1106     851  0.49    0.38   A      A
    Carson General Plan                                       TI-25                                        Chapter 4

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
3.8     INFRASTRUCTURE/UTILITIES
                 SEWER
                 The Los Angeles County Public Works Department (LACPWD) maintains the local
                 sewer lines that run in the street to the trunk sewer lines. The homeowner is
                 responsible for maintenance of the lateral connection lines from the structure to the
                 street. Most local sewer lines are eight inches in diameter. No new upgrades are
                 currently planned. The LACPWD also maintains two small lift stations that are
                 located within the Carson boundaries:
                         Scottsdale Pump Station
                          23426 Avalon Boulevard
                          Capacity: 100 gallons per minute
                         Belshaw Pump Station
                          22650 Belshaw Avenue
                          Capacity: 1,125 gallons per minute
                 The Los Angeles County Sanitation District (Sanitation District) maintains the
                 trunk sewer lines within the City of Carson. There are approximately one dozen
                 trunk sewer lines, ranging in size from 50 inches to 8 feet in diameter, which are
                 generally located as follows:
                         Del Amo Boulevard – running east to west
                         Main Street – running north to south
                         Wilmington Avenue – 3 lines running north to south, 2 lines running east to
                          west along railroad tracks
                         Alameda Street – 2 lines running north to south
                         Broadway – 2 lines running north to south
                 The Joint Water Pollution Control Plant, located at 24501 South Figueroa Street in
                 Carson, is part of the Joint Outfall System that provides sewage treatment and
                 disposal for residential, commercial and industrial users within the 17 sanitation
                 districts in Los Angeles County that are participants in the Joint Outfall Agreement.
                 The Joint Water Pollution Control Plant (JWPCP) is one of the largest wastewater
                 treatment plants in the world. It serves a population of about 3.5 million people and
                 many industries in southern and eastern Los Angeles County. It provides advanced
                 primary and partial secondary treatment for 350 million gallons of wastewater per
                 day.
                 WATER
                 Water service in the City of Carson is provided by the California Water Service
                 Company (formerly Dominguez Water Corporation) and the Southern California
                 Water Company (SCWC).
Carson General Plan                                TI-27                                       Chapter 4

                                                                            TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                      The California Water Service Company (California Water) is an investor-owned
                      public water utility. Its rates and operations are regulated by the California Public
                      Utilities Commission. Its service area, located in the South Bay, covers a 35 square
                      mile area, including most of the City of Carson.
                      California Water supply has two principal sources: local groundwater and purchased
                      imported water. Imported water is purchased from the Metropolitan Water District
                      of Southern California (MWD) through a member agency, the West Basin
                      Municipal Water District (WBMWD). California Water has eight direct MWD
                      service connections and one indirect MWD service connection. California Water
                      also participates in the MWD-sponsored “In-Lieu” Water Programs, whereby water
                      suppliers purchase imported water from MWD at a reduced rate instead of pumping
                      groundwater. The non-pumped groundwater then stays in the basins for use in the
                      future when imported water may not be as plentiful. Table TI-6, Sources of
                      California Water Company Production, illustrates the amount of groundwater,
                      imported water and desalinated water production for 1990 through 1995. The
                      company treats all of its water supply to meet drinking water standards, regardless of
                      source.
                                                              Table TI-6
                                     Sources of California Water Company Production
                                         1990           1991    1992      1993       1994        1995        Average
 Groundwater (acre feet)                7,873          8,594    6,612       1        4,006      10,654         6,290
   % of Total                            20%            27%     20%        0%        12%         30%           18%
 Imported Water (acre feet)             30,988         23,603  26,963    32,647     29,150      24,324        27,946
   % of Total                            80%            73%     80%       97%        84%         67%           80%
 Desalinated Water (acre feet)                                            905        1,563       1,181          608
   % of Total                                                              3%         4%          3%            2%
 Total Water Production
                                        38,861         32,196  33,575    33,553     34,719      36,159        34,844
 (acre feet)
 Source: Sources of Water Production 1990-1995 (Acre Feet).
                      The total number of California Water customers is projected to grow approximately
                      6.2 percent from 1995 to 2015. Future shifts in water demand most likely would
                      result from either the expansion/downsizing of major industrial customers, new
                      industrial customer growth and the introduction of recycled water. To meet water
                      demands for the next decade, the company will rely on a mix of ground, imported,
                      desalinated and recycled water sources. California Water projections indicate that,
                      under normal precipitation conditions, it will have sufficient water supplies to meet
                      annual customer water demand through 2015. This is based on the continuation of
                      conservation programs, on desalinated and recycled water becoming available, and
                      on planned efforts to emphasize groundwater supplies and to reduce reliance on
                      imported water sources.
Chapter 4                                                        TI-28                               Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                 The SCWC, Southwest District, serves a small portion of north Carson. It is an
                 investor-owned private utility company that supplies water service to approximately
                 2,030 customers within the City of Carson. Carson lies within the Lawndale/
                 Gardena Zone, which has an average daily demand of 13,900 gpm, a maximum daily
                 demand of 20,850 gpm, and a peak hour demand of 35,445 gpm. The Southwest
                 District of Southern California Water purchases approximately 80 percent of its
                 water demand from MWD connections within the service area, and approximately
                 20 percent of its water demand is supplied through company-owned deep wells.
                 Additional information regarding water quality and conservation can be found in:
                 Chapter 8, Open Space and Conservation Element of this General Plan. Information
                 regarding drainage facilities can be found in Chapter 6, Safety Element, of this General
                 Plan.
                 ELECTRIC
                 Electric service is provided to the Carson area by Southern California Edison
                 (SCE), Compton Service Center. There are three major substations within the
                 Carson boundaries: 1) Carson Substation at Alameda Street and Johns Manville
                 Street, 2) Nola Substation at South Broadway and Victoria Street, and 3) Neptune
                 Station at 213th Street and Grace Avenue. There are approximately one dozen
                 transmission facilities (66kV) that extend along Wilmington Avenue and Alameda
                 Street that feed the SCE service area or distribute directly to select high voltage
                 customers. There are also numerous high voltage easements, ranging from 120 kV
                 to 500 kV, that traverse the City of Carson.
                 Electrical consumption factors are not available specifically for the City of Carson;
                 however, annual estimated use factors are offered by SCE in Table TI-7, Electrical
                 Consumption for Various Land Uses.
                 Southern California Edison is continually analyzing the capacity of its systems and
                 projecting and planning for new load growth based on commercial, industrial and
                 residential customer demand.
                 NATURAL GAS
                 Natural gas is supplied to the City by Southern California Gas Company (The Gas
                 Company), Pacific Region. As a public utility, The Gas Company is under the
                 jurisdiction of Federal and State regulatory agencies. A medium and high pressure
                 distribution pipeline system and a high pressure transmission pipeline system
                 transect the Carson boundaries. There are no current deficiencies in the natural gas
                 supply systems that serve Carson. The Gas Company continually assesses and
                 upgrades its systems to meet current and future needs, and thus can accommodate
                 any future expansion in residential, commercial or industrial uses. The Gas
                 Company has also developed several programs to provide assistance in selecting
                 energy efficient appliances and systems.
Carson General Plan                                 TI-29                                        Chapter 4
                                                                              TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                           Table TI-7
                                   Electrical Consumption for Various Land Uses
               Land Use Type                                          Unit Type                                SCE Factor
 Residential                                    Kilowatt-hour/Unit/Year                                          6,081.0
 Food Store                                     Kilowatt-hour/Square Feet/Year                                     51.4
 Restaurant                                     Kilowatt-hour/Square Feet/Year                                     47.3
 Hospital                                       Kilowatt-hour/Square Feet/Year                                     17.9
 Retail                                         Kilowatt-hour/Square Feet/Year                                     11.8
 College/University                             Kilowatt-hour/Square Feet/Year                                     11.6
 High School                                    Kilowatt-hour/Square Feet/Year                                     8.8
 Elementary School                              Kilowatt-hour/Square Feet/Year                                     6.3
 Office                                         Kilowatt-hour/Square Feet/Year                                     8.8
 Hotel/Motel                                    Kilowatt-hour/Square Feet/Year                                     6.8
 Warehouse                                      Kilowatt-hour/Square Feet/Year                                     3.4
 Miscellaneous                                  Kilowatt-hour/Square Feet/Year                                     8.8
 Source:  South Coast Air Quality Management District, CEQA Air Quality Handbook, Appendix 9, September 1992.
                    SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
                    Waste Management currently provides residential, commercial and industrial waste
                    collection service for the City of Carson. Waste Management collects approximately
                    70,000 tons from residential customers and 153,500 tons from commercial and
                    industrial customers per year. The disposal service uses traditional methods of solid
                    waste collection using standard trash trucks and crews. The service also includes the
                    pickup of sorted recyclable materials, which are transported directly to a company
                    that separates and sells them.
                    The solid waste collected by Waste Management is transported to the company’s
                    transfer station at 321 W. Francisco Street in Carson, where it is sorted. The 10-acre
                    facility has a permitted capacity of 5,300 tons per day. After the materials are
                    sorted, tires, green waste, steel, and wood are sent to special facilities for disposal or
                    recycling. The remaining waste materials are loaded onto trailers and taken to the
                    El Sobrante Landfill in Riverside County, a distance of 75 miles from Carson.
                    The El Sobrante Landfill currently has a capacity of 4000 tons a day but is expected
                    to increase to 7500 tons per day by the year 2004, due to the construction of service
                    roads. Its current life expectancy is 100 years. Waste Management also uses
                    Lancaster Landfill and Simi Valley Landfill as alternates.
                    Additional information regarding solid waste can be found in Chapter 8, Open Space
                    and Conservation of this General Plan.
Chapter 4                                                       TI-30                                         Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                 CABLE
                 The City has multiple cable providers. One upgraded its system within the last
                 several years to the latest fiber optics. The increased capacity now allows the
                 company to offer 65 basic channels and a choice of 12 premium channels. Internet
                 connections are available through one provider.
                 TELEPHONE
                 There are also multiple telephone service providers. The telephone service facilities
                 consist of both fiber and copper facilities. A light span technique that enhances
                 service is also used in the Carson area. A sonet ring provides improved service to
                 the general South Bay area. There are both aerial and underground lines within the
                 City of Carson. Undergrounding of new facilities is considered on a case-by-case
                 basis. There is need for upgraded facilities to provide new services to existing
                 customers and to expand services to new customer facilities, especially related to
                 computers. The City has approved many telecommunications antennae.
4.0     FUTURE CIRCULATION SYSTEM CONDITIONS WITH GENERAL PLAN
        BUILDOUT
4.1     AMBIENT TRAFFIC GROWTH
                 Ambient traffic growth is the traffic growth, not including freeways, that will occur
                 in the City due to general employment growth, housing growth and growth in
                 regional through trips in southern California. Even if there were no change in
                 housing or employment in the City of Carson, there would be some background
                 (ambient) traffic growth in the region. Per discussions with City staff, an ambient
                 growth rate of 0.25 percent per year for the next 20 years is used, which represents a
                 total of 5 percent ambient growth over 20 years.
4.2     SHORT-TERM TRAFFIC GROWTH
                 Short-term traffic growth is growth due to recently approved development projects
                 in the City. City staff provided the information on projects approved but not
                 completed as of December 2000. Table TI-8, Short-Term Growth Trip Generation in
                 Carson, summarizes the trip generation estimates for these projects. Individual
                 approved project trip generation estimates are presented in Appendix B.
4.3     FORECAST FUTURE TRIP GENERATION
                 The first step in analyzing future traffic condition is to predict future trip generation.
                 The Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) has published trip generation rates
                 for numerous land uses in “Trip Generation 6th Edition,” which has been adopted
                 as a standard by nearly all agencies and cities in southern California. The Los
                 Angeles County Congestion Management Program (CMP) guidelines also
                 recommend the use of ITE trip generation data, but allow other rates to be used in
Carson General Plan                                TI-31                                          Chapter 4

                                                                 TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
             special cases if sufficient empirical data is provided and documented. Trips have
             therefore been calculated based on ITE’s trip rates for the General Plan buildout.
                                                           Table TI-8
                                    Short-Term Growth Trip Generation in Carson
                                                                    Size           Estimated New Trips
                              Land Use Type                       (Units/
                                                               Square Feet) AM Peak Hour      PM Peak Hour
             Development Status Report Project Trips
             Low Density Residential                                215           161              217
             High Density Residential                               978           491              597
             Light Industrial                                    2,294,147       1,173            1,207
             Heavy Industrial                                     197,336         101              134
             Commercial                                           256,000         210              876
             Office/Business Park                                1,480,000       1,854            2,717
             Other (Training Center, Church, Daycare, Tech.)     1,897,238       2,420            2,628
             Trips for Development Status Report Projects                        6,410            8,376
             Future trip generation rates are described in Table TI-9, Forecast Future Trip
             Generation in Carson. As shown in Table TI-9, the greatest number of new trips
             would occur due to development in light industrial land uses, which accounts for
             approximately 61 percent of all new trips during the AM peak hour and 46 percent
             of all new trips during the PM peak hour, followed by development of residential,
             retail, and office. Pass-by trips were assumed to be 25 percent of all retail
             commercial trips (consistent with ITE standards).
4.4     FUTURE TRIP DISTRIBUTION
             The distribution of the future trips describes the paths taken by new trips to and
             from the buildout locations. The traffic model that was developed for this Element
             includes a series of trip destination points around the City of Carson where trips will
             enter and leave the City on their way to the cumulative project driveways. The
             amount of traffic using each access route is an important variable in the overall
             traffic analysis. To determine the likely trip origins and destinations, the regional
             traffic model developed by the Southern California Association of Governments
             (SCAG) was reviewed. The SCAG model includes trip patterns for Traffic Analysis
             Zones (TAZs) within Carson. Those patterns are based on origin/destination
             surveys that were developed by SCAG. The model was used to determine the share
             of traffic for each cumulative project using the key arterial facilities in the City. The
             data is then refined for the City of Carson, based on the location of the City and its
             accessibility to regional freeways and roadway systems. Exhibit TI-8, Project Trip
             Distribution Pattern, illustrates the assumed trip distribution patterns that were
             developed for this Element. These patterns were varied as appropriate based on the
             location of individual project areas, for example, project areas closer to I-405 were
Chapter 4                                            TI-32                                Carson General Plan


                                                              TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
              more heavily weighed to use the I-405 freeway, and similarly for those areas near the
              I-110 and SR-91, etc.
                                                        Table TI-9
                                       Forecast Future Trip Generation in Carson
                                                                 Size           Estimated New Trips
                               Land Use Type                   (Units/
                                                            Square Feet) AM Peak Hour      PM Peak Hour
              Low Density Residential                            271           204              273
              High Density Residential                           521           266              319
              Light Industrial                               10,023,200       8,955            9,628
              Commercial                                      3,041,506       1,704            7,387
              Office/Business Park                            2,111,700       3,268            2,892
              Other (Hotel)                                    300,000         168              183
              Total Trips                                                    14,565            20,682
4.5     TRAFFIC REDISTRIBUTION DUE TO DEL AMO OVER-CROSSING OF I-405 FREEWAY
              The Del Amo over-crossing of the I-405 freeway was completed in May 2003. This
              new link in the circulation system resulted in traffic redistribution on parallel and
              connecting roadways of existing traffic volumes. The new facility enabled motorists
              to make the freeway crossing on Del Amo Boulevard, if desired, rather than using
              Carson Street or Victoria Street. The new crossing resulted in shorter path trips for
              some motorists.
              The redistributed traffic was estimated using the regional model of the Southern
              California Association of Governments. The model was run with and without the
              new Del Amo over-crossing and the resulting differences in traffic loading was
              assessed. For both the AM and PM peak hours, adjustments to link volumes were
              applied to reflect the effects of the new over-crossing. As expected, the model
              results indicated that parallel route traffic volumes would decrease, while Del Amo
              Boulevard will increase in the vicinity of the new crossing. Additionally, some of the
              connecting routes to Del Amo Boulevard would experience an increase in traffic.
              The over-crossing was included in the traffic model for future project-added trips.
              The new crossing was assumed in the local area traffic model, and future project
              trips were assigned to the over-crossing as if it were in place today. Using this
              methodology, the impacts and benefits of the new over-crossing were fully
              accounted for in the traffic analysis.
4.6     FUTURE TRAFFIC VOLUMES
              Future traffic volumes with General Plan buildout were estimated by assigning
              project traffic to the City roadway network based on the trip distribution described
              above, and are shown in Exhibit TI-9, Projected Future Traffic Flow Map. The results
              were then evaluated for potential deficiencies (LOS E or F conditions with buildout
Chapter 4                                         TI-34                                Carson General Plan
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                 of general plan. Table TI-10, Future AM Peak Hour Level of Service With General
                 Plan Growth, and Table TI-11, Future PM Peak Hour Level of Service With General
                 Plan Growth, presents the Future Conditions levels of service with general plan
                 buildout. The bold locations indicate forecast deficiencies in the future. Exhibit TI-
                 10, Deficient Segments (AM Peak Hour), and Exhibit TI-11, Deficient Segments (PM
                 Peak Hour), graphically depict the locations of the deficient roadway segments.
                 The following 17 roadway segments would operate at LOS E or F:
                        223rd Street from Wilmington Avenue to Alameda Street (PM)
                        Avalon Boulevard from Dominguez Street to Del Amo Boulevard (PM)
                        Carson Street from Figueroa Street to Main Street (PM)
                        Carson Street from Main Street to Avalon Boulevard (PM)
                        Carson Street from Avalon Boulevard to I-405 (PM)
                        Central Avenue from University Drive to Victoria Street (AM/PM)
                        Del Amo Boulevard from Avalon Boulevard to Central Avenue (PM)
                        Main Street from Carson Street to 213th Street (AM/PM)
                        Main Street from 213th Street to Torrance Boulevard (AM/PM)
                        Main Street from Torrance Boulevard to Del Amo Boulevard (AM/PM)
                        Sepulveda Boulevard from Figueroa Street to Main Street (PM)
                        Torrance Boulevard from Figueroa Street to Main Street (AM/PM)
                        Wilmington Avenue from 223rd Street to I-405 (AM/PM)
                        Wilmington Avenue from I-405 to Carson Street (AM/PM)
                        Wilmington Avenue from Carson Street to 213th Street (AM/PM)
                        Wilmington Avenue from 213th Street to Del Amo Boulevard (AM/PM)
                        Wilmington Avenue from University Drive to Victoria Street (AM/PM)
5.0 TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS
                 This report presents the summary of future operating conditions given the
                 anticipated development in the City and in the area surrounding the City. It has
                 been determined that several transportation system deficiencies would remain with
                 the current Master Plan of Highways assumed to be built. This section discusses
                 potential additional roadway system improvements to consider in order to maintain
                 adequate service levels in the future.
5.1     PLAN OF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
                 The proposed Plan of Streets and Highways, shown as Exhibit TI-12, Plan of Streets
                 and Highways, has few changes from the 1981 Plan. It is proposed that:
                        Carson Street between the western City boundary and Avalon Boulevard be
                         made a Modified Secondary Highway;
                        A new roadway of Major Highway capacity be required through the 157 acre
                         site at Avalon and I-405;
Carson General Plan                                TI-35                                      Chapter 4


      TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                           Table TI-10
                           Future AM Peak Hour Level of Service With General Plan Growth
                                                                        Number of      Future                    Level of
                               Segment                         Capacity                            V/C Ratio
                                                                           Lanes       Volume                     Service
      Street                                        Class         per
                                                                 Lane   NB/     SB/ NB/     SB/  NB/     SB/   NB/     SB/
                       From                To
                                                                        EB      WB   EB     WB   EB      WB     EB     WB
213th St         Main St           Avalon Blvd     Collector      750    1       1  388      605 0.86    1.35    D      F
213th St         Avalon St         Chico St        Collector      750    1       1  325      378 0.72    0.84    C      D
213th St         Chico St          Wilmington Ave  Collector      750    1       1  151      178 0.34    0.39    A      A
220th St         Main St           Avalon Blvd     Collector      750    1       1  321      288 0.71    0.64    C      B
223rd St         Figueroa St       Main St          Major         750    3       3  707      964 0.47    0.64    A      B
223rd St         Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major         750    3       3  783      965 0.52    0.64    A      B
223rd St         Avalon St         Wilmington Ave   Major         750    3       3  840      906 0.56    0.60    A      B
223rd St         Wilmington Ave    Alameda St       Major         750    3       3  997     1202 0.66    0.80    B      D
228th St         Main St           Avalon Blvd     Collector      750    1       1  158      167 0.35    0.37    A      A
Alameda St       Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd   Major         750    3       3  456      645 0.30    0.43    A      A
Alameda St       Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St         Major         750    3       3  614      911 0.41    0.61    A      B
Alameda St       I-405 Fwy         Carson St        Major         750    3       3  725      791 0.48    0.53    A      A
Alameda St       Carson St         Dominguez St     Major         750    3       3  523      615 0.35    0.41    A      A
Albertoni St     Figueroa St       Main St        Secondary       750    2       2  429      550 0.36    0.46    A      A
Albertoni St     Main St           Avalon Blvd    Secondary       750    2       2  693      933 0.58    0.78    A      C
Albertoni St     Avalon St         SR-91 Fwy      Secondary       750    2       2  585      358 0.49    0.30    A      A
Alondra Blvd     Figueroa St       Main St          Major         750    3       3  400      483 0.18    0.21    A      A
Alondra Blvd     Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major         750    3       3  470      722 0.21    0.32    A      A
Avalon Blvd      Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd   Major         750    3       3  731      477 0.49    0.32    A      A
Avalon Blvd      Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St         Major         750    3       3  1254     755 0.84    0.50    D      A
Avalon Blvd      223rd St          Carson St        Major         750    3       3  1253    1019 0.84    0.68    D      B
Avalon Blvd      Carson St         213th St         Major         750    3       3  1258     848 0.56    0.38    A      A
Avalon Blvd      213th St          I-405 Fwy        Major         750    3       3  1264    1187 0.56    0.53    A      A
Avalon Blvd      Dominguez St      Del Amo Blvd     Major         750    3       3  1999    1114 0.89    0.49    D      A
Avalon Blvd      Del Amo Blvd      University Dr    Major         750    3       3  1361     999 0.60    0.44    B      A
Avalon Blvd      University Dr     Victoria St      Major         750    3       3  1247    1337 0.55    0.59    A      A
Avalon Blvd      Victoria St       Albertoni St     Major         750    3       3  1053    1076 0.47    0.48    A      A
Avalon Blvd      SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd     Major         750    3       3  1171     984 0.52    0.44    A      A
Avalon Blvd      Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd     Major         750    3       3  1019    1107 0.45    0.49    A      A
Broadway         Main St           Victoria St      Major         750    3       3  476      439 0.32    0.29    A      A
Broadway         Victoria St       Albertoni St     Major         750    3       3  549      497 0.37    0.33    A      A
Broadway         SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd     Major         750    3       3  440      486 0.29    0.32    A      A
Broadway         Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd     Major         750    3       3  448      532 0.30    0.35    A      A
Carson St        Figueroa St       Main St        Secondary       750    2       2  1786    1261 1.19    0.84    F      D
Carson St        Main St           Avalon Blvd    Secondary       750    2       2  1479    1884 0.99    1.26    E      F
Carson St        Avalon St         I-405 Fwy        Major         750    3       3  1875    1930 1.25    1.29    F      F
Carson St        I-405 Fwy         Wilmington Ave   Major         750    3       3  1072     736 0.71    0.49    C      A
Carson St        Wilmington Ave    Alameda St       Major         750    3       3  835     1790 0.56    1.19    A      F
Carson St        Alameda St        Santa Fe Ave     Major         750    3       3  571     1455 0.38    0.97    A      E
Central Ave      Del Amo Blvd      Turmont St       Major         750    3       3  597      651 0.40    0.43    A      A
Central Ave      Turmont St        University Dr    Major         750    3       3  728      623 0.49    0.42    A      A
Central Ave      University Dr     Victoria St      Major         750    2       2  999     1717 1.11    1.91    F      F
      Carson General Plan                                     TI-37                                        Chapter 4
                                                                     TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                Table TI-10 [continued]
                         Future AM Peak Hour Level of Service With General Plan Growth
                                                                     Number of       Future                    Level of
                             Segment                        Capacity                               V/C Ratio
                                                                        Lanes       Volume                      Service
      Street                                      Class        per
                                                              Lane   NB/     SB/ NB/      SB/    NB/     SB/  NB/    SB/
                     From                To
                                                                     EB      WB   EB      WB     EB      WB   EB     WB
Del Amo Blvd   Figueroa St       Main St          Major        750    3       3  1246      662   0.83    0.44  D      A
Del Amo Blvd   Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major        750    3       3  1397      714   0.93    0.48  E      A
Del Amo Blvd   Avalon St         Central Ave      Major        750    3       3  1893     1537   1.26    1.02  F      F
Del Amo Blvd   Central Ave       Wilmington Ave   Major        750    3       3  743      1333   0.50    0.89  A      D
Dolores St     Sepulveda Blvd    228th St        Collector     750    1       1   67       150   0.15    0.33  A      A
Figueroa St    Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd   Major        750    3       3  350       341   0.23    0.23  A      A
Figueroa St    Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St         Major        750    3       3  415       307   0.28    0.20  A      A
Figueroa St    223rd St          Carson St        Major        750    3       3  1180      448   0.79    0.30  C      A
Figueroa St    Carson St         Torrance Blvd    Major        750    3       3  1962      527   1.31    0.35  F      A
Figueroa St    Torrance Blvd     Del Amo Blvd     Major        750    3       3  2042      848   1.36    0.57  F      A
Figueroa St    Del Amo Blvd      I-405 Fwy        Major        750    3       3  809      1058   0.54    0.71  A      C
Figueroa St    I-405 Fwy         Victoria St      Major        750    3       3  1059      968   0.71    0.65  C      B
Figueroa St    Victoria St       SR-91 Fwy        Major        750    3       3  659       622   0.44    0.41  A      A
Figueroa St    SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd     Major        750    3       3  576       649   0.38    0.43  A      A
Figueroa St    Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd     Major        750    3       3  559       736   0.37    0.49  A      A
Gardena Blvd   Figueroa St       Main St        Secondary      750    2       2  214       317   0.18    0.26  A      A
Gardena Blvd   Main St           Avalon Blvd    Secondary      750    2       2  316       290   0.26    0.24  A      A
Lomita Blvd    Figueroa St       Main St          Major        750    3       3  1021     1049   0.68    0.70  B      B
Lomita Blvd    Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major        750    3       3  834       894   0.56    0.60  A      A
Lomita Blvd    Wilmington Ave    Alameda St       Major        750    3       3  355       330   0.47    0.44  A      A
Main St        Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd   Major        750    3       3  1260     1141   0.84    0.76  D      C
Main St        Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St         Major        750    3       3  973       758   0.65    0.51  B      A
Main St        223rd St          Carson St        Major        750    3       3  1396      967   0.93    0.64  E      B
Main St        Carson St         213th St         Major        750    3       3  2528     1161   1.69    0.77  F      C
Main St        213th St          Torrance Blvd    Major        750    3       3  2566     1042   1.71    0.69  F      B
Main St        Torrance Blvd     Del Amo Blvd     Major        750    3       3  2755     1247   1.84    0.83  F      D
Main St        Del Amo Blvd      I-405 Fwy        Major        750    3       3  1059     1084   0.71    0.72  C      C
Main St        I-405 Fwy         Broadway         Major        750    3       3  992      1118   0.66    0.75  B      C
Main St        Broadway          Victoria St      Major        750    3       3  570       619   0.38    0.41  A      A
Main St        Victoria St       Albertoni St     Major        750    3       3  798       825   0.53    0.55  A      A
Main St        SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd     Major        750    3       3  948       934   0.63    0.62  B      B
Main St        Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd     Major        750    3       3  635       955   0.42    0.64  A      B
Moneta Ave     228th St          223rd St        Collector     750    1       1  205       135   0.46    0.30  A      A
Santa Fe Ave   Carson St         Dominguez St   Secondary      750    2       2  1039     1077   0.87    0.90  D      D
Santa Fe Ave   Dominguez St      Del Amo Blvd   Secondary      750    2       2  848      1108   0.71    0.92  C      E
Sepulveda Blvd Figueroa St       Main St          Major        750    3       3  1439     1119   0.96    0.75  E      C
Sepulveda Blvd Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major        750    3       3  1336     1049   0.89    0.70  D      B
Sepulveda Blvd Avalon St         Wilmington Ave   Major        750    3       3  1212      863   0.81    0.58  D      A
Sepulveda Blvd Wilmington Ave    Alameda St       Major        750    3       3  705       535   0.47    0.36  A      A
Sepulveda Blvd Alameda St        Intermodal       Major        750    3       3  804       650   0.54    0.43  A      A
     Chapter 4                                             TI-38                               Carson General Plan
      TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                  Table TI-10 [continued]
                          Future AM Peak Hour Level of Service With General Plan Growth
                                                                      Number of      Future                    Level of
                               Segment                       Capacity                            V/C Ratio
                                                                         Lanes       Volume                     Service
       Street                                      Class        per
                                                               Lane   NB/     SB/ NB/     SB/  NB/     SB/   NB/     SB/
                       From                To
                                                                      EB      WB   EB     WB   EB      WB     EB     WB
Torrance Blvd    Figueroa St       Main St        Secondary     750    2       2  1843     869 1.54    0.72    F      C
University Dr    Avalon St         Central Ave    Secondary     750    2       2  412      339 0.34    0.28    A      A
University Dr    Central Ave       Wilmington Ave Secondary     750    2       2  381      367 0.32    0.31    A      A
Victoria St      Figueroa St       Main St          Major       750    3       3  1015     994 0.68    0.66    B      B
Victoria St      Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major       750    3       3  685      761 0.46    0.51    A      A
Victoria St      Avalon St         Tamcliff Ave     Major       750    3       3  917      616 0.61    0.41    B      A
Victoria St      Tamcliff Ave      Central Ave      Major       750    3       3  632      495 0.42    0.33    A      A
Victoria St      Central Ave       Wilmington Ave   Major       750    3       3  585      553 0.78    0.74    C      C
Wilmington Ave   Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd   Major       750    3       3  1136     639 0.76    0.43    C      A
Wilmington Ave   Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St         Major       750    3       3  1639     909 1.09    0.61    F      B
Wilmington Ave   223rd St          I-405 Fwy        Major       750    3       3  2198    1773 1.47    1.18    F      F
Wilmington Ave   I-405 Fwy         Carson St        Major       750    3       3  2277    1463 1.52    0.98    F      E
Wilmington Ave   Carson St         213th St         Major       750    3       3  2759    1100 1.84    0.73    F      C
Wilmington Ave   213th St          Del Amo Blvd     Major       750    3       3  2162    1417 1.44    0.94    F      E
Wilmington Ave   Del Amo Blvd      University Dr    Major       750    3       3  1532    1261 1.02    0.84    F      D
Wilmington Ave   University Dr     Victoria St      Major       750    3       3  1324    2683 0.59    1.19    A      F
      Carson General Plan                                   TI-39                                        Chapter 4
                                                                       TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                          Table TI-11
                          Future PM Peak Hour Level of Service With General Plan Growth
                                                                       Number of      Future                    Level of
                              Segment                         Capacity                              V/C Ratio
                                                                          Lanes       Volume                     Service
      Street                                       Class         per
                                                                Lane   NB/     SB/ NB/     SB/    NB/     SB/  NB/    SB/
                      From                To
                                                                       EB      WB   EB     WB     EB      WB   EB     WB
213th St        Main St           Avalon Blvd     Collector      750    1       1  484      642   1.08    1.43  F      F
213th St        Avalon St         Chico St        Collector      750    1       1  543      404   1.21    0.90  F      D
213th St        Chico St          Wilmington Ave  Collector      750    1       1  234      278   0.52    0.62  A      B
220th St        Main St           Avalon Blvd     Collector      750    1       1  409      328   0.91    0.73  E      C
223rd St        Figueroa St       Main St          Major         750    3       3  1094     792   0.73    0.53  C      A
223rd St        Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major         750    3       3  957      987   0.64    0.66  B      B
223rd St        Avalon St         Wilmington Ave   Major         750    3       3  1102    1221   0.73    0.81  C      D
223rd St        Wilmington Ave    Alameda St       Major         750    3       3  2216    1029   1.48    0.69  F      B
228th St        Main St           Avalon Blvd     Collector      750    1       1  150      152   0.33    0.34  A      A
Alameda St      Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd   Major         750    3       3  703      716   0.47    0.48  A      A
Alameda St      Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St         Major         750    3       3  1155     754   0.77    0.50  C      A
Alameda St      I-405 Fwy         Carson St        Major         750    3       3  706      742   0.47    0.49  A      A
Alameda St      Carson St         Dominguez St     Major         750    3       3  694      661   0.46    0.44  A      A
Albertoni St    Figueroa St       Main St        Secondary       750    2       2  630      418   0.53    0.35  A      A
Albertoni St    Main St           Avalon Blvd    Secondary       750    2       2  1256     435   1.05    0.36  F      A
Albertoni St    Avalon St         SR-91 Fwy      Secondary       750    2       2  1039     276   0.87    0.23  D      A
Alondra Blvd    Figueroa St       Main St          Major         750    3       3  435      490   0.19    0.22  A      A
Alondra Blvd    Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major         750    3       3  783      544   0.35    0.24  A      A
Avalon Blvd     Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd   Major         750    3       3  611      903   0.41    0.60  A      B
Avalon Blvd     Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St         Major         750    3       3  928     1392   0.62    0.93  B      E
Avalon Blvd     223rd St          Carson St        Major         750    3       3  1125    1489   0.75    0.99  C      E
Avalon Blvd     Carson St         213th St         Major         750    3       3  1246    1635   0.55    0.73  A      C
Avalon Blvd     213th St          I-405 Fwy        Major         750    3       3  1392    1935   0.62    0.86  B      D
Avalon Blvd     Dominguez St      Del Amo Blvd     Major         750    3       3  1218    2320   0.54    1.03  A      F
Avalon Blvd     Del Amo Blvd      University Dr    Major         750    3       3  1748    1905   0.78    0.85  C      D
Avalon Blvd     University Dr     Victoria St      Major         750    3       3  2054    1860   0.91    0.83  E      D
Avalon Blvd     Victoria St       Albertoni St     Major         750    3       3  1361    1447   0.60    0.64  B      B
Avalon Blvd     SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd     Major         750    3       3  1267    1444   0.56    0.64  A      B
Avalon Blvd     Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd     Major         750    3       3  1479    1138   0.66    0.51  B      A
Broadway        Main St           Victoria St      Major         750    3       3  609      688   0.41    0.46  A      A
Broadway        Victoria St       Albertoni St     Major         750    3       3  581      609   0.39    0.41  A      A
Broadway        SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd     Major         750    3       3  575      459   0.38    0.31  A      A
Broadway        Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd     Major         750    3       3  657      479   0.44    0.32  A      A
Carson St       Figueroa St       Main St        Secondary       750    2       2  1988    1979   1.33   1.325  F      F
Carson St       Main St           Avalon Blvd    Secondary       750    2       2  2393    2010   1.60    1.34  F      F
Carson St       Avalon St         I-405 Fwy        Major         750    3       3  2345    2014   1.56    1.34  F      F
Carson St       I-405 Fwy         Wilmington Ave   Major         750    3       3  1071    1303   0.71    0.87  C      D
Carson St       Wilmington Ave    Alameda St       Major         750    3       3  1603    1027   1.07    0.68  F      B
Carson St       Alameda St        Santa Fe Ave     Major         750    3       3  1566     717   1.04    0.48  F      A
Central Ave     Del Amo Blvd      Turmont St       Major         750    3       3  751      763   0.50    0.51  A      A
Central Ave     Turmont St        University Dr    Major         750    3       3  647      837   0.43    0.56  A      A
Central Ave     University Dr     Victoria St      Major         750    2       2  1468     948   1.63    1.05  F      F
      Chapter 4                                              TI-40                              Carson General Plan
     TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                 Table TI-11 [continued]
                          Future PM Peak Hour Level of Service With General Plan Growth
                                                                      Number of      Future                    Level of
                              Segment                        Capacity                            V/C Ratio
                                                                         Lanes       Volume                     Service
      Street                                       Class        per
                                                               Lane   NB/     SB/ NB/     SB/  NB/     SB/   NB/     SB/
                      From                To
                                                                      EB      WB   EB     WB   EB      WB     EB     WB
Del Amo Blvd    Figueroa St       Main St          Major        750    3       3  907     1972 0.60    1.31    B      F
Del Amo Blvd    Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major        750    3       3  1834    1827 1.22    1.22    F      F
Del Amo Blvd    Avalon St         Central Ave      Major        750    3       3  1943    2476 1.30    1.65    F      F
Del Amo Blvd    Central Ave       Wilmington Ave   Major        750    3       3  1610    1025 1.07    0.68    F      B
Dolores St      Sepulveda Blvd    228th St        Collector     750    1       1  134      104 0.30    0.23    A      A
Figueroa St     Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd   Major        750    3       3  358      360 0.24    0.24    A      A
Figueroa St     Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St         Major        750    3       3  592      691 0.39    0.46    A      A
Figueroa St     223rd St          Carson St        Major        750    3       3  1048     880 0.70    0.59    B      A
Figueroa St     Carson St         Torrance Blvd    Major        750    3       3  1454    2093 0.97    1.40    E      F
Figueroa St     Torrance Blvd     Del Amo Blvd     Major        750    3       3  2220    2102 1.48    1.40    F      F
Figueroa St     Del Amo Blvd      I-405 Fwy        Major        750    3       3  749     1472 0.50    0.98    A      E
Figueroa St     I-405 Fwy         Victoria St      Major        750    3       3  945     1082 0.63    0.72    B      C
Figueroa St     Victoria St       SR-91 Fwy        Major        750    3       3  705      706 0.47    0.47    A      A
Figueroa St     SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd     Major        750    3       3  759      813 0.51    0.54    A      A
Figueroa St     Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd     Major        750    3       3  895      659 0.60    0.44    A      A
Gardena Blvd    Figueroa St       Main St        Secondary      750    2       2  287      350 0.24    0.29    A      A
Gardena Blvd    Main St           Avalon Blvd    Secondary      750    2       2  415      371 0.35    0.31    A      A
Lomita Blvd     Figueroa St       Main St          Major        750    3       3  1407     899 0.94    0.60    E      A
Lomita Blvd     Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major        750    3       3  891      866 0.59    0.58    A      A
Lomita Blvd     Wilmington Ave    Alameda St       Major        750    3       3  455      376 0.61    0.50    B      A
Main St         Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd   Major        750    3       3  1351    1080 0.90    0.72    E      C
Main St         Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St         Major        750    3       3  1076    1207 0.72    0.80    C      D
Main St         223rd St          Carson St        Major        750    3       3  1410    1611 0.94    1.07    E      F
Main St         Carson St         213th St         Major        750    3       3  2236    2841 1.49    1.89    F      F
Main St         213th St          Torrance Blvd    Major        750    3       3  1927    2786 1.28    1.86    F      F
Main St         Torrance Blvd     Del Amo Blvd     Major        750    3       3  2619    3342 1.75    2.23    F      F
Main St         Del Amo Blvd      I-405 Fwy        Major        750    3       3  1114    1273 0.74    0.85    C      D
Main St         I-405 Fwy         Broadway         Major        750    3       3  1087    1335 0.72    0.89    C      D
Main St         Broadway          Victoria St      Major        750    3       3  513      629 0.34    0.42    A      A
Main St         Victoria St       Albertoni St     Major        750    3       3  1025    1015 0.68    0.68    B      B
Main St         SR-91 Fwy         Gardena Blvd     Major        750    3       3  1121     959 0.75    0.64    C      B
Main St         Gardena Blvd      Alondra Blvd     Major        750    3       3  1055     703 0.70    0.47    C      A
Moneta Ave      228th St          223rd St        Collector     750    1       1  144      205 0.32    0.46    A      A
Santa Fe Ave    Carson St         Dominguez St   Secondary      750    2       2  1252    1281 1.04    1.07    F      F
Santa Fe Ave    Dominguez St      Del Amo Blvd   Secondary      750    2       2  1348    1023 1.12    0.85    F      D
Sepulveda Blvd  Figueroa St       Main St          Major        750    3       3  1591    2074 1.06    1.38    F      F
Sepulveda Blvd  Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major        750    3       3  1417    1536 0.94    1.02    E      F
Sepulveda Blvd  Avalon St         Wilmington Ave   Major        750    3       3  1160    1299 0.77    0.87    C      D
Sepulveda Blvd  Wilmington Ave    Alameda St       Major        750    3       3  597      765 0.40    0.51    A      A
Sepulveda Blvd  Alameda St        Intermodal       Major        750    3       3  875     1217 0.58    0.81    A      D
     Carson General Plan                                    TI-41                                        Chapter 4
                                                                     TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                 Table TI-11 [continued]
                          Future PM Peak Hour Level of Service With General Plan Growth
                                                                     Number of      Future                    Level of
                              Segment                       Capacity                              V/C Ratio
                                                                        Lanes       Volume                     Service
       Street                                     Class        per
                                                              Lane   NB/     SB/ NB/     SB/    NB/     SB/  NB/    SB/
                      From                To
                                                                     EB      WB   EB     WB     EB      WB   EB     WB
Torrance Blvd   Figueroa St       Main St        Secondary     750    2       2  1605    2303   1.34    1.92  F      F
University Dr   Avalon St         Central Ave    Secondary     750    2       2  375      416   0.31    0.35  A      A
University Dr   Central Ave       Wilmington Ave Secondary     750    2       2  337      495   0.28    0.41  A      A
Victoria St     Figueroa St       Main St          Major       750    3       3  1341     975   0.89    0.65  D      B
Victoria St     Main St           Avalon Blvd      Major       750    3       3  917      509   0.61    0.34  B      A
Victoria St     Avalon St         Tamcliff Ave     Major       750    3       3  1190    1051   0.79    0.70  C      C
Victoria St     Tamcliff Ave      Central Ave      Major       750    3       3  1009     897   0.67    0.60  B      A
Victoria St     Central Ave       Wilmington Ave   Major       750    3       3  760     1236   1.01    1.65  F      F
Wilmington Ave  Lomita Blvd       Sepulveda Blvd   Major       750    3       3  547     1348   0.36    0.90  A      D
Wilmington Ave  Sepulveda Blvd    223rd St         Major       750    3       3  1157    1890   0.77    1.26  C      F
Wilmington Ave  223rd St          I-405 Fwy        Major       750    3       3  1556    3081   1.04    2.05  F      F
Wilmington Ave  I-405 Fwy         Carson St        Major       750    3       3  1436    2887   0.96    1.92  E      F
Wilmington Ave  Carson St         213th St         Major       750    3       3  1403    2868   0.94    1.91  E      F
Wilmington Ave  213th St          Del Amo Blvd     Major       750    3       3  1794    2554   1.20    1.70  F      F
Wilmington Ave  Del Amo Blvd      University Dr    Major       750    3       3  1508    1709   1.01    1.14  F      F
Wilmington Ave  University Dr     Victoria St      Major       750    3       3  2702    1518   1.20    0.67  F      B
      Chapter 4                                            TI-42                              Carson General Plan



                                                            TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                     An improved interchange at Avalon and I-405 be required prior to use of the
                      157 acre site; and
                     Carson Street between Alameda Street and Santa Fe Street be made a
                      Secondary Highway.
             These changes are all needed by the type of land use which is planned for the
             abutting areas.
             Carson Street is planned for Mixed Use and to be a new “Main Street” for the City.
             As such it needs to be more pedestrian and business friendly with various traffic
             control measures including no expanding the number of travel lanes it currently has.
             Carson Street will retain its 100 foot right of way but will retain its parking lanes.
             The ability to develop the 157 acre site, as well as other sites in the area of Del Amo,
             Main, and Avalon, is predicated on the two traffic improvement measures proposed.
             Carson Street at the east end of the City does not have an eastern extension out of
             the City, land uses are neighborhood in nature, and there is little chance of
             obtaining the full 100 feet of right of way required for a Major Highway without
             decimating the parcels on the north side of the roadway. The street would have an
             83 foot right of way.
             The cross sections for roadways required by the Plan of Streets and Highways are
             shown in Exhibit TI-13, Street Cross Sections.
             The City of Carson requires fuel improvements in public right-of-way pursuant to
             the Zoning Ordinance and the City Engineer’s Standard Drawings. Sidewalks are
             not required in some industrial areas as shown in Exhibit TI-14, Non-Sidewalk
             Areas.
5.2     OTHER IMPROVEMENTS BEYOND THE MASTER PLAN OF HIGHWAYS
             The analysis presented in this report demonstrates that several roadway segments
             are forecast to experience congestion and level of service E or F conditions even
             with the completion of the Master Plan of Highways. Therefore, in addition to the
             designated street system in the Master Plan, further transportation system
             enhancements are warranted to maintain adequate service levels.                     Those
             improvements to the transportation system are described below.
             INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS (ITS)
             Nearly every jurisdiction in southern California has experienced roadway congestion
             problems that cannot be solved simply by adding roadway capacity. This is for
             several reasons, including the lack of right-of-way to accomplish various widening
             projects, as well as the environmental impacts associated with major roadway
             enhancements. As an alternative and supplemental improvements, many local
             agencies are implementing Intelligent Transportation Systems projects using
             advanced computer and communication technologies. The ITS projects that are
             being implemented provide improved traveler information, manage the flow of
             traffic, and utilize existing transportation systems more efficiently.
Chapter 4                                        TI-46                               Carson General Plan



TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                 The goals of ITS are to reduce travel times, provide more reliable travel times,
                 improve safety, reduce delay and reduce congestion. The high concentration of
                 industrial employment in some areas of Carson makes it a City that is well suited for
                 application of advanced technology to accomplish the goals of ITS. This is because
                 of the high density of employment, the large number of peak hour trips, truck trips,
                 the potentially high growth rate and the constraints on physical improvements.
                 Examples of ITS system components include a centralized computer transportation
                 management center, advanced transportation monitoring systems such as closed
                 circuit TV (CCTV), transit traveler information, dynamic information displays at
                 activity centers, bus priority treatment, real-time traffic management, coordination
                 of local circulators, corporate Intranet information and other elements. In other
                 jurisdictions, these types of improvements have resulted in significant savings in
                 vehicle and motorist delay, significant travel time reductions and significant
                 environmental benefits all without major roadway widening or reconstruction
                 projects. Recent deployment of ITS technologies has occurred throughout Los
                 Angeles (ATSAC and other systems), Orange County (SMART STREETS), the
                 South Bay, Santa Monica and many other jurisdictions. Due to its many benefits
                 and cost effectiveness, ITS could be considered as an integral part of the future
                 transportation system of Carson.
                 Typically, cities have applied a 5 to 10 percent mitigation factor for ITS
                 implementation. In other words, ITS will yield the equivalent of a 5 to 10 percent
                 improvement in traffic flow and reduction in delays.
                 MAXIMUM FEASIBLE INTERSECTION CONCEPT
                 As described earlier in this section, even with the Master Plan of Highways fully
                 built out there would still be some roadway segments operating at level of service E
                 or F, (considered to be deficient). In those cases, additional enhancements beyond
                 the Master Plan have been investigated. The types of improvements that have been
                 investigated include the following: ITS signal system and real time monitoring
                 system (see previous discussion), dual left turn lanes, exclusive right turn lanes and
                 right turn overlap phases, and additional through lanes beyond the Master Plan of
                 Highways. These changes would only apply to arterials classified as Major Highway.
                 Intersections are the critical bottleneck locations in an urban arterial roadway
                 system. This is due to the fact that they allocate right of way in both directions;
                 therefore, there is less capacity for each intersecting roadway than at mid-block
                 locations. Typically, intersections are often improved beyond the standard for mid-
                 block locations to allow for expanded capacity and to reduce congestion. Additional
                 lanes for through traffic or turning movements may be added to eliminate
                 bottlenecks. In Carson, it will be necessary to expand some critical intersections in
                 the future to provide adequate capacity. The concept of the “Maximum Feasible
                 Intersection” has been developed to describe potential intersection improvements
                 beyond the standard cross section. Exhibit TI-15, Maximum Feasible Intersection
                 Concept, graphically depicts a cross section of a maximum feasible intersection. As
                 shown, a Maximum Feasible Intersection would have up to six through lanes, dual
                 left turn lanes, and right turn lanes in each direction. This would require up to 122
                 feet curb to curb, whereas the city standard for a major highway is 100 feet curb to
                 curb.
Carson General Plan                                TI-49                                       Chapter 4


TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                 NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC CONTROL
                 The City experiences traffic intrusion into residential neighborhoods as a result of
                 many factors including arterial congestion (creating traffic by-passes), high student
                 population at schools, adjacent commercial activities and other reasons. As these
                 problems occur, they cause impacts on local residential streets such as speeding and
                 excessive traffic volumes. In many cases, the impact is an “environmental impact”
                 on the residential street. While the street has the total capacity for more traffic, the
                 “environmental capacity” is exceeded based on the residential character of the
                 adjoining land uses. Speeds and volumes are perceived to be too high and disrupt
                 the character of the street.
                 While such impacts occur, it is necessary to address problems on a case-by-case
                 basis, including the affected residents in the process. To accomplish this, a
                 “Neighborhood Traffic Control Program” is proposed as part of the Transportation
                 Element update. It should be noted that a program for neighborhood traffic control
                 could require significant staff resources, outside consultant costs, and capital
                 expenditures, depending on the extent of the program. This will require review and
                 prioritization compared to other roadway infrastructure needs.
                 CONGESTION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM SYSTEMS ANALYSIS
                 Development activity related to buildout of the General Plan will affect the regional
                 transportation facilities in addition to the transportation system within Carson. In
                 particular, the freeway system will be used for regional access for all types of
                 development in the city. The regional roadway system is controlled by the State of
                 California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). As such, the city does not
                 have jurisdiction over improvements on the freeway system, however, the City works
                 cooperatively with Caltrans on improvement projects such as freeway/arterial ramp
                 system improvements. The State, along with regional agencies, has a series of
                 programs aimed at addressing congestion on the regional system.
                 The Congestion Management Program (CMP) was created statewide and has been
                 implemented locally by the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation
                 Authority (LACMTA). The CMP for Los Angeles County requires that the traffic
                 impact of individual development projects of potential regional significance be
                 analyzed. A specific system of arterial roadways plus all freeways comprise the CMP
                 system. This section describes the analysis of project-related impacts on the CMP
                 system.
                 The CMP requires traffic studies to analyze CMP freeway monitoring locations
                 where the proposed project adds 150 or more in either direction during the AM or
                 PM peak hours. The number of project trips that are likely to travel along the CMP
                 monitoring stations has been calculated from the project trip generation. It is
                 important to note that detailed CMP system analysis at the intersection level “are
                 largely geared toward analysis of projects where land use types and design details
                 are known. Where likely land uses are not defined (such as where project
                 descriptions are limited to zoning designation and parcel size with no information
Carson General Plan                                TI-51                                       Chapter 4

                                                       TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
          on access location), the level of detail in the transportation impact analysis may be
          adjusted accordingly. This may apply, for example, to some development area and
          citywide general plans, or to community level specific plans. In such cases, where
          project definition is insufficient for meaningful intersection level of service analysis,
          CMP arterial segment analysis may substitute for intersection analysis.” (2002
          Congestion Management Program for Los Angeles County, LACMTA, April 2002,
          Appendix D, page D-2).
          The trip generation analysis determined that the project would add 150 or more
          trips during the AM and/or PM peak hours along the I-405 Freeway, along the I-710
          Freeway, and along the SR-91 Freeway at adjacent CMP monitoring stations. The
          analysis of these locations is presented in Tables TI-12 and TI-13, which show the
          existing conditions, the future base conditions, and the future with project
          conditions. Per CMP guidelines, an increase of 0.02 or more in demand to capacity
          (d/c) ratio with a resulting level of service F is deemed a significant impact by the
          project. As identified on the tables, the results of the analysis indicate that the
          buildout of the General Plan would result in a significant impact (according to CMP
          guidelines) along the I-405 freeway at two monitoring locations, along the SR-91 at
          one monitoring location, and along the I-710 freeway at one monitoring location.
          Mitigation would be determined as actual development occurs and greater detail is
          known such as specific land uses, specific intensities of development and project
          access locations.
          As mentioned, there are many future regional improvement projects on the freeway
          system that are proposed as part of State and regional funding programs. These
          include freeway improvements such as HOV lanes, interchange improvements and
          auxiliary lanes. Two projects of special interest to Carson include the I-710 Major
          Project Study and the Alameda Corridor Expressway project. Although neither
          project is fully funded, both are undergoing extensive review and analysis at this
          time. The I-710 project studies are investigating future needs and potential
          improvements along the freeway from the Port of Long Beach to downtown Los
          Angeles. That project is investigating a range of alternative improvements including
          adding mixed flow lanes, HOV lanes, truck lanes, or other improvements. The I-710
          project would likely result in some type of capacity enhancement in the freeway
          corridor, which could benefit Carson residents and businesses by providing
          improved regional access to the City. The Alameda Corridor Expressway project is
          investigating a potential grade-separated connection of the SR-47/103 Freeway to
          Alameda Street via a viaduct structure. This project would facilitate travel from the
          Port area to Alameda Street by providing a series of grade separations over existing
          rail tracks, and by eliminating intersections that would delay traffic. This project
          would result in a net increase in traffic on Alameda Street through the City, and it
          would also facilitate easier access from the Port area to Carson and the surrounding
          area. It will be important for the City to continue to monitor the technical studies
          associated with both of these regional projects which affect Carson.
Chapter 4                                    TI-52                              Carson General Plan

         TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                                 Table TI-12
                             CMP Freeway Analysis Results for General Plan Buildout – AM Peak
                                                    Northbound/ Eastbound – AM Peak Hour
                                                    Existing Conditions      Future Base Conditions         Future with General Plan Buildout
Station Route         Location          Capacity
                                                                                                                                Change      Significant
                                                 Demand       D/ C    LOS   Demand      D/C     LOS Demand    D/C      LOS
                                                                                                                                 in D/C       Impact
               East of Alameda/ Santa
 1033   SR-91                            12,000    6,714      0.56      C     7,290     0.61     C    7,463   0.62      F         0.01
                       Fe Ave
 1065   I-405         Santa Fe            8,000    8,080      1.01      F     8,836     1.10      F  10,530   1.32      F         0.22          Yes
                  South of I-110 at
 1066   I-405                            10,000   10,100      1.01      F    10,762     1.08      F  11,040   1.10      F         0.02          Yes
                   Carson Scales
               North of PCH/ south of
 1077   I-710                             6,000    5,932      0.99      E     6,235     1.04      F   6,291   1.05      F         0.01
                      Willow St
               North of I-405/ south of
 1078   I-710                             8,000    7,912      0.99      E     8,430     1.05      F   8,641   1.08      F         0.03          Yes
                       Del Amo
                                                    Southbound/ Westbound – AM Peak Hour
                                                    Existing Conditions      Future Base Conditions         Future with General Plan Buildout
Station Route         Location          Capacity
                                                                                                                                Change      Significant
                                                 Demand       D/ C    LOS   Demand      D/C     LOS Demand    D/C      LOS
                                                                                                                                 in D/C       Impact
               East of Alameda/ Santa
 1033   SR-91                            12,000   12,120      1.01      F    13,878     1.16      F  14,692   1.22      F         0.06          Yes
                       Fe Ave
 1065   I-405         Santa Fe            8,000    7,534      0.94      E     8,062     1.01      F   8,450   1.06      F         0.05          Yes
                  South of I-110 at
 1066   I-405                            10,000    8,731      0.87      D     9,674     0.97     E   10,948   1.09      F         0.12          Yes
                   Carson Scales
               North of PCH/ south of
 1077   I-710                             6,000    5,973      1.00      E     6,276     1.05      F   6,276   1.05      F         0.00
                      Willow St
               North of I-405/ south of
 1078   I-710                             8,000    7,987      1.00      E     8,961     1.12      F   8,961   1.12      F         0.00
                       Del Amo
         Carson General Plan                                          TI-53                                                Chapter 4

                                                                                    TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                                 Table TI-13
                             CMP Freeway Analysis Results for General Plan Buildout – PM Peak
                                                    Northbound/ Eastbound – PM Peak Hour
                                                    Existing Conditions      Future Base Conditions         Future with General Plan Buildout
Station Route         Location          Capacity
                                                                                                                                Change      Significant
                                                 Demand       D/ C    LOS   Demand      D/C     LOS Demand    D/C      LOS
                                                                                                                                 in D/C       Impact
               East of Alameda/ Santa
 1033   SR-91                            12,000   16,320      1.36      F    18,486     1.54      F  19,481   1.62      F         0.08          Yes
                       Fe Ave
 1065   I-405         Santa Fe            8,000    6,935      0.87      D     7,588     0.95     E    8,463   1.06      F         0.11          Yes
                  South of I-110 at
 1066   I-405                            10,000    8,691      0.87      D     9,732     0.97     E   11,327   1.13      F         0.16          Yes
                   Carson Scales
               North of PCH/ south of
 1077   I-710                             6,000    5,651      0.94      E     5,942     0.99     E    5,985   1.00      F         0.01
                      Willow St
               North of I-405/ south of
 1078   I-710                             8,000    7,847      0.98      E     8,860     1.11      F  10,013   1.25      F         0.14          Yes
                       Del Amo
                                                    Southbound/ Westbound – PM Peak Hour
                                                    Existing Conditions      Future Base Conditions         Future with General Plan Buildout
Station Route         Location          Capacity
                                                                                                                                Change      Significant
                                                 Demand       D/ C    LOS   Demand      D/C     LOS Demand    D/C      LOS
                                                                                                                                 in D/C       Impact
               East of Alameda/ Santa
 1033   SR-91                            12,000    6,394      0.53      B     7,152     0.60     C    7,514   0.63      C         0.03
                       Fe Ave
 1065   I-405         Santa Fe            8,000    8,080      1.01      F     9,031     1.13      F  11,192   1.40      F         0.27          Yes
                  South of I-110 at
 1066   I-405                            10,000   10,100      1.01      F    10,848     1.08      F  11,447   1.14      F         0.06          Yes
                   Carson Scales
               North of PCH/ south of
 1077   I-710                             6,000    5,236      0.87      D     5,508     0.92      F   5,508   0.92      D         0.00
                      Willow St
               North of I-405/ south of
 1078   I-710                             8,000    7,418      0.93      D     7,965     1.00     E    7,965   1.00      E         0.00
                       Del Amo
         Chapter 4                                                    TI-54                                   Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
6.0 PLANNING FACTORS, GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION
                 The acronyms listed below are used for the implementation measures:
                     RA/D:       Responsible Agency/Division
                     FS:         Funding Source
                     TF:         Time Frame
                 ISSUE:        TRUCK TRAFFIC IN CARSON
                 Some neighborhoods are impacted by noise and vibrations associated with truck traffic,
                 particularly those residential areas adjacent to industrial uses. To mitigate this impact,
                 the City should restrict truck traffic to certain essential streets in Carson. The City should
                 develop acceptable development standards to control land uses which generate excessive
                 truck traffic.
                 Goal:         TI-1        Minimize impacts associated with truck traffic through the
                                           City, as well as the truck parking locations.
                 Policies: TI-1.1          Enforce the City’s revised truck route system.
                               TI-1.2      Devise strategies to protect residential neighborhoods from
                                           truck traffic.
                               TI-1.3      Ensure that the City’s designated truck routes provide
                                           efficient access to and from the I-405, I-110 and Route-91
                                           Freeways, as well as the Alameda Corridor.
                               TI-1.4      Ensure that all new commercial projects have properly
                                           designed truck loading facilities.
                               TI-1.5      Require that all new construction or reconstruction of streets
                                           or corridors that are designated as truck routes,
                                           accommodate projected truck volumes and weights.
                 Implementation Measures:
                               TI-IM-1.1       Periodically evaluate the City’s truck route system and
                                               determine the necessity of the routes. The truck route
                                               system should exclude streets with inadequate
                                               improvements or those intended to serve residential or
                                               pedestrian-oriented development. (Implements Policies
                                               TI-1.1, TI-1.2, TI-1.3)
                                               RA/D:       Engineering
                                               FS:         Gas Tax
                                               TF:         Every two years
Carson General Plan                                   TI-55                                           Chapter 4

                                                          TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                       TI-IM-1.2        Require new development applications to provide
                                        estimates of truck trip generation as part of
                                        environmental studies and incorporate improvements as
                                        necessary to mitigate truck impacts. (Implements Policies
                                        TI-1.1, TI-1.2, TI-1.3)
                                        RA/D:      Planning, Engineering
                                        FS:        Environmental Fees
                                        TF:        Ongoing
                       TI-IM-1.3        When necessary, use and enforce “No Truck Parking”
                                        signs on those residential-serving streets adjacent to
                                        industrial areas. (Implements Policy TI-1.2)
                                        RA/D:      Engineering
                                        FS:        Gas Tax
                                        TF:        Ongoing
                       TI-IM-1.4        Ensure that the development review process incorporates
                                        consideration of and adequate design for off-street
                                        commercial loading requirements in all new commercial
                                        projects, where applicable. (Implements Policy TI-1.4)
                                        RA/D:      Planning
                                        FS:        Application fees
                                        TF:        Ongoing
                       TI-IM-1.5        All new construction or reconstruction of streets or
                                        corridors that are designated as truck routes shall have a
                                        Traffic Index calculation as indicated by the State
                                        Department of Transportation. (Implements Policy TI-1.5)
                                        RA/D:      Engineering
                                        FS:        Gas Tax
                                        TF:        Ongoing
                                                                                                 
          ISSUE:       IMPROVING AND MAINTAINING TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE
                       CITY
          In addition to general street maintenance, it is important to provide additional
          signalization and street lighting on certain streets, as well as upgrade these systems when
          appropriate. Also, the City should work with County, State and Federal agencies to
          improve all circulation systems serving the City of Carson.
          Goal:        TI-2        Provide a sustainable, safe, convenient and cost-effective
                                   circulation system to serve the present and future
                                   transportation needs of the Carson community.
Chapter 4                                     TI-56                                 Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                 Policies: TI-2.1     Require that new projects not cause the Level of Service for
                                      intersections to drop more than one level if it is at Level A, B
                                      or C, and not drop at all if it is at D or below, except when
                                      necessary to achieve substantial City development goals.
                           TI-2.2     Pursue and protect adequate right-of-way to accommodate
                                      future circulation system improvements.
                           TI-2.3     Widen substandard streets and alleys to meet City standards
                                      wherever feasible.
                           TI-2.4     Provide up-to-date safety devices and lighting on City streets
                                      where appropriate.
                           TI-2.5     Facilitate cooperation between the City and the
                                      transportation agencies serving the region in order to provide
                                      adequate regional vehicular traffic volumes and movements
                                      on freeways, streets and through intersections.
                           TI-2.6     Establish a comprehensive traffic impact fee program and
                                      other programs/actions to provide for “fair-share” funding
                                      from new development for transportation improvements
                                      necessary to accommodate growth.
                           TI-2.7     Provide all residential, commercial and industrial areas with
                                      efficient and safe access to major regional transportation
                                      facilities.
                           TI-2.8     Provide traffic calming, landscape and pedestrian
                                      improvements in non-truck route streets and other streets as
                                      appropriate.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           TI-IM-2.1      Evaluate and pursue design and operational
                                          improvements to improve the efficiency of arterials and
                                          intersections in the City to more closely approximate
                                          planned carrying capacities. Priorities should be given to
                                          the study of certain intersections on Wilmington and
                                          Avalon. (Implements Policy TI-2.1)
                                          RA/D:        Engineering
                                          FS:          Gas Tax, Application Fees
                                          TF:          2003-05
                           TI-IM-2.2      Develop a Citywide traffic model to evaluate current and
                                          future circulation system impacts in the City. (Implements
                                          Policy TI-2.1)
Carson General Plan                               TI-57                                       Chapter 4

                                      TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                    RA/D:      Engineering
                    FS:        Gas Tax, Impact Fees
                    TF:        2003-05
          TI-IM-2.3 Establish and maintain a Citywide traffic count program
                    to ensure the availability of data needed to identify
                    circulation problems and to evaluate potential
                    improvements. (Implements Policy TI-2.1)
                    RA/D:      Engineering
                    FS:        Gas Tax, General Fund
                    TF:        2003-05
          TI-IM-2.4 Perform an annual evaluation of the circulation system to
                    determine segments and intersections not meeting LOS
                    requirements. If necessary develop a deficiency plan in
                    order to identify mitigations which achieve LOS goals.
                    (Implements Policy TI-2.1)
                    RA/D:      Engineering
                    FS:        Gas Tax
                    TF:        Annual
          TI-IM-2.5 Evaluate traffic impacts, including truck impacts,
                    associated with proposed new developments prior to
                    project approval.        Require the implementation of
                    appropriate mitigation measures prior to, or in
                    conjunction with, project development.           Mitigation
                    measures shall be required of the project developer on a
                    “fair-share” basis. (Implements Policies TI-2.1, TI-2.2, TI-
                    2.3, TI-2.4, TI-2.8)
                    RA/D:      Engineering, Planning
                    FS:        Environmental Application Fees
                    TF:        Ongoing
          TI-IM-2.6 Prepare a plan of traffic signals and traffic control to
                    address the needs for new signals, signal synchronization
                    at existing signalized intersection systems, the efficiency
                    of existing signals, and the effect of traffic signals on
                    vehicular and pedestrian safety Citywide. (Implements
                    Policies TI-2.1, TI-2.4, TI-2.5)
                    RA/D:      Engineering
                    FS:        Gas Tax
                    TF:        2004-05
          TI-IM-2.7 Prioritize capital improvements, focusing on those areas
                    of the City which operate at unacceptable levels of
Chapter 4                 TI-58                               Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                               service, to improve levels of service and enhance travel
                                               safety. (Implements Policies TI-2.1, TI-2.2, TI-2.3, TI-2.4,
                                               TI-2.5, TI-2.7, TI-2.8)
                                               RA/D:      Engineering
                                               FS:        General Fund, Redevelopment Funds
                                               TF:        Ongoing
                              TI-IM-2.8        Investigate the feasibility of providing cameras at
                                               intersections    for red-light photo enforcement.
                                               (Implements Policy TI-2.4)
                                               RA/D:      Engineering, Sheriff
                                               FS:        Gas Tax, General Fund, Grant Funds
                                               TF:        2004-05
                              TI-IM-2.9        Conduct the necessary feasibility and nexus studies and
                                               establish a comprehensive traffic impact fee program to
                                               provide “fair-share” transportation project funding.
                                               RA/D:      Engineering
                                               FS:        General Fund
                                               TF:        2003-04
                                                                                                       
                 ISSUE:       PROTECTION OF RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS FROM TRAFFIC
                 Many residential streets in Carson are used by motorists to bypass heavier traffic on
                 major arterials; vehicles using these streets are usually traveling at higher rates of speed
                 than local residents, thus negatively impacting the safety of the neighborhood.
                 Goal:        TI-3        Minimize intrusion of commuter traffic on local streets
                                          through residential neighborhoods.
                 Policies: TI-3.1         Monitor traffic intrusion on local residential streets and
                                          establish a formalized mechanism to respond to resident
                                          complaints and requests regarding residential street traffic
                                          problems.
                              TI-3.2      Where feasible, create disincentives for traffic traveling
                                          through neighborhoods, without impacting adjacent
                                          residential streets.
                              TI-3.3      Prioritize circulation improvements that enhance through
                                          traffic flow on Major and Secondary Highways providing
                                          parallel routes to residential streets, in order to reduce
                                          through traffic during peak commute periods.
Carson General Plan                                  TI-59                                          Chapter 4

                                                   TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                   TI-3.4    Adopt Neighborhood Traffic Control Guidelines to address
                             all aspects of resident requests, complaints, and traffic
                             calming alternatives.
          Implementation Measures:
                   TI-IM-3.1     Based on resident requests, conduct neighborhood
                                 circulation studies to determine the nature and extent of
                                 actual and perceived traffic through these areas.
                                 (Implements Policy TI-3.1)
                                 RA/D:      Engineering, Code Enforcement
                                 FS:        General Fund
                                 TF:        Ongoing
                   TI-IM-3.2     Create distinctive entry statements at identified
                                 neighborhood entrances that discourage through traffic.
                                 (Implements Policy TI-3.2)
                                 RA/D:      Engineering, Planning
                                 FS:        Gas Tax, Assessment Districts, Homeowners’
                                            Associations, Grant Funds
                                 TF:        Ongoing
                   TI-IM-3.3     Enforce posted speed limits and add awareness
                                 programs, such as mobile radar trailers, traffic stops, and
                                 decoy Sheriff cars. (Implements Policy TI-3.2)
                                 RA/D:      Public Safety
                                 FS:        General Fund, grant funds
                                 TF:        Ongoing
                   TI-IM-3.4     Include impact on neighborhood local streets as a
                                 criterion for determining capital improvement project
                                 priorities for public works. (Implements Policy TI-3.3)
                                 RA/D:      Engineering
                                 FS:        General Fund
                                 TF:        Ongoing
                   TI-IM-3.5     Develop Neighborhood Traffic Control Guidelines for
                                 use in evaluation of resident complaints, development of
                                 recommended solutions and prioritizing of funding
                                 requests. Guidelines should include processes to respond
                                 to resident concerns, evaluate impacts, provide
                                 alternative improvements, and test and implement the
                                 solutions. (Implements Policies TI-3.1, TI-3.2, TI-3.4)
Chapter 4                              TI-60                               Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                              RA/D:       Engineering, Planning, Code Enforcement
                                              FS:         General Fund
                                              TF:         2004-05
                                                                                                      
                 ISSUE:       ALTERNATE FORMS OF TRANSPORTATION
                 Alternative forms of transportation should be promoted in Carson: from additional bicycle
                 routes and park-and-ride facilities, to expanded public transportation systems, such as the
                 Carson Circuit. It is important to link public transportation systems on a local, sub-
                 regional and regional level.
                 Goal:        TI-4        Increase the use of alternate forms of transportation
                                          generated in, and traveling through, the City of Carson.
                 Policies: TI-4.1         Promote the use of public transit.
                              TI-4.2      Provide appropriate pedestrian access throughout the City.
                                          Develop a system of pedestrian walkways, alleviating the
                                          conflict between pedestrians, automobiles and bicyclists
                                          where feasible.
                              TI-4.3      Provide appropriate bicycle access throughout the City by
                                          implementing the Bicycle Plan.
                 Implementation Measures:
                              TI-IM-4.1       Pursue funding, including Proposition A and C funds as
                                              well as other sources, for bus transit facilities, bus
                                              shelters, signing, advertising and bus turnouts to
                                              encourage bus ridership. (Implements Policy TI-4.1)
                                              RA/D:       Transportation Services
                                              FS:         General Fund, Prop A and C, Other Grant
                                                          Funds
                                              TF:         Ongoing
                              TI-IM-4.2       Ensure the installation of bus transit facilities, shelters
                                              and bus turnouts in all future arterial widening or new
                                              construction projects. (Implements Policy TI-4.1)
                                              RA/D:       Engineering, Planning, Transportation Services
                                              FS:         Gas Tax, Prop A and C, Other Grant Funds
                                              TF:         Ongoing
                              TI-IM-4.3       Locate sites for the implementation of park-and-ride
                                              facilities proximate to the I-405, I-110 and Route 91
                                              Freeways. (Implements Policy TI-4)
Carson General Plan                                  TI-61                                         Chapter 4

                                     TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                    RA/D:      Transportation Services
                    FS:        General Fund, Redevelopment Funds
                    TF:        2002-05
          TI-IM-4.4 Work closely with the Los Angeles County Metropolitan
                    Transportation Authority (LACMTA), Torrance
                    Municipal Bus Lines, Long Beach Municipal Bus Lines
                    and other public and private transit providers to expand
                    and improve the public transit service within and
                    adjacent to the City of Carson. (Implements Policy TI-4.1)
                    RA/D:      Transportation Services
                    FS:        General Fund
                    TF:        Ongoing
          TI-IM-4.5 Plan and construct a Transportation Center at either the
                    South Bay Pavilion or the new commercial area west of I-
                    405. This could include both bus and shuttle transit.
                    (Implements Policy TI-4.1)
                    RA/D:      Planning, Engineering, Transportation Services
                    FS:        Developer fees, impact fees, Prop A and C,
                               Other Grant Funds, Developer Contributions
                    TF:        2004-08
          TI-IM-4.6 Require appropriate new developments to provide
                    alternate fuel vehicle charging stations. (Implements
                    Policy TI-4.1)
                    RA/D:      Planning, Transportation Services
                    FS:        Developer contributions
                    TF:        Ongoing
          TI-IM-4.7 Require new development to provide pedestrian
                    walkways which serve the proposed development and link
                    to the City’s existing pedestrian system. (Implements
                    Policy TI-4.2)
                    RA/D:      Planning, Engineering
                    FS:        Developers
                    TF:        Ongoing
          TI-IM-4.8 Ensure the installation of sidewalks in all future arterial
                    widening or new construction projects to establish a
                    continuous and convenient link for pedestrians.
                    (Implements Policy TI-4.2)
                    RA/D:      Engineering
                    FS:        Gas Tax, General Fund
                    TF:        Ongoing
Chapter 4                 TI-62                              Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                           TI-IM-4.9      Investigate the feasibility of installing pedestrian signal
                                          lights at various locations. (Implements Policy TI-4.2)
                                          RA/D:      Engineering, Public Works, Sheriff, Public
                                                     Safety
                                          FS:        Gas Tax, General Fund
                                          TF:        2003-04
                           TI-IM-4.10     Complete an approved Bicycle Plan (as defined by the
                                          MTA) and implement it as availability arises through
                                          private development, private grants, public grants
                                          (particularly the MTA call for projects), signing of shared
                                          routes, and cooperation with other agencies such as the
                                          County of Los Angeles for bicycle routes along channels.
                                          (Implements Policy TI-4.3)
                                          RA/D:      Engineering, Recreation and Community
                                                     Services
                                          FS:        Developer fees, Prop A and C, TDA Article 3,
                                                     AB2766 Vehicle Registration Funds, Park
                                                     Funds, Other Grant Funds
                                          TF:        2004-06
                           TI-MI-4.11     Acquire right-of-way for completion of the adopted
                                          Bicycle Plan through available funding sources.
                                          (Implements Policy TI-3)
                                          RA/D:      Engineering, Recreation and Community
                                                     Services
                                          FS:        Prop A and C, park funds, other grant funds
                                          TF:        Ongoing
                           TI-IM-4.12     Encourage new development to provide facilities for
                                          bicyclists to park and store their bicycles as well as
                                          shower and changing facilities. (Implements Policy TI-4.3)
                                          RA/D:      Planning
                                          FS:        Developer contributions
                                          TF:        Ongoing
                           TI-IM-4.13     Continue coordination of bicycle route planning and
                                          implementation with adjacent jurisdictions and regional
                                          agencies. (Implements Policy TI-4.3)
                                          RA/D:      Engineering, Recreation and            Community
                                                     Services
                                          FS:        General Fund, Grant Funds
                                          TF:        Ongoing
Carson General Plan                             TI-63                                          Chapter 4
                                                       TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                      TI-IM-4.14      Design new streets and major street improvements with
                                      the potential for Class I or Class II bicycle routes, as
                                      appropriate, to separate automobile, bicycle and
                                      pedestrian movements to the extent feasible. (Implements
                                      Policy TI-4.3)
                                      RA/D:      Engineering
                                      FS:        Gas Tax
                                      TF:        Ongoing
                                                                                             
          ISSUE:      REDUCE TRIPS IN CARSON
          Growth in Southern California will continue and the roadway system will be challenged
          accordingly to meet the needs of new residents and businesses. The removal of existing
          trips and the reduction of future increases in trip generation will help to alleviate the
          impacts of new growth and promote sustainability.
          Goal:       TI-5        Use Transportation Demand Management (TDM) measures
                                  throughout the City, where appropriate, to discourage the
                                  single-occupant vehicle, particularly during the peak hours.
                                  In addition, ensure that any developments that are approved
                                  based on TDM plans incorporate monitoring and
                                  enforcement of TDM targets as part of those plans.
          Policies: TI-5.1        Ensure that Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
                                  policies are considered during the evaluation of new
                                  developments within the City, including but not limited to:
                                  ridesharing, carpooling and vanpooling, flexible work
                                  schedules, telecommuting and car/vanpool preferential
                                  parking.
                      TI-5.2      Encourage the provision of preferential parking for high
                                  occupancy vehicles wherever possible.
          Implementation Measures:
                      TI-IM-5.1       Provide information regarding TDM alternatives to
                                      developers early in the planning process. (Implements
                                      Policy TI-5.1)
                                      RA/D:      Planning
                                      FS:        General Fund
                                      TF:        Ongoing
                      TI-IM-5.2       Based on traffic impacts of new development, develop
                                      mitigation measures incorporating TDM measures.
                                      (Implements Policy TI-5.1)
Chapter 4                                   TI-64                              Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                                  RA/D:     Planning
                                                  FS:       General Fund, Impact Fees
                                                  TF:       Ongoing
                                TI-IM-5.3         Develop provisions for preferential parking for high
                                                  occupancy vehicles to include in the Zoning Code
                                                  parking standards. (Implements Policy TI-5.2)
                                                  RA/D:     Planning
                                                  FS:       General Fund
                                                  TF:       2004-05
                                See also Chapter 10, Air Quality.
                                                                                                      
                 ISSUE:         FEDERAL, STATE AND REGIONAL COMPLIANCE
                 The City of Carson must remain in compliance with applicable Federal, State and
                 regional regulations, and coordinate with neighboring jurisdictions in order to enhance
                 eligibility for all potential transportation improvement program funding.
                 Goal:          TI-6         Cooperate to the fullest extent possible with Federal, State,
                                             County and regional planning agencies responsible for
                                             maintaining and implementing circulation standards to
                                             ensure orderly and consistent development of the entire
                                             South Bay region.
                 Policies: TI-6.1            Actively participate in various intergovernmental committees
                                             and related planning forums associated with County,
                                             Regional and State Congestion Management Programs.
                                TI-6.2       Ensure that the City remains in compliance with the County,
                                             Regional, and State Congestion Management Programs
                                             (CMP) through the development of appropriate City
                                             programs and traffic impact analyses of new projects
                                             impacting the CMP routes.
                                TI-6.3       Ensure that new roadway links are constructed as designated
                                             in the Circulation Element, and link with existing roadways
                                             in neighboring jurisdictions in order to allow efficient access
                                             into and out of the City.
                                TI-6.4       Assess adjacent local agencies' plans to ensure compatibility
                                             across jurisdictional boundaries.
                                TI-6.5       Encourage cooperation with other governmental agencies to
                                             provide adequate vehicular traffic movements on streets and
                                             through intersections by means of synchronized signalization.
Carson General Plan                                    TI-65                                       Chapter 4

                                                     TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
          Implementation Measures:
                    TI-IM-6.1       Continue land use coordination through the use of
                                    standardized traffic impact analysis methodologies.
                                    (Implements Policies TI-6.1, TI-6.2)
                                    RA/D:      Planning, Engineering
                                    FS:        General Fund
                                    TF:        Ongoing
                    TI-IM-6.2       Implement and enforce TDM strategies. (Implements
                                    Policy TI-6.2)
                                    RA/D:      Planning, Engineering
                                    FS:        Developer Fees
                                    TF:        Ongoing
                    TI-IM-6.3       Maintain transit service standards. (Implements Policy TI-
                                    6.2)
                                    RA/D:      Transportation Services
                                    FS:        General Fund
                                    TF:        Ongoing
                    TI-IM-6.4       Develop level of service deficiency           plans where
                                    applicable. (Implements Policy TI-6.2)
                                    RA/D:      Engineering
                                    FS:        General Fund
                                    TF:        Ongoing
                    TI-IM-6.5       Monitor and comply with all CMP provisions.
                                    (Implements Policies TI-6.1, TI-6.2, TI-6.3, TI-6.4, TI-6.5)
                                    RA/D:      Engineering
                                    FS:        General Fund
                                    TF:        Ongoing
                                                                                           
          ISSUE:    IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF TRANSPORTATION CORRIDORS
          Some of the City’s major transportation corridors are deficient in infrastructure
          maintenance and landscaping improvement.
          Goal:     TI-7        Provide improved aesthetic enhancements to                   and
                                maintenance of the City’s transportation corridors.
Chapter 4                                 TI-66                               Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                 Policies: TI-7.1     Provide landscaped medians and greenbelts along major
                                      arterials, when economically feasible.
                           TI-7.2     Encourage the aesthetic quality and maintenance of facilities
                                      within the City, under the jurisdiction of other agencies.
                           TI-7.3     Target and prioritize street beautification programs along
                                      major transportation corridors.
                           TI-7.4     Strive to achieve adequate funding levels for street and
                                      parkway maintenance in each budgetary cycle.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           TI-IM-7.1      Through design standards and zoning requirements,
                                          require landscaped medians and parkways for all new
                                          development on major arterials. (Implements Policy TI-
                                          7.1)
                                          RA/D:       Planning, Engineering
                                          FS:         Developer Fees, Impact Fees
                                          TF:         Ongoing
                           TI-IM-7.2      Pursue agreements with Caltrans to construct new sound
                                          walls, as necessary, with landscaping, along all State
                                          freeways in the City. (Implements Policy TI-7.2)
                                          RA/D:       Engineering
                                          FS:         State funds, Grant Funds
                                          TF:         Ongoing
                           TI-IM-7.3      Coordinate Gardena Municipal Bus, Long Beach Transit,
                                          MTA, and Torrance Transit with Carson Circuit to
                                          construct bus turn-outs at appropriate locations with
                                          attractive shelters designed for safe and comfortable use.
                                          (Implements Policy TI-7.3)
                                          RA/D:       Transportation Services, Engineering
                                          FS:         Various Transportation Grant Funds
                                          TF:         2004-06
                           TI-IM-7.4      Develop design plans for all major streets to provide
                                          walls, landscape and hardscape features, as appropriate,
                                          to protect and beautify neighborhoods in order to
                                          provide an aesthetic environment for the users of the
                                          transportation corridors. First priority should be given to
                                          Avalon, south of Carson, and Wilmington, south of 213th.
                                          (Implements Policy TI-7.3)
Carson General Plan                              TI-67                                       Chapter 4
                                                          TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                       RA/D:       Planning, Engineering
                                       FS:         Gas Tax, Redevelopment Funds, General Fund
                                       TF:         Ongoing
                       TI-IM-7.5       Develop a land use and design plan for the Alameda
                                       Transportation Corridor to provide for appropriate uses,
                                       access, sound walls, landscape and hardscape features, to
                                       protect and beautify the Dominguez area/neighborhoods
                                       as well as to limit access to Alameda and improve the
                                       flow of traffic. (Implements Policy TI-7.3)
                                       RA/D:       Planning, Engineering
                                       FS:         Gas Tax, Alameda Corridor Transportation
                                                   Authority, Redevelopment Funds
                                       TF:         2003-04
                       TI-IM-7.6       Prepare a City-wide plan for the under grounding of
                                       utilities along the major transportation corridors.
                                       (Implements Policy TI-7.4)
                                       RA/D:       Engineering, Public Works
                                       FS:         General Fund, grant funds
                                       TF:         Ongoing
                                                                                               
          ISSUE:       IMPROVING AND MAINTAINING THE CITY’S INFRASTRUCTURE
          The City’s infrastructure systems must be expanded, improved and regularly maintained
          to meet both the existing needs of the community, as well as future needs associated with
          infill development. The City’s infrastructure includes not only water, sewer, storm
          drainage systems, but also energy, communication, fiberoptic and other systems.
          Goal:        TI-8        Provide sustainable water and wastewater systems which
                                   meet the needs of the community.
          Policies: TI-8.1         Continue to maintain, improve and replace aging water and
                                   wastewater systems to ensure the provision of these services
                                   to all areas of the community.
                       TI-8.2      As development intensifies and/or as land redevelopment
                                   occurs in the City, ensure that infrastructure systems are
                                   adequate to accommodate any intensification of use, as well
                                   as existing uses.
          Implementation Measures:
                        TI-IM-8.1      Review the Water Master Plan of the private water
                                       utilities and recommend changes as needed to ensure an
                                       adequate supply. (Implements Policy TI-8.1)
Chapter 4                                     TI-68                               Carson General Plan

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                          RA/D:       Engineering, Public Works
                                          FS:         General Fund
                                          TF:         Ongoing
                           TI-IM-8.2      Review and update the Wastewater Master Plan.
                                          (Implements Policy TI-8.1)
                                          RA/D:       Engineering, Public Works
                                          FS:         General Fund
                                          TF:         Ongoing
                           TI-IM-8.3      Evaluate other agency master plans for water and
                                          wastewater facilities on a periodic basis and encourage
                                          appropriate updates and implementation. (Implements
                                          Policy TI-8.2)
                                          RA/D:       Engineering
                                          FS:         General Fund
                                          TF:         Ongoing
                            TI-IM-8.4     Evaluate utility infrastructure along those streets
                                          scheduled for reconstruction or improvements. When
                                          utility infrastructure improvements are necessary,
                                          encourage other agencies to include such as part of the
                                          street improvement           or    reconstruction  project.
                                          (Implements Policy TI-8.2)
                                          RA/D:       Engineering, Public Works
                                          FS:         Gas Tax, Redevelopment funds, General Fund
                                          TF:         Ongoing
                 Goal:     TI-9       Promote sustainable energy, communication, and other
                                      systems which meet the needs of the community.
                 Policies: TI-9.1     Cooperate with the providers of the energy, communication,
                                      and other systems in Carson to maintain, improve, expand,
                                      and replace (when necessary) these systems throughout the
                                      City as good partners.
                           TI-9.2     As development intensifies and/or as redevelopment occurs
                                      in the City, encourage the provision of integrated
                                      communication and other systems to accommodate any
                                      intensification of uses, as well as existing uses.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           TI-IM-9.1      Inform system providers of roadway projects requiring
                                          the reconstruction of streets, so that these providers may
Carson General Plan                              TI-69                                      Chapter 4
                                                     TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                   evaluate their infrastructure systems to determine if
                                   improvements are necessary and could be made during
                                   the street improvement or reconstruction project.
                                   (Implements Policy TI-9.1, TI-9.2)
                                   RA/D:      Engineering, Public Works
                                   FS:        General Fund
                                   TF:        Ongoing
                    TI-IM-9.2      Review and revise planning and building codes to provide
                                   for new technologies and appropriate integration with
                                   land       use     regulations.     Promote        incentive
                                   regulations.(Implements Policy TI-9.1, TI-9.2)
                                   RA/D:      Planning, Building & Safety
                                   FS:        General Fund
                                   TF:        2003-05
          Goal:     TI-10      Provide sustainable civic facilities that are maintained and
                               rehabilitated in a manner that provides an acceptable level of
                               service and is cost-effective.
          Policies: TI-10.1    Pursue State, Federal and other available funding sources to
                               improve and enhance public facilities.
                    TI-10.2    Require that all civic facilities be maintained and
                               rehabilitated to ensure their continued availability and use.
                    TI-10.3    Rehabilitate public facilities using technologies, methods,
                               and materials which result in energy and water savings, and
                               implement cost effective, long-term maintenance programs.
                    TI-10.4    Ensure that construction of new civic facilities have state of
                               the art technologies.
          Implementation Measures:
                    TI-IM-10.1     Establish a capital improvement fund for development,
                                   construction and maintenance of civic physical assets.
                                   (Implements Policies TI-10.1, TI-10.2, TI-10.3, TI-10.4)
                                   RA/D:      Finance, Engineering
                                   FS:        General Fund
                                   TF:        2003-04 and Annually
                    TI-IM-10.2     Revise the Civic Center Master Plan to include
                                   appropriate communications technologies, energy and
Chapter 4                                TI-70                               Carson General Plan
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
                                          water savings, and other cost effective applications.
                                          (Implements Policies TI-10.3, TI-10.4)
                                          RA/D:        Engineering
                                          FS:          General Fund
                                          TF:          2005-06
                           TI-IM-10.3     Implement a Facility Replacement Fund for civic
                                          improvements as necessary.
                                          RA/D:        Finance, Engineering
                                          FS:          General Fund
                                          TF:          2003-04
                           See also Chapter 6, Safety Element, for drainage and flood control.
                                                                                                 
Carson General Plan                              TI-71                                         Chapter 4

CITY OF CARSON
2014-2021 Housing Element
Prepared for the
City of Carson by ESA
 


         CITY OF CARSON
2014 - 2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                CITY COUNCIL
               Jim Dear, Mayor
   Elito M. Santarina, Mayor Pro Tempore
                Mike A. Gipson
              Lula Davis-Holmes
                 Albert Robles
          PLANNING COMMISSION
           Loa Pele Faletogo, Chair
           Olivia Verrett, Vice Chair
              Charlotte Brimmer
               John C. Goolsby
                   Louie Diaz
                Joseph Gordon
                  Joseph Piñon
                 Amador Saenz
                Janice Schaefer
               CITY MANAGER
      Jacki Acosta, Acting City Manager
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
            PLANNING DIVISION
   Sheri Repp-Loadsman, Planning Officer
      John Signo, AICP, Senior Planner
     Zak Gonzalez II, Associate Planner

City of Carson ii 2014-2021 Housing Elemen
                                   TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.   INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 7 
    A.    Purpose of the Housing Element .................................................................................. 10 
    B.    Organization of the Housing Element ........................................................................... 14 
    C.    Relationship To Other General Plan Elements ............................................................. 14 
    D.    Public Participation ....................................................................................................... 15 
    E.    Sources of Information ................................................................................................. 16 
II.     BACKGROUND INFORMATION ......................................................................... 19 
    A.    Population Characteristics ............................................................................................ 19 
    B.    Household Characteristics ............................................................................................ 23 
    C.    Employment Characteristics ......................................................................................... 34 
    D.    Housing Stock Characteristics ...................................................................................... 36 
    E.    Preservation of Assisted Housing At Risk of Conversion ............................................. 42 
    F.  Energy Conservation ........................................................................................................ 44 
III.    SUMMARY OF HOUSING NEEDS ..................................................................... 47 
IV.     CONSTRAINTS ON HOUSING PRODUCTION .................................................. 51 
    A.    Infrastructure Constraints ............................................................................................. 51 
    B.    Environmental Constraints ........................................................................................... 52 
    C.    Market Constraints ....................................................................................................... 54 
    D.    Governmental Constraints ............................................................................................ 57 
V.      HOUSING RESOURCES .................................................................................... 71 
    A.    Availability of Sites for Housing .................................................................................... 71 
    B.    Financial Resources ..................................................................................................... 75 
    C.    Administrative Resources ............................................................................................. 82 
VI.     HOUSING PLAN ................................................................................................. 83 
    A.    Goals and Policies ........................................................................................................ 83 
    B.    Affordable Housing Strategies and Programs .............................................................. 86 
    C.    Affordable Housing Implementation Strategies ............................................................ 97 
APPENDIX A – Public Outreach Materials 
APPENDIX B – State Licensed Residential Care Facilities – City of Carson
APPENDIX C – List of Vacant Sites Identified by Assessor’s Parcel Numbers
APPENDIX D – Manufacturing Light (ML) and Manufacturing Heavy (MH) Zone Districts
APPENDIX E – Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
APPENDIX F – Preservation of Assisted Housing At-Risk of Conversion Analysis
City of Carson                                         iii                                       2014-2021 Housing Element

                                    LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 State Housing Element Requirements ........................................................................... 12 
Table 2 City Of Carson and Los Angeles County Historic Population Figures ........................... 20 
Table 3 Carson and Los Angeles County Population Trends: 1990 – 2030 ............................... 20 
Table 4 City of Carson Age Distribution: 2000 to 2010 ............................................................... 21 
Table 5 City of Carson and Los Angeles County Race and Ethnicity: 2010 ............................... 22 
Table 6 City Of Carson Household Characteristics: 2000-2010 ................................................. 23 
Table 7 City Of Carson Household Size: 1990-2010 .................................................................. 24 
Table 8 City Of Carson Household Tenure: 1990-2010 .............................................................. 24 
Table 9 City of Carson Overcrowding by Tenure: 2010 .............................................................. 25 
Table 10 Carson and Surrounding Areas Median Household Income: 2000 and 2010................ 26 
Table 11 City Of Carson Household Income: 2010 .................................................................... 26 
Table 12 City of Carson Income Groups: 2000 & 2010 .............................................................. 28 
Table 13 City Of Carson Households Paying Greater Than 30% of Income for Shelter......... 29 
Table 14 City of Carson Summary of Special Needs Groups ..................................................... 30 
Table 15 City of Carson Housing Stock by Bedroom Mix ........................................................... 32 
Table 16 City Of Carson Labor Force by Industry ...................................................................... 35 
Table 17 City Of Carson Employment by Occupation: 2010 ...................................................... 35 
Table 18 Carson and Surrounding Areas Housing Growth: 2000-2010 ..................................... 36 
Table 19 City of Carson Housing Trends: 1990-2010 ................................................................. 37 
Table 20 City of Carson Plumbing and Kitchen Facilities by Tenure: 2010 ................................ 38 
Table 21 Carson and Surrounding Areas Housing Values: 2000-2013 ...................................... 39 
Table 22 City of Carson Housing Sales: November 2012 – February 2013 ............................... 39 
Table 23 City of Carson Housing Affordability by Income Group .............................................. 40 
Table 24 Carson and Surrounding Areas Monthly Rents: 2010 ................................................. 41 
Table 25 City of Carson Monthly Rental Rates ........................................................................... 41 
Table 26 Los Angeles County Affordable Rent by Income Category: 2012 ................................ 42 
Table 27 City of Carson Assisted Housing Inventory .................................................................. 43 
Table 28 City of Carson Regional Housing Needs Assessment ................................................. 47 
Table 29 City of Carson Existing Housing Needs ....................................................................... 49 
Table 30 City of Carson and Los Angeles County Disposition of Loans: 2010 ........................... 57 
Table 31 City Of Carson Residential Development Standards ................................................... 59 
Table 32 City of Carson Parking Requirements .......................................................................... 60 
Table 33 City of Carson Planning Entitlement Fees .................................................................. 65 
Table 34 City of Carson Building Permit Fees ........................................................................... 65 
Table 35 Carson and Surrounding Areas Entitlement Fee Comparisons ................................... 66 
Table 36 School Impact Fees ..................................................................................................... 66 
Table 37 Inventory of Vacant Sites Suitable for Residential Development1 ................................ 74 
Table 38 Resources Available for Housing and Community Development Activities ................. 78 
Table 39 Evaluation of 2007-2014 Affordable Housing Strategies and Programs ...................... 87 
Table 40 City of Carson 2014 - 2021 Quantified Objectives ..................................................... 107 
Table F-1 City of Carson Potential At-Risk Units ...................................................................... F-4 
Table F-2 City of Carson 2013 Fair Market Rents .................................................................... F-4 
Table F-3 City of Carson Estimated Monthly Subsidy to Preserve “At-Risk” Units ................... F-5 
Table F-4 City of Carson Replacement Cost by Unit Type ....................................................... F-5 
Table F-5 City of Carson Replacement Cost of “At-Risk” Units1 ............................................... F-6 
City of Carson                                    iv                                        2014-2021 Housing Element

                                  LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 City of Carson Regional Location Map ........................................................................... 9 
Figure 2 City of Carson Census Tracts ....................................................................................... 18 
Figure 3 Median Household Income by Census Tracts: 2010 .................................................... 27 
City of Carson                                v                                         2014-2021 Housing Element

City of Carson vi 2014-2021 Housing Elemen
I.       INTRODUCTION
The City of Carson covers approximately 19.2 square miles in the southern area of Los
Angeles County, as seen in the regional location map (see Figure 1). The City, located
in the South Bay/Harbor area of the County, is bordered by Long Beach to the east,
Compton to the north, Torrance to the west, and Los Angeles to the south and west.
Unincorporated areas of Los Angeles County also surround Carson to the north, east
and west. The western boundary of the City is formed by Interstate 110 (south of 190th
Street/Victoria Street) and by Figueroa Street (north of 190th Street/Victoria Street). The
northernmost boundary is Alondra Boulevard until it enters the City of Compton at
Haskins Avenue. The majority of the City is located south of State Route 91. The
southern boundary generally follows Lomita Boulevard, while the eastern boundary
follows portions of Central Avenue, Wilmington Avenue, Interstate 710, Santa Fe
Avenue and just west of the Union Pacific Railroad lines.
Though considered an urban city, Carson has an abundance of recreational activities.
There are 16 City-operated parks in the City of Carson (including four mini-parks), as
well as one county-operated park, five public swimming pools (including one county-
operated), a county-operated golf course, four gymnasiums, and a 31,000 square foot
Community Center.
City History
The Suangna Native American village once stood at the location of the present day
Congresswoman Juanita Millender-McDonald Community Center. The site was once
part of a large village complex occupying the inner harbor area. Native Americans like
the Suangna (or Tongva) established villages in the Rancho San Pedro area 6,000
years before the first white men arrived on the shores of Southern California.
Known to the Spanish as Gabrielino Indians (named after the Mission San Gabriel),
they gathered shellfish, hunted wild game, and made a flour-like meal out of acorns
from the oak trees which grew in the area. The Suangna villagers lived peacefully,
traded with their neighbors, and made tools, weapons and grinding implements from
stone and other natural materials. Many of these objects were discovered at this site in
Carson.
In 1784, the village became part of the Rancho San Pedro (more generally known as
the Dominguez Rancho), where some of the Indians worked at the ranch as vaqueros.
By the end of the 19th century, the village was no longer inhabited.
In the 1760's, when the first European explorers set foot on Southern California soil, a
Spanish soldier named Juan Jose Dominguez was part of the fabled Portola expedition.
A few years later, when Franciscan missionaries began their journey on foot to establish
the chain of California Missions, Juan Dominguez accompanied Father Junipero Serra
as part of the small band of military men who helped to protect the padres.
City of Carson                            7                       2014-2021 Housing Element
In 1782, Señor Dominguez was rewarded with a gift from the Spanish governor of
California: the very first land grant in the history of California - a vast expanse of 75,000
acres of land, which he named Rancho San Pedro. It stretched from the Los Angeles
River all the way west to the Pacific Ocean, encompassing what today would be the
cities of Carson, Torrance, Redondo Beach, Lomita, Wilmington, and parts of San
Pedro.
The center of this vast landholding was the Dominguez Rancho homestead, located in
what today is the eastern portion of Carson’s sphere of influence (but not necessarily
within city limits), known as Dominguez Hills. It is here that his nephew built the historic
Dominguez Ranch Adobe in 1826, which still stands today as a proud monument to
Carson's romantic past.
During the rancho period in Old California's history, vast herds of cattle roamed the hills
and plains of the Los Angeles region, tended by vaqueros on horseback (cowboys,
some of whom were recruited from the local Indian tribes), who marked the animals with
the special lemon-shaped brand of the Dominguez Rancho.
The cattle hides were sold to ships which docked at the San Pedro harbor (as
documented in Richard Henry Dana's masterpiece, "Two Years Before the Mast"), in
return for dollars and merchandise the sailing ships brought from Europe. The rancho
era lasted until the 1860's, when a disastrous series of droughts destroyed the cattle
herds.
The Dominguez ranch home was also the site of a notable battle during the U.S. war
with Mexico. The Battle of Dominguez Ranch took place on October 8th and 9th, in
1846. During the U.S.-Mexican War, a small handful of California troops, led by Jose
Antonio Carrillo, successfully held off the invasion of La Pueblo de Los Angeles by
American Marines, under the command of U.S. Navy Captain William Mervine.
By running horses across the dusty hills of Carson, and dragging a single small cannon
to various sites, Carrillo and his troops fooled the Americans into believing that they had
encountered a large enemy force, and forced them to temporarily withdraw. It was, of
course, only a short-lived victory. The Americans, under Captain John Fremont,
eventually seized the town, and California became part of the United States when
Mexico and the U.S. signed a peace treaty (near what is now Universal Studios) on
February 2, 1848.
Almost 200 years after the founding of Rancho San Pedro, 142 years after the
Dominguez Adobe was built, and 58 years following the Great Air Meet of 1910, the
citizens of the land "to the west of the Los Angeles River" finally took a long overdue
step toward independence. After suffering decades of neglect as an unincorporated part
of Los Angeles County, the citizens went to the polls on Tuesday, February 6, 1968 to
vote on whether to officially incorporate their community as an independent city. Almost
10,000 of the 17,351 registered voters in Carson cast a vote that February morning.
City of Carson                              8                          2014-2021 Housing Element

When the ballots were counted, the vote was 6,301 to 3,834 in favor of incorporation,
and the City of Carson was born.
                                      Figure 1
                                   City of Carson
                               Regional Location Map
City of Carson                         9                    2014-2021 Housing Element
A. Purpose of the Housing Element
The Housing Element of the Carson General Plan sets forth the City’s strategy to address the
community’s housing needs. This includes the preservation and enhancement of the
community’s residential character, the expansion of housing opportunities for all economic
segments, and the provision of guidance and direction for local government decision-
making in all matters relating to housing.
The Housing Element identifies programs aimed at meeting the identified housing needs of the
City’s population. Concerns of the Carson Housing Element include the identification of
housing strategies and programs that focus on: 1) conserving and improving
existing affordable housing; 2) providing adequate housing sites; 3) assisting in the
development of affordable housing; 4) removing governmental constraints to the
development of housing; and 5) promoting equal housing opportunities.
California State Housing Element Law
California State Housing Element Law (California Government Code Article 10.6)
establishes the requirements for Housing Elements of the General Plan. Specifically,
California Government Code Section 65588 requires that local governments review and
revise the Housing Element of their Comprehensive General Plans not less than once
every five years.
The California State Legislature has identified the attainment of a decent home and
suitable living environment for every Californian as the State's major housing goal.
Recognizing the important role of local planning programs in the pursuit of this goal, the
Legislature has mandated that all cities and counties prepare a housing element as part
of their comprehensive General Plans. Table 1 summarizes these State requirements
and identifies the applicable sections in the Carson Housing Element where these
requirements are addressed.
Carson's Housing Element was last updated in 2010 and is currently being updated
through the year 2021 as part of an extended update cycle for jurisdictions within the
SCAG (Southern California Association of Governments) region. The Element sets
forth a strategy to address the City’s identified housing needs, including specific
implementing programs and activities. The Housing Element is an 8-year plan,
extending from 2014 to 2021. The other General Plan elements typically cover a 10- to
20-year planning horizon.
Various amendments have been made to Housing Element law since adoption of the
City’s current Housing Element. These include:
        AB 162: Requires the City, upon adoption of the Housing Element, to identify
         specific flood hazard zones in the Land Use Element and specific floodwater and
         groundwater recharge areas in the Conservation and Safety Elements.
City of Carson                            10                      2014-2021 Housing Element

        SB 244: Requires the City, upon the adoption of the Housing Element, to update
         the Land Use Element to include data and analysis, goals, and implementation
         measures regarding unincorporated island, fringe, or legacy communities and
         their infrastructure needs.
        SB 812: In addition to the existing special needs groups, the City must include an
         analysis of the housing needs for persons with developmental disabilities.
        AB 1867: Under certain conditions, the City can now count multi-unit
         homeownership units that have been converted to affordable units toward their
         RHNA allocation.
        SB 375 Implications: For jurisdictions that do not submit their adopted 2014-
         2021 Housing Element update within 120 days of the October 2013 deadline,
         their Housing Element updates revert to a four-year cycle.
The contents of this updated Housing Element comply with these amendments and all
other requirements of Housing Element law.
Environmental Review
The Housing Element Update is considered a General Plan Amendment, and is
therefore subject to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). In 2010, City
Council certified the Initial Study/Negative Declaration (IS/ND) for the 2008-2014
Housing Element, which evaluated impacts. Since the 2014-2021 Housing Element
Update includes minor changes to the previous Update, an addendum to the Negative
Declaration has been prepared. This addendum demonstrates that the environmental
analysis and impacts in the Negative Declaration for the 2008-2014 Housing Element
Update remain substantively and support the finding that the proposed project does not
raise any new issues.
Under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), an Addendum to a certified
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) or Negative Declaration is needed if minor technical
changes or modification to the proposed project occur (CEQA Guidelines Section
15164). An addendum is appropriate only if these minor technical changes or
modifications do not result in any new significant impacts of a substantial increase in the
severity of previously identified significant impacts. The Addendum need not be
circulated for public review (CEQA Guidelines Section 15164(c); however, an
addendum is to be considered by the decision-making body prior to making a decision
on the project (CEQA Guidelines Section 15164(d)).
Lastly, the adoption of the Element by itself would not result in any physical
development. The Housing Element is a policy document rather than a plan to build
structure on any particular site. Any future housing development in Carson will be
subject to subsequent environmental review and remains subject to the requirements of
CEQA.
City of Carson                             11                      2014-2021 Housing Element

Regional Housing Needs Assessment
Section 65583 of the Government Code sets forth the specific components to be
contained in a community's housing element. Included in these requirements is an
obligation on the part of local jurisdictions to provide their “fair share” of regional
housing need. Local governments and Councils of Governments (COGs) are required
to determine the existing and future housing need and the allocation of said need must
be approved by the California Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD). Carson is a member of the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG) who is responsible for preparing the Regional Housing Needs Assessment
(RHNA) for the six-county territory that it represents.
HCD established the planning period for the current Regional Housing Needs
Assessment from January 1, 2014, to September 30, 2021. For the 2014-2021 planning
period the City was allocated a total 1,698 housing units, including 447 for very low-
income, 263 for low-income, 280 for moderate-income, and 708 for above moderate-
income households.
                                                  Table 1
                             State Housing Element Requirements
                                                                             Current Housing Element
                 Required Housing Element Component
                                                                               Document Reference
A . Housing Needs Assessment                                            Section III
1.     Analysis of population trends in Carson in relation to regional
                                                                        Section II-A
       trends.
2.     Analysis of employment trends in Carson in relation to regional
                                                                        Section II-C
       trends.
3.     Projection and quantification of Carson’s existing and projected
                                                                        Section III
       housing needs for all income groups.
4.     Analysis and documentation of Carson’s housing characteristics
       including the following:
        a.   level of housing cost compared to ability to pay;
                                                                        Section II-D & Section III
        b.   overcrowding;
                                                                        Section II-B
        c.   housing stock condition
                                                                        Section II-D
City of Carson                                   12                         2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                                                Current Housing Element
                  Required Housing Element Component
                                                                                  Document Reference
5.     An inventory of land suitable for residential development,
       including vacant sites, land having redevelopment potential,
                                                                           Section V-A
       and an analysis of the relationship of zoning, public facilities,
       and services to these sites.
6.     Analysis of existing and potential governmental constraints
       upon the maintenance, improvement, or development of                Section IV-C
       housing for all income levels.
7.     Analysis of existing and potential non-governmental and market
       constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or                   Section IV-B
       development of housing for all income levels.
8.     Analysis of special needs households: persons with disabilities,
       persons with developmental disabilities, elderly, large families,   Section II-B
       female-headed households, and farmworkers.
9.     Analysis concerning the needs of homeless individuals and
                                                                           Section II-B
       families in Carson.
10.    Analysis of opportunities for energy conservation with respect to
                                                                           Section II-F
       residential development.
B.     Goals and Policies
1.      Identification of Carson’s goals and policies relative to          Section VI-A
        maintenance, improvement, and development of housing.
C.     Implementation Program
1.     An implementation program should do the following:                  Section VI-C
2.     Identify adequate sites which will be made available through
       appropriate action with required public services and facilities for Section V-A
       a variety of housing types for all income levels.
3.     Describe programs to assist in the development of adequate
        housing to meet the needs of low and moderate income               Section VI-A
        households.
4.     Identify and, when appropriate and possible, remove
       governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement,
       and development of housing in Carson.                               Section VI-A
City of Carson                                     13                          2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                                      Current Housing Element
                 Required Housing Element Component
                                                                        Document Reference
5.     Conserve and improve the condition of the existing and
                                                                 Section VI-A
       affordable housing stock in Carson.
6.     Promote housing opportunities for all persons.            Section VI-A
7.     Preserve lower income households assisted housing
                                                                 Section VI-A
       developments.
B. Organization of the Housing Element
The City of Carson Housing Element is comprised of the following major components:
         1. An analysis of the City's population, household and employment base, and
             the characteristics of the City's housing stock (Chapter II).
         2. A summary of the present and projected housing needs of the City's
             households (Chapter III).
         3. A review of potential constraints to meeting the City's identified housing needs
             (Chapter IV).
         4. An evaluation of resources that can further the development of new housing
             (Chapter V).
         5. A statement of the Housing Plan to address Carson's identified housing needs,
             including housing goals, policies and programs (Chapter VI).
C. Relationship To Other General Plan Elements
The nine elements that comprise the Carson General Plan are required by law to be
internally consistent. Together these elements provide the framework for development of
those facilities, services and land uses necessary to address the needs and desires of
the City's residents. To ensure that these needs are clearly addressed throughout the
General Plan, the elements must be interrelated and interdependent.
The Housing Element is affected by development policies contained in the Land Use
Element, which establishes the location, type, intensity and distribution of land uses
throughout the City, and defines the land use build-out potential. In designating
City of Carson                                   14                  2014-2021 Housing Element
residential development, the Land Use Element places an upper limit on the number
and types of housing units constructed in the City. The acreage designated for a range
of commercial and office uses creates employment opportunities for various income
groups. The presence and potential for jobs affects the current and future demand for
housing at the various income levels in the City.
The Circulation Element of the General Plan also affects the implementation of the
Housing Element. The Circulation Element establishes policies for a balanced
circulation system in the City. Consequently, the Housing Element must include policies
that take into account the types of infrastructure essential for residential housing units in
addition to mitigating the effects of growth in the City.
The last comprehensive General Plan Update was in 2004 and reflects current City
policies. As such, this Housing Element Update builds upon the other General Plan
elements and is entirely consistent with the policies and proposals set forth by the Plan. As
portions of the General Plan are amended in the future, the Carson General Plan,
including the Housing Element, will be reviewed to ensure internal consistency is
maintained.
D. Public Participation
Section 65583 (c)(6)(B) of the Government Code states that, “The local government shall
make a diligent effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments of the
community in the development of the housing element, and the program shall describe
this effort.” City residents will have several opportunities to recommend strategies, review,
and comment on the Carson Housing Element as discussed below.
Prior to the submittal of the Housing Element for initial review, a community workshop with the
Planning Commission was held on April 23, 2013. The community workshop sought to inform
the Planning Commission, residents, and interested stakeholders of the 2014-2021 Housing
Element update process. The goal of the workshop was to receive feedback related to the
current and future housing needs of the City. Members of the Planning Commission asked
clarifying questions on the definition of overcrowding and how “Hispanic” as an ethnic group
differs from other races classified in the Census. Members of the Planning Commission also
discussed the importance of maintaining the City’s mobile home parks and existing residential
areas through various programs such as the Rent Control Ordinance, Foreclosure Crisis
Program, and the Foreclosure Registration Program. A few members of the Planning
Commission stressed the importance of helping homeowners prevent foreclosure.
The City identified key community stakeholders to be included in the Housing Element
update process. The purpose of this task was to identify those individuals, groups, and
organizations that should be included in the update process, acquaint them with the
purpose and need for the Housing Element update, and invite them to participate in the
update process. The community stakeholders contacted included local and regional
business groups such as the Chamber of Commerce, grass roots community based
City of Carson                              15                         2014-2021 Housing Element

organizations, neighborhood associations, and civic groups. Additional stakeholders
included housing service providers, mobile home park associations, neighborhood
associations, health and human service providers, churches, and non- and for-profit
affordable housing developers.
At the community workshop held on April 23, 2013, participants asked clarification
questions on how the City can ensure that future housing units developed in the City will
be kept affordable to lower income families – how will the affordability be maintained.
The City’s mobilehome parks, which supply a number of affordable units, was discussed
by the Planning Commission. Some Commissioners expressed the importance of
conserving the affordability of mobilehome parks and preventing their conversion.
Foreclosure was also extensively discussed by participants, citing that current City
programs should not only address the blight caused by foreclosures but should also
help residents from going into foreclosure on their properties.
Following public hearings conducted by the Planning Commission and the incorporation of
comments from the public and Planning Commission, the draft Housing Element was
submitted to the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). HCD
reviewed the draft Element for consistency with State Housing law. Following HCD’s
finding that Carson’s 2014-2021 Housing Element was found in substantial compliance
with Housing Element law, two public hearings were held on the Housing Element (one
before the Planning Commission and one before the City Council). Notification was given
through legal ads published in the local newspaper of general circulation in advance of
each hearing and copies of the draft Element were made available for review at City Hall and
the public library. In addition, copies of the Element were sent to the local school district.
Public hearings are held annually on the City's participation in the Community Development
Block Grant program. Housing rehabilitation and fair housing needs are a major
expenditure in the Block Grant program, and projects are reviewed for consistency with the
General Plan, including this Housing Element. Additionally, each year the Planning
Commission and City Council annually conduct a public review of progress made in
implementing the programs set forth in the Housing Element as part of the Annual Report
prepared in accordance with Section 65400 of the California Government Code.
E. Sources of Information
In preparing the Housing Element, various sources of information were consulted. The
2010 Census provides the basis for population and household characteristics. Although
dated, no better source of information on demographics is widely accepted. In addition,
the 2010 Census must be used in the Housing Element to ensure consistency with
other Regional, State and Federal housing plans. However, several sources are used to
provide reliable updates of the 2010 Census. These are listed below.
    1. State Department of Finance, Demographic and Research Unit Population and
         Housing Estimates, 2010
City of Carson                               16                      2014-2021 Housing Element

    2. SCAG Regional Housing Needs Assessment, 2012
    3. Trulia.com 2012-2013 Rental and Sales Data
    4. Data Quick Information Systems
    5. City of Carson 2010-2015 Five Year Consolidated Plan and 2012-2013 Annual
         Action Plan
    6. Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) 2012–2035 Regional
         Transportation Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy
    7. Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data for 2011
    8. Los Angeles County Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA) Continuum of Care
In addition to providing information on the citywide level, selected information is also provided
at the census tract level to allow comparison among different areas in Carson.
Comparisons are made to illustrate diversity within the City across geographic areas.
For example, comparisons are made across census tracts on 2010 median household
income to illustrate the diversity of household income within the City. Figure 2 provides
a census tract map for the City of Carson.
City of Carson                              17                          2014-2021 Housing Element

                          Figure 2
               City of Carson Census Tracts
City of Carson            18                2014-2021 Housing Element
II.      BACKGROUND INFORMATION
A successful strategy for improving housing conditions must be preceded by an assessment
of the housing needs of the community and region. This section discusses the components of
housing need, that is, the trends in the City's population, households, and employment
base and the type of housing available. Since these changes have not occurred in a
vacuum, the regional context is also presented.
The following analysis is broken down into six major subsections. Section A, Population
Characteristics, analyzes the City of Carson in terms of individual persons and identifies
any population trends that may affect future housing needs. Section B, Household
Characteristics, analyzes Carson in terms of households, or living groups, to see how past
and expected household changes will affect housing needs. Section C, Employment
Characteristics, analyzes individual persons in Carson again, in terms of occupation and
employment sources as this directly affects the need for and location of housing. Section D,
Housing Stock Characteristics, analyzes the housing units in Carson in terms of availability,
affordability, and condition. Section E, Preservation of Assisted Housing, identifies the
assisted housing units in the City that are at-risk of conversion to market rate units since this
directly affects the amount of affordable housing available. Finally Section F, Energy
Conservation, reviews the City’s energy conservation programs which affect utility costs that
impact the affordability of housing. This information can be used to help identify programs
that are needed to ensure that the existing and future housing stock meets the housing needs
of every segment of the City's population. Analysis in each of these subsections provides a
database upon which decisions concerning programs and policies for the provision of
adequate housing in the City can be based.
A. Population Characteristics
The 2010 population of Carson was estimated by the U.S. Census to be 91,714
persons. As illustrated in Table 2, Carson experienced a smaller increase in population
growth between 2000 and 2010, at 2.2 percent, compared to the decade before. The rate of
population growth between 1990 and 2000 was 6.8 percent. The population growth from
1980 to 1990 was 3.4 percent, suggesting a gradual slow down of population growth in the
most recent decade. This trend is inconsistent with that seen in Los Angeles County
where the highest rate of population growth of 18.5 percent was seen in the decade
between 1980 and 1990. There was a more moderate rate of growth over the last two
decades with a 7.4 percent rate of population growth between 1990 and 2000 and a 3.1
percent increase between 2000 and 2010.
City of Carson                             19                         2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                         Table 2
                              City Of Carson and Los Angeles County
                                        Historic Population Figures
                                            1980                  1990                 2000                2010
 Carson                                    81,221                83,995               89,730              91,714
 Los Angeles County                      7,477,421             8,863,164            9,519,338           9,818,605
  Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010 Census Reports.
The SCAG 2012–2035 Regional Transportation Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy
(RTP/SCS) growth projections for the City of Carson, Los Angeles County and
surrounding cities are presented in Table 3. The largest growth rate over the 40 year
period from 1990 to 2035 is projected for Los Angeles County at 28.1 percent. The
second highest growth rate is projected for the City of Carson at 26.2 percent. The
surrounding cities are projected to have lower growth rates with Long Beach at 24.4
percent, Torrance at 19.1 percent and Compton at 7.9 percent. The projected growth
rate for the City of Carson from 2010 to 2020 of 6.3 percent is higher than what was
seen over the previous decade. There is an increase in the projected growth rate for the
City from 2020 to 2035 at an estimated 8.7 percent. In comparison, Los Angeles County
is projected to have a growth rate of 6.0 percent from 2010 to 2020 and a 9.1 growth
rate from 2020 to 2030.
                                                         Table 3
                                   Carson and Los Angeles County
                                    Population Trends: 1990 – 2030
 Jurisdiction                    1990            2000            2010            2020           2035      % Increase
 Carson                         83,995          89,730          91,714         97,500         106,000       26.2%
Los Angeles County            8,863,164       9,519,338       9,818,605      10,404,000     11,353,000      28.1%
 Torrance                      133,107         137,946         145,438        150,800         158,500       19.1%
 Compton                        90,454          93,493          96,455         96,900          97,600        7.9%
 Long Beach                    429,433         461,522         462,257        491,000         534,100       24.4%
Sources: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010 Census Reports;
SCAG 2012–2035 Regional Transportation Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy (RTP/SCS) Integrated Growth Forecast
Age Characteristics
With the increase in the City’s population from 2000 to 2010, there has been a
measureable change in the age of the City's population. The median age in Carson rose
during this time period from 33.7 to 37.6 years of age (see Table 4). According to the
2010 Census, there was a decrease in the percentage of children in the 5 to 14 years
age group, as compared with the 2000 population. In contrast, there was an increase in
the percentage of young adults in the 20 to 24 years age group during the same time
period. Comparing 2000 and 2010 there is a similar percentage of the population in the
middle age group from 35 years to 59 years of age. Importantly, from 2000 to 2010,
City of Carson                                          20                               2014-2021 Housing Element

there was an increase in the number of residents aged 60 years or older. The growing
elderly population in Carson is consistent with a nationwide trend toward a growing
elderly population.
                                                      Table 4
                                                 City of Carson
                                   Age Distribution: 2000 to 2010
        Age                                 2000                                            2010
      Cohorts                 Number                   Percent                 Number             Percent
Under 5 years                  6,192                     6.9%                    5,265              5.7%
5-9 years                      7,570                     8.4%                    5,647              6.2%
10-14 years                    7,543                     8.4%                    6,654              7.3%
15-19 years                    7,021                     7.8%                    7,577              8.3%
20-24 years                    6,057                     6.8%                    6,813              7.4%
25-34 years                    12,107                   13.5%                   10,981             12.0%
35-44 years                    13,475                   15.0%                   12,124             13.2%
45-54 years                    11,393                   12.7%                   13,123             14.3%
55-59 years                    4,688                     5.2%                    5,862              6.4%
60-64 years                    4,123                     4.6%                    5,028              5.5%
65-74 years                    5,889                     6.6%                    7,469              8.1%
75-84 years                    2,899                     3.2%                    3,985              4.3%
85 years and over               773                      0.9%                    1,186              1.3%
    Median Age                        33.7 years                                       37.6 years
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2000, 2010 Census Reports
Race/Ethnicity Characteristics
Table 5 presents the race and ethnic make-up of Carson residents in 2010. As this table
reveals, the City of Carson has a racially diverse population. While the largest racial
component among the City's residents is Asian at 25.6 percent, there is a comparable
White and Black population both comprising 23.8 percent of the City’s total population. The
2010 Census also reported 0.6 percent of the population as American Indian and 2.6
percent as Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander.
It should be noted that persons of Hispanic origin are now a self-designated category
separate from race (see Table 5). In 2010, 38.6 percent of the City’s population
identified themselves as being of Hispanic origin. The Census treats race and ethnicity
as separate and independent categories. This means that within the federal system
everyone is classified as both a member of one of the race groups and also as either
Hispanic or non-Hispanic (which is an ethnicity).
In 2000, the racial composition for the City of Carson was comprised of 25.7 percent White,
25.4 percent Black, 25.3 percent Asian/Pacific Islander and 18.0 percent reported as Other.
City of Carson                                        21                              2014-2021 Housing Element

Compared to the 2000 Census, the 2010 Census indicates that there was a decrease in the
White and Black populations, and an increase in the Asian population.
The City of Carson appears to be racially diverse when compared to Los Angeles County.
The racial composition for Los Angeles County in 2010 was 50.3 percent White; 8.7 percent
Black and 13.7 percent Asian with 21.8 percent of the population reporting some other race.
Additionally, the Hispanic total for the County is higher than the City at 47.7 percent.
                                                       Table 5
                             City of Carson and Los Angeles County
                                        Race and Ethnicity: 2010
                                                     CITY OF CARSON            LOS ANGELES COUNTY
Category                                             Number         Percent     Number       Percent
White                                              21,864            23.8%     4,936,599      50.3%
Black                                              21,856            23.8%      856,874        8.7%
American Indian                                      518              0.6%       72,828        0.7%
Asian                                              23,522            25.6%     1,346,865      13.7%
Native Haw.& Other Pacific Islander                 2,386             2.6%      26,094         0.3%
Some Other Race                                    17,151            18.7%     2,140,632      21.8%
Two or More Races                                   4,416             4.8%      438,713        4.5%
Total                                              91,714             100%     9,818,605       100%
Hispanic Origin                                    35,417            38.6%     4,687,605      47.7%
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census Report.
City of Carson                                         22                       2014-2021 Housing Element
B. Household Characteristics
The characteristics of the population provide an essential component toward the
understanding of growth and change in the City. In addition, information collected on the
household level provides a good base for the analysis of a community's housing needs.
The Bureau of the Census defines a household as all persons who occupy a housing unit,
which may include single persons living alone, families related through marriage or blood, and
unrelated individuals living together. Persons living in retirement or convalescent homes,
dormitories, or other group living situations are not considered households.
In 2010, there were a total of 24,903 households in the City of Carson; a 1.03 percent
increase in households from 2000 (see Table 6). Carson remains a predominantly family-
oriented City with over 81 percent of its households comprised of families. About 14
percent of all households were single persons living alone, a slight increase over the 2000
estimate. The remaining 4 percent of the City's households fall within the "Other"
category, representing individuals who share a housing unit and are not related by
blood or marriage.
                                                        Table 6
                                                  City Of Carson
                              Household Characteristics: 2000-2010
                                             2000                                            2010
   Household Type
                                Number                   Percent                 Number               Percent
   Family                        20,243                    82.1%                  20,202                 81.1%
   Singles                        3,506                    14.2%                   3,638                 14.6%
   Other                           899                      3.7%                   1,063                  4.3%
   Total                         24,648                   100.0%                  24,903                100.0%
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2000 Census Report and 2006-2010 American Community Survey
Household Size
Household size is an important indicator in identifying sources of population growth, as
well as, overcrowding in individual housing units. A city's average household size will
increase over time if trends move toward larger families. In communities where the
population is aging, the average household size may actually decline.
In 1990, the average household size in Carson was 2.71 persons per household. By the
year 2000, the average household size had increased to 3.59 persons per unit. Over the
next ten years, the average has continued to increase reaching 3.63 persons per
household in 2010 (see Table 7). In comparison, the average household size for Los
Angeles County has remained relatively consistent from 1990 to 2010 at approximately 2.9
persons per household.
City of Carson                                          23                               2014-2021 Housing Element
                                                       Table 7
                                                  City Of Carson
                                       Household Size: 1990-2010
                                                  1990                      2000                       2010
  Carson                                          2.71                      3.59                       3.63
  Los Angeles County                              2.91                      2.98                       2.97
Sources: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 1990, 2000 Census Reports and 2006-2010 American Community
 Survey.
Tenure by Household
Tenure, and the ratio between homeowner and renter households, can be affected by
many factors including housing cost, housing type, housing availability, and job
availability. From 1990 to 2010, generally, more than three quarters of the total
households in the City owned their homes. In comparison less than half of all
households in the County owned their homes, for the same timeframe. According to the
2010 Census, 76.2 percent of the households in the City of Carson owned their homes,
as compared with 23.8 percent of the households that were renters.
                                                       Table 8
                                                  City Of Carson
                                     Household Tenure: 1990-2010
                                           City of Carson                             Los Angeles County
          1990
        Category                 Number                     Percent                 Number                Percent
         Owners                   18,807                     79.0%                 1,440,830               48.2%
         Renters                   5,001                     21.0%                 1,548,722               51.8%
          2000
         Owners                   19,205                     77.9%                 1,499,744               47.9%
         Renters                   5,443                     22.1%                 1,634,030               52.1%
          2010
         Owners                   18,982                     76.2%                 1,552,091               48.2%
         Renters                   5,921                     23.8%                 1,665,798               51.8%
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1990, 2000 Census Reports and 2006-2010 American Community
 Survey
Overcrowding
The Census defines overcrowded households as units with more than one (1) person per
room, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, hallways, and porches. Severely overcrowded is
identified as over 1.5 persons per room. .” In using this definition, a habitable room does
City of Carson                                         24                               2014-2021 Housing Element

not necessarily mean a bedroom for each occupant. For example, a married couple with
no children living in a one-bedroom apartment is not considered overcrowded because
there are two people and two rooms (a bedroom and a living room). But, a couple living
in a one-room efficiency housing unit would be considered overcrowded by these
definitions. Likewise, a family of four living in a small two-bedroom apartment with a
small kitchenette would be considered overcrowded, but a family of four living in a two-
bedroom house (which would include a living room) with a large eat-in kitchen would not
be considered overcrowded.
The 2010 Census indicated that 10.2 percent of the occupied housing in Carson was
classified as overcrowded. This translates to approximately 2,548 households. As
shown in Table 9, overcrowding was a greater problem for renters, with 16.7 percent of
renter households reporting overcrowded conditions, as compared to 8.2 percent of
owners. Similarly, the 2010 Census reported that 5.4 percent of renter households were
living in severely overcrowded conditions, as compared with 2.0 percent of owner-
occupied households.
                                                       Table 9
                                                  City of Carson
                                    Overcrowding by Tenure: 2010
                                                                                     Severely Overcrowded
                Total Housing             Overcrowded Households
   Tenure                                                                                 Households
                       Units
                                           Number            Percentage            Number         Percentage
  Renters              5,921                  672               11.3%                 319            5.4%
  Owners              18,982                1,181                6.2%                 376            2.0%
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 2006-2010 American Community Survey
The City's existing housing stock consists of primarily owner-occupied units that contain a
greater number of bedrooms, compared to the rental housing stock. About 34 percent of the
owner-occupied units consisted of four bedrooms or more. Only about 13.2 percent of the
rental housing stock contained four or more bedrooms. Greater overcrowding conditions for
renters compared to owners may reflect the need for larger units with a greater number of
bedrooms within the rental housing stock.
Income
A major factor determining the ability of a household to obtain adequate housing is income.
Table 10 shows that in 2010, the median household income in Carson was $68,425. This
was higher than the County median income of $55,476. While Carson’s median income was
less than that of Torrance ($74,163) it was significantly higher than the median incomes of
surrounding cities including Compton ($43,201) and Long Beach ($51,173), as indicated in
Table 10. The average increase in income between 2000 and 2010 for each city is about 33
percent.
City of Carson                                         25                              2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                       Table 10
                                    Carson and Surrounding Areas
                           Median Household Income: 2000 and 2010
        Jurisdiction              2000 Median Income            2010 Median Income              Percent Increase
  Carson                                  $52,584                      $68,425                       30.1%
  Torrance                                $56,489                      $74,163                       31.3%
  Compton                                 $31,819                      $43,201                       35.8%
  Long Beach                              $37,270                      $51,173                       37.3%
  Los Angeles County                      $42,189                      $55,476                       31.5%
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2000 Census Report and 2006-2010 American Community Survey.
According to the 2010 Census, household income levels vary widely in the City of
Carson. Table 11 presents the number and percentage of households within the City
that fall within a series of ten income ranges. About 35 percent of the City's households
earn annual incomes up to $49,999. At the opposite end of the spectrum, about 45
percent of Carson’s households earned $75,000 or more annually. The largest income
category was households earning between $50,000 and $74,999, comprising 20.3
percent of the population. Figure 3 illustrates the diversity of median household income
across the City by census tract.
                                                       Table 11
                                                  City Of Carson
                                          Household Income: 2010
                                                            Number of                           Percent of
               Income Range
                                                           Households                          Households
 Under $10,000                                                  857                                3.4%
 $10,000 - $14,999                                              785                                3.2%
 $15,000 - $24,999                                             1,867                               7.5%
 $25,000 - $34,999                                             2,092                               8.4%
 $35,000 - $49,999                                             3,026                              12.2%
 $50,000 - $74,999                                             5,065                              20.3%
 $75,000 - $99,999                                             3,790                              15.2%
 $100,000 - $149,999                                           4,945                              19.9%
 $150,000 - $199,999                                           1,576                               6.3%
 $200,000 or more                                               900                                3.6%
                                      Totals                  24,903                              100.0%
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 2006-2010 American Community Survey.
City of Carson                                          26                              2014-2021 Housing Element

                                  Figure 3
               Median Household Income by Census Tracts: 2010
City of Carson                    27                           Draft 2006-2014
                                                              Housing Element
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the State Department of
Housing and Community Development, have developed the following income categories and
their definitions:
         Very Low Income - less than 50 percent of the County median.
         Low Income - between 51 and 80 percent of the County median.
         Moderate Income - between 81 and 120 percent of the County median.
         Above-Moderate Income - greater than 120 percent of the County median.
The City's 2000 and 2010 income distribution can be divided into these four income groups
through interpolation, as presented in Table 12. Comparing the City’s income distribution in
these two years provides insight into the changing income characteristics of the City's
population. The number of very low income households in Carson has increased by 1,044
during the 2000-2010 period, representing a 28.2 percent increase. The City also
experienced a 13.2 percent decrease in upper income households during the period. The
largest increase of any of the four income groups is moderate income households, which
increased 54.1 percent during the 2000-2010 period. Of the City’s 2010 households,
19.1 percent earned less than 50 percent of the area median income, as compared with
15.1 percent in 2000. Low income households have experienced a 28.8 percent decrease
during the 2000-2010 period. Finally, the proportion of upper income households to total
households decreased from approximately 52.7 percent to 45 percent, and the actual
number of upper income households decreased by 1,763. The change in income
distribution in the City, in particular the increase in moderate income households, may have
resulted from an in-migration of median income individuals into the City.
                                                       Table 12
                                                  City of Carson
                                      Income Groups: 2000 & 2010
 Income Groups                                      2000                      2010           Change 2000-2010
                                            Number       Percent      Number      Percent    Number    Percent
 Very Low Income (0 - 50%)                    3,707        15.1%        4,751        19.1%    1,044      28.2
 Low Income (51% - 80%)                       3,966        16.1%        2,823        11.3%    -1,143     -28.8
 Moderate Income (81% - 120%)                 3,971        16.1%        6,118        24.6%    2,147      54.1
 Above Moderate Income (> 120%)              12,974        52.7%       11,211         45.0    -1,763     -13.6
 Totals:                                     24,618       100.0%       24,903       100.0%     285        1.2
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2000 & 2010 Census Report.
Based on Los Angeles County 2000 Median Income of $42,189 and 2010 Median Income of $55,476
City of Carson                                          28                             2014-2021 Housing Element

Housing Affordability
State and Federal standards for housing overpayment are based on an income-to-housing
cost ratio of 30 percent and above. Households paying greater than 30 percent of their
income have less income available for other necessities such as food, clothing, utilities,
and health care. It is recognized, however, that moderate and above moderate income
households are generally capable of paying a larger proportion of their income for
housing, and therefore estimates of housing overpayment generally focus on lower income
groups.
The distinction between renter and owner housing overpayment is important because,
while homeowners may over-extend themselves financially to afford the option of home
purchase, the owner always maintains the option of selling the home. Renters, on the other
hand, are limited to the rental market, and are generally required to pay the rent
established in that market. The CHAS Data Set has broken down housing overpayment by
housing tenure, as presented in Table 13. According to the 2005-2009 CHAS Data Set
provided by HUD, an estimated 6,060 of Carson's lower income households, consisting of
Extremely Low Income, Very Low Income and Low Income groups, were paying more than
30 percent of their income on rent or mortgage payments. Of these overpaying households,
1,870 are classified as Extremely Low Income, 1,815 are Very Low Income and 2,375 are
Low Income. The cost burden of paying more than 30 percent of household income on
housing costs is greater for renters in the Extremely Low and Very Low Income groups
compared with owners. Approximately 70.8 percent of renters in these income groups were
overpaying for housing costs compared with approximately 26.5 percent for owners. These
changes in the Low Income and Moderate and Above Moderate Income groups, where a
higher percentage of owners are paying over 30 percent for their housing costs, compared
with renters.
                                            Table 13
                                       City Of Carson
           Households Paying Greater Than 30% of Income for Shelter
  Household         Extremely Low   Very Low           Low        Moderate
  Tenure                Income       Income          Income      and Above          Total
  Owner              985 (12.8%)  1,060 (13.7%)   1,930 (25.0%) 3,750 (48.5%)      7,725
  Renter             885 (38.2%)   755 (32.6%)     445 (19.2%)   230 (9.9%)        2,315
  Total                  1,870        1,815           2,375         3,980          10,040
Source: 2005-2009 CHAS Data Book
City of Carson                               29                    2014-2021 Housing Element
Special Needs Groups
Certain segments of the population may have a more difficult time finding decent, affordable
housing due to special circumstances. In Carson, these "special needs" groups include
the elderly, persons with disabilities, persons with developmental disabilities, extremely
low income households, large households, female-headed households, farmworkers,
and the homeless. The number of special needs households and/or persons in Carson is
summarized in Table 14.
                                                            Table 14
                                                       City of Carson
                                   Summary of Special Needs Groups
                                                                         Number of                        Percent of Total
  Needs Group
                                                                   Households/Persons                Households/Population
  Elderly Persons (65+)                                                     11,458                            12.5%
  Persons with Disabilities (Physical Disability)**                         5,486                              6.0%
  Persons with Developmental Disabilities                                   1,135                              1.2%
  Extremely Low Income (less than 30% MFI)                                  1,642                              6.6%
  Large Households(5 or more persons)                                       5,700                             22.9%
  Female-headed Households                                                   4,638                            18.6%
  Farmworkers***                                                              178                             0.19%
  Homeless Persons*                                                            21                             0.02%
Source: U. S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census Report.
* 2013 Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA) Greater Los Angeles Homeless Count
** Census data that represents persons with self-care and an independent living difficulty (18 yrs. and over)
***Persons employed in Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining
Elderly: The special needs of many elderly households result from their lower, fixed
incomes, physical disabilities, and dependence needs. An estimated 11,458 elderly
persons (65 years and over) resided in Carson in 2010, representing 12.5 percent of the
total population. The proportion of elderly can be expected to increase as those persons in
the middle age groups grow older. Escalating housing costs, particularly in the rental
market, severely impact housing affordability for the elderly, who are usually on fixed
incomes. In the City of Carson, however, approximately 85 percent of elderly households
are home owners while only 15 percent are renters. According to the 2010 Census, there are
971 seniors whose incomes fell below the poverty level in Carson. Housing needs of the
elderly can be addressed through conservation of existing mobilehome parks, congregate
housing, rental subsidies, housing rehabilitation assistance, and other types of homeowner
assistance for seniors in single-family and mobilehomes.
Persons with Disabilities: Physical disabilities can hinder access to housing units of traditional
design as well as limit the ability to earn adequate income. In 2010, approximately 6
percent of Carson's population reported having a physical disability. Housing opportunities
for persons with physical disabilities can be maximized through the provision of affordable,
City of Carson                                              30                                    2014-2021 Housing Element
barrier-free housing. Special modifications include units with access ramps, wider doorways,
assist bars in bathrooms, lower cabinets, and elevators. This is accomplished through
compliance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the 2007 Title 24
Part 2, California Building Code regulations.
Persons with Developmental Disabilities: According to Section 4512 of the California
Welfare and Institutions Code a “developmental disability” means a disability that
originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to
continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which
includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term shall also
include disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation or to
require treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall
not include other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
Many persons with developmental disabilities can live and work independently within a
conventional housing environment. Individuals who have more severe developmental
disabilities require a group living environment where supervision is provided. The most
severely affected individuals may require an institutional environment where medical
attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental disabilities exist
before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for persons with developmental
disabilities is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate
level of independence as an adult.
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community
based services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and
their families through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental
centers, and two community-based facilities. The Harbor Regional Center and the South
Central Los Angeles Regional Center are the two regional centers currently providing
point of entry services to people with developmental disabilities in the City of Carson.
Table 14 provides information from the Harbor Regional Center and the South Central
Los Angeles Regional Center on the number of individuals with developmental
disabilities in Carson. In 2013, there were approximately 1,135 individuals actively
utilizing services at these two regional centers for a developmental disability.
To assist with any housing needs for persons with developmental disabilities, the City
will implement programs to coordinate housing activities and outreach with the Harbor
Regional Center and the South Central Los Angeles Regional Center and encourage
housing providers to designate a portion of new affordable housing developments for
persons with disabilities, especially persons with developmental disabilities, and pursue
funding sources designated for persons with special needs and disabilities.
Large Households: Large households are identified as a group with special housing needs
based on the limited availability of adequately sized, affordable housing units. Large
households are often of lower income, frequently resulting in the overcrowding of smaller
dwelling units and in turn accelerating unit deterioration. In addition, large families often
have difficulty finding rental units which qualify for the Section 8 Rental Assistance
Program due to the larger units exceeding maximum rent limits, combined with the
reluctance of some landlords to rent to large families. Approximately 22.9 percent of
City of Carson                             31                         2014-2021 Housing Element

Carson's households in 2010 had five or more members, translating to 5,700 households.
This represents a slight decrease from 2000 when large households comprised 28.4
percent of the City's total households.
According to the 2010 Census, there is a disparity between the number of larger rental
units available in the City and the number of large households in Carson. For example, as
shown in Table 15, only about 15.2 percent of the City’s rental units have four or more
bedrooms, despite the fact that the average household size of renter-occupied units is
higher at 3.74 persons per household compared to 3.62 persons per unit for owner-
occupied units. About 38.4 percent of owner occupied units contain four or more bedrooms.
The housing needs of large households can be addressed through the expansion of
existing smaller units, and the provision of new, affordably-priced larger units. The fact that
the majority of unit overcrowding occurs in the City's rental housing stock indicates the
need for larger rental units and/or rental subsidies to allow for large households to afford
adequately sized units.
                                                       Table 15
                                                  City of Carson
                                    Housing Stock by Bedroom Mix
              #Bedrooms               Rental Units                   Owner Units                        Total
                     0                       163                           38                             201
                     1                      1,064                         229                           1,293
                     2                      2,154                        2,804                          4,958
                     3                      1,901                        8,428                         10,329
                     4                       904                         6,010                          6,914
                     5+                       46                         1,155                          1,201
                        Total:              6,232                       18,664                         24,896
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 2008-2010 American Community Survey
Female-Headed Households: Female-headed households tend to have lower incomes, thus
limiting housing availability for this group. In 2010, 18.6 percent of Carson's households
were headed by women, representing a total of 4,638 female-headed households. Of
these, approximately 1,749 (37.7 percent) have dependent children under 18 years of age.
While there is no definitive data regarding the housing tenure of this group, it can be
assumed that low incomes preclude the option of homeownership for most female-
headed households. According to 2010 Census data, about 27 percent of those female-
headed households with children under the age of 18 years live below the poverty level in
Carson. Thus, providing housing opportunities for female-headed households relates both
to affordability and services related to the care of children, such as day care, schools, and
recreational facilities.
Extremely Low Income Households: The 2005-2009 CHAS Data Set reported that
Carson had a total of 985 renter households and 885 owner households that were extremely
low income. The combined total of 1,870 households represents about 7.5 percent of the
City’s households. Extremely low income households represent the highest need group in
terms of affordable housing as the greatest amount of subsidies are needed to assist this
group.
City of Carson                                         32                              2014-2021 Housing Element

Farmworkers: The special housing needs of many farmworkers stem from their low wages
and the insecure nature of their employment. The 2010 Census identified 178
farmworkers in Carson. Like other lower income individuals, the housing needs of
farmworkers can be addressed through the provision of affordable housing opportunities.
Homeless: Throughout the country, homelessness has become an increasing problem.
Factors contributing to the rise in homelessness include the general lack of housing
affordable to low and moderate income persons, increases in the number of persons whose
incomes fall below the poverty level, reductions in public subsidy to the poor, and the de-
institutionalization of the mentally ill.
The Los Angeles County Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA) is a joint powers authority
created by the City and the County of Los Angeles for the purpose of planning, coordinating,
and managing resources for homeless programs. LAHSA is the lead agency for developing a
Continuum of Care (COC) strategy for the region to meet the needs for emergency shelters for
homeless persons and to provide services and housing to transition homeless from emergency
housing to transitional and permanent housing. For a variety of services, Los Angeles County
is divided into eight Service Planning Areas (SPAs). LAHSA utilizes these SPAs in planning,
coordinating, and managing resources for homeless programs. The City of Carson is located in
SPA 8—South Bay.
During the 2013 Greater Los Angeles Homeless Count, volunteers observed 21 homeless
individuals in the City of Carson. LAHSA is currently in the process of generating the average
number of homeless persons that reside in cars, vans, campers/RVs, tents and make-shift
shelters, which will be multiplied by the number of the subject vehicles/shelters observed within
the City during the night of the Homeless Count (January 29,2013 from 8:45 pm to 1:00).
The Los Angeles County COC has described six strategies to prevent homelessness which
include: (1) Maintain the existing capacity to serve homeless residents and build new capacity
where it is needed; (2) Address the structural causes of homelessness; (3) Ensure rapid
reconnection with housing for people who become homeless; (4) Bring homeless residents into
the mainstream of society; (5) Respect the individualized nature of problems that make people
homeless and the need for individual solutions; and (6) Call on all communities to participate
fairly in funding and hosting homeless services and affordable housing, and create new, on-
going funding streams dedicated to supporting homeless programs. Most of the prevention
activities in the Los Angeles COC are programs administered by mainstream agencies that
provide the following support: (1) County General Relief funding; (2) CalWORKS Program to
help welfare recipients obtain employment; (3) Social Security Income (SSI) provides elderly
and persons with disabilities with monthly stipends, and provides survivor benefits to surviving
spouses with dependent children under age 16; (4) Food Stamps provide for a substantial
portion of a household’s food budget; (5) Section 8 subsidies which enables families or
individuals with disabilities earning very low incomes to live in decent, safe and sanitary
housing; and (6) Rental Assistance programs that provide rent payments to prevent
homelessness.
Support services are also necessary to address the needs of homeless persons. Support
services include case management, life skills, alcohol and drug abuse treatment, mental health
City of Carson                              33                         2014-2021 Housing Element

treatment, AIDS-related treatment, education, employment assistance, childcare,
transportation, housing placement, medical and dental care, and other services. Supportive
services are accessed at all levels of the COC. Generally, non-profit service providers target a
particular community and population with appropriate social services. Services are accessed in
different ways through various homeless programs. For example, job development programs
are available to residents of housing programs or may be referred by case managers. Life skills
training programs are typically accessed through residential programs offering case
management services. Childcare services are often accessed through emergency and
transitional shelters that sponsor on- and off-site childcare. Substance abuse programs often
receive referrals from Drop-In Centers, Access Centers, LAHSA Emergency Response Team,
the court system, Veterans Administration, health and mental health care systems, emergency
shelters, transitional shelters and through self-referral. Most services are accessed directly
through residential programs that offer these services, or by referral to an off-site program.
Mental health services are also an important part of many transitional and permanent programs
offered by non-profit providers of the COC.
C. Employment Characteristics
The City of Carson is a major industrial/warehouse hub for Los Angeles County. More
than half of the City’s land is in industrial use. Other major land uses in the City are
residential (30 percent), commercial (6 percent), and open space/public use (8 percent).
An Advisory Services Panel Report prepared by the Urban Land Institute in June 2002,
indicated that while there could be continued demand for industrial space, the City also
has an opportunity for major retail development supported by the income levels in the City
and household growth. The retail development proposed in the report can be expected to
create demand for new high-quality office space and to increase demand for existing
office space.
One of the factors that can contribute to an increase in the demand for housing in an area
is an expansion of the employment base. The 2006-2010 American Community Survey
classified 46,745 persons living within Carson as being part of the labor force. Of this total,
46,740 persons were in the civilian labor force with a total of 42,370 persons employed. In
the 2010 Census, the unemployment rate was 9.3 percent in Carson, which was above the
County unemployment rate of 8.7 percent for the same period. The civilian labor force
employed in the categories listed in Table 16 numbered 42,370 persons in 2010. About
24.9 percent of the City’s residents were employed in educational, health and social
services and about 15 percent in the manufacturing sector. The next two categories in
which Carson residents were employed include: retail trade (11 percent) and
transportation, warehousing, and utilities (10 percent).
City of Carson                               34                        2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                       Table 16
                                                  City Of Carson
                                           Labor Force by Industry
 Industry                                                                          Persons             Percent
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting , and mining                               140          0.3%
 Construction                                                                        1,557          3.7%
 Manufacturing                                                                       6,337         15.0%
 Wholesale trade                                                                     1,452          3.4%
 Retail trade                                                                        4,647         11.0%
 Transportation, warehousing, and utilities                                          4,216         10.0%
 Information                                                                           855          1.9%
 Finance, insurance, real estate, and rental and leasing                             2,228          5.3%
 Professional, scientific, management, administrative                                3,582          8.5%
 Educational, health and social services                                            10,564         24.9%
 Arts, entertainment, recreation, accommodation and food                             3,011          7.1%
 Other services (except public administration)                                       1,745          4.1%
 Public Administration                                                               2,036          4.8%
                                                         Total:                     42,370         100%
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2006-2010 American Community Survey.
Table 17 provides employment by occupation for the City of Carson, based on the 2010
Census. Management, business, science, and arts occupations comprised 29.4 percent
of the labor force. The next two highest occupational categories were sales and office
occupations at 29.2 percent and service occupations at 17.9 percent. Another
consideration of employment opportunities within the City is through a "jobs-housing
balance" test. The State Legislature established Government Code Section 65890.1, the
intent of which is to encourage land use patterns which balance the location of
employment-generating uses with residential uses. A balanced community would have a
match between employment and housing opportunities enabling most residents to also
work in the community. Using data from SCAG’s 2012 Integrated Growth Forecast,
comparing the estimated number of jobs in Carson to the number of housing units indicates
a jobs-housing ratio 2.03:1.00 for the City. The fact that this ratio exceeds 1.0 indicates that
Carson is providing more jobs than it is housing, reflective of the City's stature as an
employment center.
                                                       Table 17
                                                  City Of Carson
                                  Employment by Occupation: 2010
                             Occupation                                  Number                    Percent
   Management, professional, and related occupations                      12,474                    29.4%
   Service occupations                                                     7,595                    17.9%
   Sales and office occupations                                           12,376                    29.2%
   Natural resources, construction, and maintenance
                                                                           2,837                     6.8%
   occupations
   Production, transportation, and material moving occupations             7,088                    16.7%
                                                       Total              42,370                    100%
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2006-2010 American Community Survey.
City of Carson                                          35                              2014-2021 Housing Element

D. Housing Stock Characteristics
With a 2010 housing stock of 25,990 units, Carson represents a mid-sized community in
Los Angeles County. During the period of 2000-2010, Carson grew in the number of
housing units at a rate of 2.6 percent. The County grew at the highest rate of 5.3 percent.
SCAG estimates reflect continued growth in the City of Carson with projected household
totals increasing from 25,990 in 2010 to 27,400 in 2020 and 29,600 in 2035. This
indicates an approximate 13.9 percent projected increase in the number of households
over the next 25 years.
                                                       Table 18
                                    Carson and Surrounding Areas
                                       Housing Growth: 2000-2010
                                                     Number of Housing Units
                                                                                                Percent Increase
         Jurisdiction                       2000                          2010
                                                                                                   2000-2008
 Carson                                       25,337                     25,990                      2.6%
 Torrance                                  55,967                        58,377                      4.3%
 Compton                                      23,795                     24,523                      3.1%
 Long Beach                                   171,632                   176,032                      2.6%
 Los Angeles County                         3,270,909                 3,445,076                      5.3%
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2000 Census Report and 2008-2010 American Community Survey
Housing Type and Tenure
In order to determine the extent of housing need in the City of Carson, the analysis must
include not only population, household, and employment characteristics, but also the
type of housing available. Housing need is defined as the difference between the type of
housing required by the City's existing and projected population and the type of housing
available. The size, price, and condition of existing units are the major factors in
determining suitability. The City’s 2010 housing stock is comprised of 80 percent single-
family, 10.9 percent multi-family, and 9.3 percent mobilehome and other (boat, RV, van, etc.)
units. The City continues to be a predominantly single family dwelling community. The City’s
multi-family housing stock decreased by 45 units from 2000-2010, representing a 1.6 percent
decrease as seen in Table 19. From 2000-2010 the greatest increase in housing type was in
single family dwellings with an increase of 791 units, representing a four percent increase.
City of Carson                                          36                              2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                       Table 19
                                                  City of Carson
                                       Housing Trends: 1990-2010
                                                                             Change                  Change
     Housing Type              Number of Housing Units
                                                                            1990-2000               2000-2010
                            1990             2000           2010       Number Percent           Number Percent
  Single-Family            19,149           19,956         20,747         807          4.2%        791         4.0%
  Multi-Family              2,672            2,876          2,831         204          7.6%        -45        -1.6%
  Mobilehomes and
  Other                     2,620            2,505          2,412        -115         -4.4%        -93        -3.7%
  (Boat, RV, Van, etc.)
                 Totals:   24,441           25,337         25,990         896          7.4%        653         2.6%
Sources: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1990 and 2000 Census Report; and 2008-2010 American Community
 Survey
The tenure distribution of a community's housing stock (owner versus renter) influences
several aspects of the local housing market. Residential mobility is influenced by tenure.
Owner-occupied housing evidences a much lower turnover rate than rental housing.
Housing overpayment, while faced by many households regardless of tenure, is far
more prevalent among renters. Tenure preferences are primarily related to household
income, composition, and the age of the householder.
The housing stock in Carson has historically been majority owner-occupied units. As seen
in Table 8, the ratio of owner-occupied to renter-occupied units remained fairly stable at
about 76 percent owners to 24 percent renters from 2000 to 2010. The percentage of
owner-occupied housing in the City during 2010 was 76.2 percent owners with 23.8 percent
renters. While the City must continue to provide for the demand for owner occupied
housing, there must be an understanding of the needs for rental housing in the City as well.
Vacancy Rate
According to the 2010 Census, the vacancy rate for ownership units was 1.5 percent
and 1.9 percent for rentals, with an overall vacancy rate of 1.7 percent for both types of
units.
Housing Conditions
The accepted standard for major housing rehabilitation needs is normally a 30-year
timeframe. As indicated in the 2010 Census, more than 90 percent of Carson's housing
stock was 30 years or older in 2010. This would indicate the potential need for rehabilitation
and continued maintenance of more than 23,458 dwelling units based on age alone.
The 2010 Census reveals that on a smaller scale, 29 housing units in the City lack
complete plumbing facilities and 60 housing units lack complete kitchen facilities.
Precise quantification of housing rehabilitation needs are difficult to estimate. Housing is
considered substandard when physical conditions are determined to be below the
City of Carson                                          37                               2014-2021 Housing Element
minimum standards of living, as defined by Section 1001 of the Uniform Housing Code.
A housing unit is considered substandard if any of the following conditions exist:
        Inadequate sanitation
        Structural hazards
        Nuisances
        Faulty weather protection
        Fire hazards
        Inadequate maintenance
        Overcrowding
        Hazardous wiring, plumbing or mechanical equipment
Households living in substandard conditions are considered as being in need of housing
assistance even if they are not actively seeking alternative housing arrangements. In
addition to structural deficiency and standards, the lack of certain infrastructure and
utilities often serves as an indicator of substandard conditions. According to the 2010
Census, there were 29 rental units (0.5 percent) lacking complete plumbing facilities
(Table 20)) and 60 rental units (0.1 percent) without complete kitchen facilities. There
were no owner occupied units lacking complete plumbing or complete kitchen facilities.
                                                       Table 20
                                                  City of Carson
                       Plumbing and Kitchen Facilities by Tenure: 2010
                                                                     Owner                        Renter
                                                            Number          Percent        Number       Percent
 Total Units                                                 18,664          100%           6,232        100%
 Complete Plumbing Facilities                                18,664          100%           6,203        99.5%
 Lacking Complete Plumbing Facilities                           0             0%              29         0.5%
 Complete Kitchen Facilities                                 18,664          100%           6,172        99.0%
 Lacking Complete Kitchen Facilities                            0             0%              60         0.1%
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2008-2010 American Community Survey
Housing Costs
The cost of housing determines whether or not a household will be able to obtain an
adequately-sized unit in good condition in the area in which they wish to locate. In 2000,
the median home value in the City of Carson was $183,200, which was lower than most of
the surrounding cities. Carson’s median home value was higher than the City of Compton
($136,200), but lower than the City of Torrance ($320,700), City of Long Beach ($210,000)
and County of Los Angeles ($209,300). Housing costs rose dramatically in the middle of
the 2000-2010 decade. Reflecting both a dramatic increase in housing costs seen in the
middle of the 2000-2010 decade, and a more recent decline in housing costs over the last
year and a half, Table 21 provides current median housing costs for the City of Carson
City of Carson                                          38                              2014-2021 Housing Element

and the surrounding cities, as well as the countywide total for Los Angeles County.
Carson’s median housing cost of $333,500 in January 2013 remains higher than the City
of Compton ($196,000). The median housing cost for Los Angeles County in January
2013 was $350,000.
                                                       Table 21
                                    Carson and Surrounding Areas
                                       Housing Values: 2000-2013
                                                           2000                                January 2013
                Jurisdiction
                                                 Median Housing Value                    Median Housing Value
 Carson                                                  $183,200                                      $333,500
 Torrance                                                $320,700                                      $493,000
 Compton                                                 $136,200                                      $196,000
 Long Beach                                              $210,000                                      $399,000
 Los Angeles County                                      $209,300                                      $350,000
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 2000 Census Report; Los Angeles Times, January 2013.
To obtain detailed information on housing sales activity in the City, recent housing sales
were tracked on Trulia.com over the period of November 2012 to February 2013. Table
22 provides a sample of these sold housing units. According to this data, a total of 132
homes were sold in the City during this period. Single-family home sales prices in Carson
range from a low of $90,045 to a high of $458,000. The median price for a single family
home in Carson was $333,500 in January 2013. A total of 24 condominium (Condo) units
were sold in the City during this period. Condo sales prices in Carson range from a low of
$110,000 to a high of $372,000. The median price for a condo in Carson was $190,000.
                                                       Table 22
                                                  City of Carson
                        Housing Sales: November 2012 – February 2013
                Unit Type                              Bedrooms                                Price Sold
                  Condo                                   2-bdr                                 $110,000
                  Condo                                   3-bdr                                 $179,000
                  Condo                                   2-bdr                                 $149,000
                  Condo                                   4-bdr                                 $285,000
                  Condo                                   3-bdr                                 $226,000
              Single-Family                               3-bdr                                 $275,000
              Single-Family                               3-bdr                                 $375,000
              Single-Family                               4-bdr                                 $250,000
              Single-Family                               3-bdr                                 $395,000
              Single-Family                               5-bdr                                 $355,000
Source: Trulia.com, February 2013
The costs of home ownership and rent can be compared to a household's ability to pay
for housing, using the 2012 HUD-established Area Median Family Income (MFI) limit for
Los Angeles County of $64,800. Table 23 illustrates maximum affordable mortgage
payments and rents for a four-person household in Los Angeles County. Affordable
City of Carson                                         39                                2014-2021 Housing Element

housing cost is based on a maximum of 30 percent of gross household income devoted
to mortgage or rental costs. These maximum affordable costs would be adjusted
downward for smaller households, or upward for larger households.
According to the table, very low income households can afford a maximum home price of
$151,790, while low income households can afford a maximum home price of $219,026 and
moderate income households can afford a maximum home price of $379,195.
Comparing the median sales price for a three bedroom single family home in Carson
($306,450, according to Trulia.com) with the City's income structure, it is evident that a
three bedroom home in the City is only affordable to moderate income households. A three
bedroom single family home is clearly not affordable to very low or low income households.
Two and three bedroom condos in the City would be affordable to moderate income
households. Clearly this demonstrates that housing in a high cost area like Southern California
is only affordable to some income groups if there is a range of housing types available, buyers
carry equity over from a previously owned home, and buyers have a large amount of cash for
a down-payment or subsidies are available to make housing affordable.
                                                         Table 23
                                                     City of Carson
                               Housing Affordability by Income Group
                                                             Affordable                                        Maximum
                                                                                  Housing Costs
                                    AMI adjusted by            Payment                                      Affordable Price
          Income Group
                                           Size                                             Taxes &              (b)
                                                          Renter    Owner     Utilities              (a)  Owner       Renter
                                                                                          Insurance
  Extremely Low (0-30% MFI)              30% AMI
  Two Person (1 bedroom)                 $13,293           $332      $332       $50            $80         $47,112      $282
  Three Person (2 bedrooms)              $15,192           $380      $380       $75            $90         $50,017      $305
  Four Person (3 bedrooms)               $17,091           $427      $427      $100            $95         $54,086      $327
  Five Person (4 bedrooms)               $23,325           $583      $583      $125           $100         $83,390      $458
  Very Low (30-50% MFI)                  50% AMI
  One Person (Studio)                    $12,650           $316      $316       $50           $115         $35,219      $266
  Two Person (1 bedroom)                 $21,075           $527      $527       $50           $115         $84,263      $477
  Three Person (2 bedrooms)              $33,725           $843      $843      $100           $130        $142,767      $743
  Four Person (3 bedrooms)               $32,400           $810      $810      $125           $140        $126,904      $685
  Five Person (4 bedrooms)               $38,875           $972      $972      $175           $145        $151,790      $797
  Low (50-80% MFI)                60% AMI 70% AMI
  One Person (Studio)             $15,180     $17,710      $443      $443       $48           $150         $57,107      $395
  Two Person (1 bedroom)          $25,290     $29,505      $738      $738       $85           $165        $113,544      $653
  Three Person (2 bedrooms)       $40,470     $47,215     $1,180    $1,180     $125           $190        $201,504     $1,055
  Four Person (3 bedrooms)        $38,880     $45,360     $1,134    $1,134     $175           $210        $174,406      $959
  Five Person (4 bedrooms)        $46,650     $54,425     $1,361    $1,361     $200           $220        $219,026     $1,161
  Moderate Income (81-120%
                                        110% AMI
  MFI)
  One Person (Studio)                    $27,830           $696      $812      $135           $405         $63,268      $561
  Two Person (1 bedroom)                 $46,365          $1,159    $1,352     $135           $405        $189,149     $1,024
  Three Person (2 bedrooms)              $74,195          $1,855    $2,164     $157           $475        $356,734     $1,698
  Four Person (3 bedrooms)               $71,280          $1,782    $2,079     $211           $571        $302,009     $1,571
  Five Person (4 bedrooms)               $85,525          $2,138    $2,494     $238           $628        $379,195     $1,900
Source: Compiled by ESA.
Notes:
Property taxes and insurance based on averages for the region.
Calculation of affordable home sales prices based on a down payment of 20%, annual interest rate of 5%, 30-year mortgage, and
 monthly payment 30% of gross household income. 3. Based on 2012 Los Angeles County MFI $64,800 and 2012 HCD State
 Income Limits 4. Monthly affordable rent based on payments of no more than 30% of household income.
City of Carson                                            40                                  2014-2021 Housing Element
Rental Housing
In 2010, the median monthly rent in Carson was $1,089. Table 24 illustrates that rents in
Carson held a higher value relative to the surrounding cities of Compton ($825) and Long
Beach ($945), and were also higher than Los Angeles County ($1,017). The neighboring
City of Torrance had a higher median rent at $1,286. The cost of rental housing in the City
may be maintained at a relatively higher level because rental housing in the City
represents only about 25 percent of the entire housing stock.
                                                          Table 24
                                      Carson and Surrounding Areas
                                                Monthly Rents: 2010
 Jurisdiction                                                                 Median Monthly Contract Rent
 Carson                                                                                 $1,089
 Torrance                                                                               $1,286
 Compton                                                                                 $825
 Long Beach                                                                              $945
 Los Angeles County                                                                     $1,017
Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 2010 Census Report.
In order to update information on rental costs in Carson, data has been compiled from
internet listings on Craig’s List and Trulia. Table 25 presents results of the rental survey
by unit type, including apartments, condominiums/townhomes, and single-family homes.
                                                          Table 25
                                                      City of Carson
                                                Monthly Rental Rates
  Unit Type and Bedrooms                 Units Advertised                Rental Range              Median Rent
 Apartments
   1 bedroom                                        4                    $1,400-$1,700                $1,550
   2 bedrooms                                      10                    $1,245-$2,200                $1,700
   3 bedrooms                                       5                    $1,600-$2,300                $2,010
Condominiums/Townhomes
   1 bedroom                                        1                    $1,050                       $1,050
   2 bedrooms                                       5                    $1,650-$2,000                $1,850
   3 bedrooms                                       3                    $1,400-$1,725                $1,560
Single-Family Homes
   1 bedroom                                        1                    $1,050                       $1,050
   2 bedrooms                                       3                    $1,695-$2,000                $1,850
   3 bedrooms                                      12                    $1,595-$2,995                $2,300
   4 bedrooms                                       2                    $2,475-$2,600                $2,550
Source: Trulia.com and Craigslist.com, City of Carson rental survey 2013
City of Carson                                             41                            2014-2021 Housing Element

Using the guideline that a household should not spend more than 30 percent of their
income on housing, the rental rates in the City of Carson are not affordable to the City's very
low and low income four-person households. The affordable monthly rental payments for
these groups are $685 for the very low income group and $959 for the low income group.
Rental units in the City may begin to become affordable for the low income group when
lower cost housing units are available. This also holds true for the moderate income group.
The affordable monthly payment for the moderate income group is $1,571 and rental units
at the lower range of three bedroom units are available at $1,400 per month.
                                                     Table 26
                                            Los Angeles County
                           Affordable Rent by Income Category: 2012
                                                                 Monthly                            Affordable
                                               Income                                Utility
            Income Group                                                                              Monthly
                                                             Affordable Rent      Allowance
                                                                                                      Payment
 Very Low (0-50% MFI)                          $32,400            $810                $125             $685
 Low (51-80% MFI)                              $45,360           $1,134               $175             $959
 Moderate (81-120% MFI)                        $71,280           $1,782               $211            $1,571
Note: Calculation of affordable rent is based on a monthly payment of 30 percent of Los Angeles County Median
Family Income (MFI) of $64,800 for 2012 for a four-person household.
E. Preservation of Assisted Housing At Risk of Conversion
As required by Government Code Section 65583, the City must analyze the extent to which
low income, multi-family rental units are at risk of becoming market rate housing and, if
necessary, develop programs to preserve or replace these assisted housing units. There
are in the City of Carson several low to moderate-income housing projects that have
existing affordability controls that are listed in Table 27, comprising the assisted housing
inventory for the City of Carson. Consistent with the requirement to analyze the impacts of
the potential conversion of these units to market-rate units, an analysis of the preservation
of assisted housing at risk of conversion is presented in Appendix F.
The City has an ongoing housing program to facilitate the preservation of at risk housing
units. The City has provided funding assistance in the past, through Redevelopment Low-
and Moderate-Income Housing Funds, to assist in the development of a variety of
affordable housing projects. With the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency, the City’s
Housing Authority and Successor Agency are responsible for all remaining obligations and
programs, including the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Funds. As Table 27 shows,
there are two housing developments at-risk of conversion to market rate within the 2014-
2021 planning period, and an additional two housing developments at-risk of converting to
market rate during the period 2021-2024. The City currently implements a program that
serves as an early warning system to monitor all at risk units in the City. Owners of such
units will be contacted to assess their intent to prepay federally-assisted mortgages or
renew or opt-out of project-based Section 8 contracts. The owners will be encouraged
to consider renewal of HUD Section 8 contracts. Owners who want to opt-out of a
City of Carson                                       42                               2014-2021 Housing Element

Section 8 contract, prepay a HUD subsidized mortgage or sell their property upon the
expiration of the rental subsidy will be encouraged to provide 18-24 months advance
notice to tenants. Through the program, tenants will be informed of the potential
conversion of their units to market rate, and they will be educated on the potential
tenant purchase of units. The City will, when possible, allocate local funds or support
efforts to secure other potential sources of funding to provide gap financing for non-
profit housing developers for mortgage refinancing, acquisition and in an effort to
preserve affordable units.
                                                      Table 27
                                                  City of Carson
                                       Assisted Housing Inventory
    Project                                                                  # of
                                         Types of       Earliest
     Name,                                                        Total #   Units
                                      Project-Based     Potential                                    Reported
 Address &                                                        Units in Subj. to  Tenant  Bdrm.
                                           Govt.       Conversion                                    Condition
 Telephone              Address                                   Project  Conver-
                                        Assistance       Dates
    Number                                                                  sion
Carson
Gardens          21811 So. Main St.
                                                                                                       Good
Retirement       Carson, CA 90745     HUD 221 D4          2020      101      101     Senior   1&2
Apts.
El Camino        21735 So. Main St.   Housing
Village Senior   Carson, CA 90745     Authority Funds                                         0,1,2    Poor
                                                                     45        0      Senior
Complex                                                   2022
                 22121 So. Avalon     Low Income
Avalon
                 Blvd.                Housing Tax
Courtyard                                                                                            Very Good
                 Carson, CA 90745     Credits/Housing                92        0      Senior  0,1,2
Senior Project
                                      Authority Funds     2024
                                      Low Income
Carson                      th
                 632 E. 219           Housing Tax
Terraces                                                                             Seniors  0,1,2  Very Good
                 Carson, CA 90745     Credits/Housing                62        0
Senior’s                                                  2029
                                      Authority Funds
                                      Low Income
Villagio         545 E. Carson St.    Housing Tax
                                                          2040                                       Very Good
                 Carson, CA 90745     Credits/Housing               148        0      Family 1,2,3,4
                                      Authority Funds
                     rd
Grace Manor      223 & Grace          HUD Section
                                                                                                     Very Good
Apartments       Carson, CA 90745     236                 2020       38       38      Family  1,2,3
                                      Redevelopment
Gateway at       708 E. Carson        Housing
                                                          2066      85        85      Senior    1    Very Good
City Center      Street               Funds/Housing
                                      Authority
                                      Redevelopment
                 425 E. Carson        Housing
Via 425                                                   2067      65        65      Family  1,2,3  Very Good
                 Street               Funds/Housing
                                      Authority
Magnolia                              Housing
Walk (For                             Authority
                 2535 E. Carson
Sale                                                      2057      12        12      Family    3    Very Good
                 Street
Affordable
Housing)
Source: City of Carson Community Development Department
City of Carson                                        43                           2014-2021 Housing Element

F.       Energy Conservation
The affordability of housing can be reduced by increases in utility costs. The City of Carson
has opportunities to directly affect energy use within its jurisdiction. In addition to
compliance with the California building standards of the International Building Code and
Title 24 of the California Administrative Code related to energy conservation, the City has set
forth goals and policies which encourage the conservation of non-renewable resources in
concert with the use of alternative energy sources to increase energy self-sufficiency.
In large part, energy savings and utility bill reductions can be realized through the following
energy design standards:
Glazing - Glazing on south facing exterior walls allow winter sunrays to warm the structure.
Avoidance of this technique on the west side of the structure prevents afternoon
sunrays from overheating the unit.
Landscaping - Strategically placed vegetation reduces the amount of direct sunlight on
the windows. The incorporation of deciduous trees in the landscaping plans along the
southern area of units reduces summer sunrays, while allowing penetration of winter rays to
warm structures.
Building Design - The implementation of roof overhangs above southerly facing windows
shield the structure from solar rays during the summer months.
Cooling/Heating Systems - The use of attic ventilation systems reduces attic temperatures
during summer months. Solar heating systems for swimming pool facilities save on
energy costs. Natural gas is conserved with the use of flow restrictors on all hot water
faucets and shower heads.
Weatherization Techniques - Weatherization techniques such as insulation, caulking,
and weather-stripping can reduce energy use for air-conditioning up to 55 percent and for
heating as much as 40 percent. Weatherization measures help to seal a dwelling unit to
guard against heat gain in the summer and prevent heat loss in the winter. Due to the wide
range of temperatures experienced in the summer and winter months in Carson, the
California Building Standards of the International Building Code require dual-paned
windows in new construction, which reduces heat loss in winter and cooling loss during
summer.
Efficient Use of Appliances - Each residence contains a different mixture of
appliances. Regardless of the mix of appliances present, appliances can be used in ways
which increase their energy efficiency. Unnecessary appliances can be eliminated, and
proper maintenance and use of the stove, oven, clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher,
and refrigerator can also reduce energy consumption. New appliance purchases of air-
conditioning units and refrigerators can be made on the basis of efficiency ratings. The
State prepares a list of air-conditioning and refrigerator models that detail the energy
efficiency ratings of the products on the market.
City of Carson                              44                        2014-2021 Housing Element
Efficient Use of Lighting - The costs of lighting a home can be reduced through purchase of
light bulbs which produce the most lumens per watt, avoidance of multi-bulb fixtures, and use
of long life bulbs and clock timers on security lighting.
Load Management - The time of day when power is used can be as important as how
much power is used. Power plants must have enough generating capacity to meet the
highest level of consumer demand for electricity. Peak demands for electricity occur on
summer afternoons. Therefore, reducing use of appliances during these peak load hours
can reduce the need for new power plants just to meet unusually high power demands.
Southern California Edison Customer Assistance Programs - Southern California
Edison (SCE) offers a variety of energy conservation services including the Energy
Management Assistance Program (EMA). This program is designed to help lower income,
elderly, permanently handicapped, and non-English speaking customers conserve and
reduce their electricity costs. EMA participants must meet income qualifications as well as
provide proof of income. SCE also offers a variety of rebate programs to install energy
efficient appliances, lighting, heating and cooling systems, and pool pumps. SCE also
provides a Multi-Family Energy Efficiency Rebate Program offering rebates for improvements
to multi-family units and a Multifamily Affordable Solar Housing (MASH) Program offering
financial incentives for installing eligible photovoltaic (PV) systems in multifamily housing. The
various programs offered by SCE are briefly described below.
Energy Management Assistance Program (EMA) - Eligible customers may receive
assistance through the EMA program to pay for the cost of purchasing and installing energy
efficient appliances and equipment.
            An energy efficient wall or window mounted air conditioner.
            An energy efficient evaporative cooler (also known as a “swamp cooler”).
            A replacement energy efficient central air conditioner.
            A replacement energy efficient refrigerator.
Energy Star Lighting - This program is designed to help customers lower the cost of
meeting their basic lighting needs. SCE works with manufacturers and retailers to make
possible special discount prices on specific Energy Star qualified lighting products.
            Indoor lights are replaced with compact florescent light bulbs, which use up to
             75% less energy and provide service up to 10 times longer than traditional
             incandescent bulbs.
            Replacement of outdoor fixtures with CFL’s may also be provided.
Home Energy Efficiency Rebate Program (HEER) - This program offers programs for
the reduction of utility costs through:
            Rebates on the installation of energy saving refrigerators and electric water
             heaters.
City of Carson                                 45                        2014-2021 Housing Element

           Rebates on the installation of energy saving room air conditioners, whole
            house fans, and evaporative “swamp” coolers, and the installation of energy
            efficient roofing materials.
           Reduction of energy bills by enrolling in an energy reduction program which
            allows Southern California Edison to interrupt service to air conditioners
            during emergency periods.
           Rebates on recycling old refrigerators and freezers.
Multifamily Energy Efficiency Rebate Program - The Residential Multifamily Energy
Efficiency Rebate Program offers property owners and managers incentives on a broad
list of energy efficiency improvements in lighting, HVAC, insulation and window
categories. These improvements apply to the retrofit of existing multifamily properties
of two or more units.
Multifamily Affordable Solar Housing (MASH) Program - The MASH Program is part of
the California Solar Initiative. It offers incentives for installing eligible PV systems for
qualifying multifamily affordable housing. It is designed to subsidize PV systems in
multifamily housing which will offset electricity loads and provide economic benefits for
housing property owners and managers as well as building tenants.
Southern California Gas Company Rebate Programs - The Southern California Gas
Company (SoCal Gas) offers rebate programs for residential customers to increase
energy efficiency and reduce energy costs. The programs involve rebates for the
installation of qualified energy saving appliances and home improvements to increase
energy efficiency in single-family homes. SoCal Gas also offers multi-family housing
cash rebates for the installation of qualified energy-efficient products in apartment
dwelling units and in the common areas of apartment and condominium complexes, and
the common areas of mobile home parks.
South Bay Environmental Services Center - The South Bay Environmental Services
Center (SBESC) partners with local agencies and utility providers. The SBESC acts as
a central clearinghouse for energy efficiency information and resources. The purpose of
the organization is to help significantly increase the availability of information and
resources to the people in the South Bay region to help them save water, energy,
money, and the environment. The SBESC assists public agencies including cities,
schools, and special districts as well as businesses and residents of the South Bay to
best utilize the many resources available to them through a wide variety of statewide
and local energy efficiency and water conservation programs. SBESC recently
expanded their services through implementation of an Energy Efficiency Plus (EE+)
program to deliver energy savings to local public agencies, including the City of Carson.
City of Carson                             46                        2014-2021 Housing Element

III.       SUMMARY OF HOUSING NEEDS
California’s Housing Element law requires that each city and county develop local housing
programs designed to meet its “fair share” of existing and future housing needs for all
income groups, as determined by the jurisdiction’s Council of Governments and the State
Department of Housing and Community Development. This “fair share” allocation concept
seeks to ensure that each jurisdiction accepts responsibility for the housing needs of not
only its resident population, but also for the jurisdiction’s projected share of regional
housing growth across all income categories. Regional growth needs are defined as the
number of newly constructed units needed to accommodate the projected increase in
households, in addition to the number of units that would have to be added to compensate
for anticipated demolitions and changes to achieve an “ideal” vacancy rate.
In the six-county southern California region, of which Carson is a part, the Council of
Governments responsible for assigning these regional housing needs to each jurisdiction
is the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG). The regional growth
allocation process begins with the State Department of Finance’s projection of statewide
housing demand for a multi-year planning period, which is then apportioned by the State
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) among each of the State’s
official regions.
SCAG has developed the Final Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) Plan for the
2014-2021 period. SCAG’s adopted 2012 Final RHNA figures identify an overall
construction need of 1,698 new units in Carson. Table 28 shows the income breakdown
of these units. According to the residential sites inventory, the City has designated adequate
sites to provide for the City’s share of the 2014-2021 regional housing growth needs. In
addition, the City supports a variety of programs to encourage the provision of housing
for lower income households, as presented in the Housing Plan section of this Element.
                                                        Table 28
                                                    City of Carson
                                 Regional Housing Needs Assessment
                        Income Level                          Total Construction Need           Percent by Income Level
  Extremely Low Income (<50% MFI)(a)                                       224                               -
  Very Low Income (0-50% MFI)                                              447                            26.3%
  Low Income (51-80% MFI)                                                  263                            15.5%
  Moderate Income (81-120% MFI)                                            280                            16.5%
  Above Moderate Income (>120% MFI)                                        708                            41.7%
                                                       Total              1,698                           100%
Source: SCAG Regional Housing Needs Assessment, 2012.
Notes:
(a)
    The need for Extremely Low-Income households is assumed to be 50 percent of the Very Low-Income housing need
While the RHNA focuses on Carson’s 8-year future housing needs, the City must also
address the housing needs of existing residents.
City of Carson                                          47                                  2014-2021 Housing Element

Presented below is a summary of the major existing housing need categories, in terms of
income groups, as defined by Federal and State law. The City also recognizes the
special status of extremely low, very low and low income households, which in many
cases are also elderly, single-parent, or large family households. City housing programs focus
on these households. Table 29 presents the 2005-2009 HUD Community Housing
Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data set. As summarized in Table 29, the groups most in need
of housing assistance include the following:
         Households with Any Problems: A continuing priority of communities is
         enhancing or maintaining their quality of life. A key measure of quality of life in a
         community is the extent of “housing problems.” The Department of Housing and
         Urban Development and SCAG have developed an existing needs statement that
         details the number of households which are paying a disproportionate share of their
         income for housing, are living in overcrowded units, or are living in substandard
         housing, as discussed.
         Overpayment: Refers to a household paying more than 30 percent of its gross
         income for housing (either mortgage or rent), including costs for utilities, property
         insurance, and real estate taxes as defined by the Federal Government. According to
         SCAG estimates, 10,040 Carson households are paying more than 30 percent of their
         income for housing, or about 40 percent of the City’s households. Close to 90 percent
         of the renter household who are overpaying for housing are lower income and about
         51 percent of the owner households who are overpaying are lower income
         households (80% or less MFI).
         Any Housing Problem: Refers to cost burden greater than 30% of income and/or
         overcrowding within a housing unit which is occupied by more than one person per
         room, excluding kitchens, bathrooms, hallways, and porches, as defined by the
         Federal Government. According to 2005-2009 CHAS data set, approximately 53
         percent of renter households and approximately 45 percent of owners experience
         some housing problem in Carson.
         Substandard Units: Based on the 2000 Census there is 89 housing units in the
         City that lack either plumbing or kitchen facilities. This is a rough measure of
         substandard housing units in need of repair or replacement, representing 0.3
         percent of the City’s housing stock. A majority of these units may require
         rehabilitation.
City of Carson                               48                        2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                         Table 29
                                                    City of Carson
                                             Existing Housing Needs
                                                                                                    Greater
                                                       Less Than          30 to          50 to
                  Housing Need                                                                        Than      Total
                                                          30%             50%             80%
                                                                                                      80%
 All Households
    Renters                                                                 990            1,420      2,045     5,505
    Owners                                               1,395            1,815            3,220     12,795    19,225
    Total Households                                     2,445            2,805            4,640     14,840    24,730
 Households with any Housing Problems
    Renters                                                885              805              790       420      2,900
    Owners                                                 985            1,105            2,040     4,515      8,645
    Total Households                                     1,870            1,910            2,830     4,935     11,545
 Households with Overpayment
    Renters                                                885              755              445       230      2,315
    Owners                                                 985            1,060            1,930     3,750      7,725
    Total Households                                     1,870            1,815            2,375     3,980      10,040
  Substandard Housing
                            Suitable for Rehab                                                                     89
    Needs Replacement                                                                                               0
                              Total Units                                                                          89
                        Special Needs
    Elderly Persons                                                                                            11,458
    Persons with Disabilities                                                                                   5,486
    Persons with Developmental Disabilities                                                                     1,135
    Extremely Low Income                                                                                        1,642
    Large Families                                                                                              5,700
    Female-headed Households                                                                                    4,638
                           Farmworkers                                                                           178
    Homeless Persons*                                                                                             21
Source: 2010 U.S. Census Report
2005-2009 HUD CHAS Data Set
Note: Special needs figures cannot be totaled because categories are not exclusive of one another.
*Homeless figure based on estimates from the 2013 LAHSA Greater Los Angeles Homeless Count
Special Needs Groups: Certain households in Carson may have a more difficult time
finding decent, affordable housing, including the elderly, persons with disabilities and
persons with developmental disabilities, extremely low income households, large families,
female-headed households, farmworkers, and the homeless. The special needs of
elderly households result from their limited and fixed incomes, physical disabilities and
dependence needs. Female-headed households also tend to have lower incomes, thus
limiting housing availability for this group, while the special housing needs of farmworkers
often stem from their low wages and the transitional nature of their employment. It is
extremely low income persons who are the highest need group because they require the
deepest subsidies to make housing affordable.
Carson has been able to satisfy some of the needs of various special needs residents in the
City through the licensing of group homes and other similar facilities that can accommodate
special needs housing. For example, there are currently 58 licensed adult residential care
facilities in Carson which accommodate 6 or fewer adults. One exception is the Olivia Isabel
Manor adult residential care facility which accommodates 110 residents. There are also six
City of Carson                                            49                                   2014-2021 Housing Element
group homes in Carson, each accommodating 6 adults. There are, in addition, 24 residential
care facilities for the elderly, each accommodating 6 adults, with the exception of the Carson
Senior Assisted Living Facility which accommodates 230 residents. Finally, there are three
small-family homes in Carson, each accommodating 6 persons or less. All of these types of
facilities and their locations are included in Appendix B.
Special needs groups can further be served by the City by making more affordable housing
available. Homeless persons require special needs housing such as emergency shelters to
meet their immediate needs and transitional housing to stabilize their lives and move them
toward permanent housing. Housing needs for persons with physical disabilities must be
met through making housing accessible. Finally, large related households have special
housing needs for larger housing units of adequate size, which commonly may be of
limited availability and affordability. Large households are often of lower income, which can
result in occupying units of inadequate size with overcrowding as the result. The extent of
each of these special needs groups in Carson is shown in Table 29.
These specific areas - expected growth, overpayment for housing, overcrowding,
substandard housing, and households with special needs - are areas where the City can
target its efforts toward realizing its goal for the provision of adequate housing. In addition,
through efforts to increase homeownership for first-time homebuyers the City can not
only address housing affordability, but it can also assist in neighborhood stabilization. As
part of a comprehensive approach to housing in Carson, the City can focus on promoting a
range of housing types, particularly newer, larger units to meet the needs of its resident
and business population.
City of Carson                                50                       2014-2021 Housing Element
IV.      CONSTRAINTS ON HOUSING PRODUCTION
While the City of Carson recognizes the need for sound, affordable housing for all of its
residents the City itself does not produce housing. The City does, however, have
resources at its disposal to encourage the development of affordable housing for its
residents. Although there are physical constraints to new residential development at
certain locations (such as locations previously contaminated with hazardous wastes)
and laws and regulations (Subdivision Map Act and the International Building Code)
which impact the cost and amount of housing produced, these factors have not
prevented the City from achieving its past housing production goals.
The physical constraints to residential development in Carson can be divided into two
types: infrastructure constraints and environmental constraints. In order to accommodate
future residential development, improvements may be necessary in infrastructure and public
services related to man-made facilities such as sewer, water, and electrical services.
Portions of Carson are also constrained by a variety of environmental hazards and
resources that may affect the development of lower priced residential units. Although these
constraints are primarily physical and hazard related, they are also associated with the
conservation of the City's natural resources.
A. Infrastructure Constraints
Water services, sewage facilities, and public services are of critical importance to a city.
The provision and maintenance of these facilities enhance the safety of neighborhoods
and serve as an incentive to homeowners to maintain their homes. Alternatively, when
these public improvements are left to deteriorate or their use is overextended,
neighborhoods can become neglected and show early signs of deterioration.
Water Services
 The City of Carson receives water service from two water purveyors: the California
Water Service Company (Cal Water) Dominguez District and the Southern California
Water Company (SCWC), Southwest District. SCWC serves approximately 13 percent
of the City of Carson with the other 87 percent served by Cal Water. Water is also
provided to the City from groundwater sources and treated surface water is purchased
from the Metropolitan Water District (MWD) respectively to serve residential
development within the Carson city limits.
Upon requests for new customer service, a site-specific evaluation of the existing water
system’s capacity to serve is completed. If additional water supplies and/or water
system facility improvements are required, the developer may be required to pay the
cost of all or portions of the needed improvements. Currently SCWC is discussing the
addition of a second MWD connection within the City of Carson area and/or increasing
the capacity of its existing connection.
City of Carson                           51                        2014-2021 Housing Element

In accordance with Section 65589.7 of the California Government Code, the draft
Housing Element was submitted to the California Water Service Company (Cal Water)
Dominguez District and to the Southern California Water Company (SCWC), Southwest
District. These entities/agencies have given priority to proposed lower income housing
when allocating available water supply and wastewater treatment capacity.
Sewer Services
The City of Carson owns the local sanitary sewers within the City. The Los Angeles
County Department of Public Works Consolidated Sewer Maintenance District (CSMD)
maintains these sewers lines. The CSMD collects user fees for operation and
maintenance of existing local sewer lines. In addition, the trunk lines and treatment plant
within the City are owned and operated by the County Sanitation Districts of Los
Angeles County (CSDLAC). Wastewater generated within the City is treated at the Joint
Water Pollution Control Plan (JWPCP) located at 24501 South Figueroa Street in
Carson. The JWPCP has a design capacity of 385 million gallons per day (mgd) and
processes an average flow of 329.3 mgd. The design capacities of the Districts’
wastewater treatment facilities are based on regional growth forecasts adopted by the
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG). All expansion of Districts’
facilities must be sized and service phased in a manner that would be consistent with
SCAG’s regional growth forecasts. The available capacity of the Districts’ treatment
facilities would be limited to levels associated with the approved growth identified by
SCAG.
Public Services
Future residential growth in Carson will require additional public service personnel if the
existing levels of service for law enforcement, fire protection, and other essential
services are to be maintained. The nature and characteristics of future population
growth will, to a large extent, determine which services will require additional funding to
meet the City's future needs.
B. Environmental Constraints
Although there are environmentally sensitive areas within the City, they do not represent
serious constraints to development due to the abundance of vacant land in non-sensitive
areas of the City.
Hazardous Materials
The City of Carson has a relatively long history of urban use, including industrial,
commercial, and oil field development dating back to the early 1920s. Many of these
uses have involved the use, storage, and/or generation of hazardous materials that
were and continue to be required for even the most routine industrial and manufacturing
City of Carson                           52                         2014-2021 Housing Element

processes. As a result of this long history of industrial and commercial development and
the fact that waste management practices and regulations were either not in place or
not up to current standards, there are several sites within the City that have the potential
to have been impacted by previous releases of contaminated materials. Any future
development proposed on or near these sites should be carefully studied and a landfill
gas control plan and monitoring system may be required for safety.
Oil Production Hazards
Development within or adjacent to an oil field could result in construction of structures
over abandoned wells. If the wells are leaking, methane and hydrogen sulfide gas could
migrate upward and could accumulate beneath developed areas where concrete and
asphalt surfaces prevent the natural migration of the methane gas to the atmosphere.
Migration of gas through cracks in concrete foundations into the interior of structures
could create the potential for an explosion and/or fire. Any future development proposed
on or near these sites should be carefully studied and a landfill gas control plan and
monitoring system may be required for safety
Soil Contamination Hazards: Oil contaminated soil is known to occur in oil fields and
particularly adjacent to oil wells. Unrefined oil contains a variety of hazardous
constituents, including polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), which are carcinogens,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethylbenzene and heavy metals; however, it should be noted
that all oil contaminated soil is considered hazardous under Federal and State
standards. Due to the historic drilling activities within the City, contaminated soils may
exist in the City. Any future development proposed on or near these sites should be
carefully studied and a landfill gas control plan and monitoring system may be required
for safety.
Landfill Hazards
The City currently has 15 inactive sanitary landfills and no active landfills. Although
none of these landfills currently accepts materials that decompose chemically or
biologically, some of these sites may produce landfill gases. Other sites will probably
not produce landfill gases since they contain non-water soluble, non-decomposable
inert solids. Additionally, some areas of the City are sites of previous organic landfill
activity and may be subject to decomposition and the production of landfill gases. Any
future development proposed on or near these sites should be carefully studied and a
landfill gas control plan and monitoring system may be required for safety.
Noise Exposure
Residential land uses are considered the most sensitive to loud noise. Major noise
generators in the City are vehicular traffic including vehicular-generated noise along
Interstate 405 (I-405), State Route 91 (SR-91), and primary and major arterial
roadways. Additionally, the Compton and Long Beach Airports, as well as railroad
City of Carson                           53                         2014-2021 Housing Element
operations within the City contribute to the noise environment. Residential development
near these major noise generators (excluding sonic booms) requires consideration of
special noise attenuation measures, which could add to the cost of development.
Another major noise exposure to residential units/residents exists on Alameda Street
between Dominguez and the I-405 Freeway. Noise sources originate from Union Pacific
activities in the Union Pacific rail yard west of Alameda Street, freight trains on the
Alameda corridor, and diesel trucks traveling along Alameda Street that move goods
and materials from the Long Beach and Los Angeles Ports. Noise levels in these areas
have been monitored reaching up to 71dBA within a 24 hour Ldn (day and night
reading) period. These noise levels are projected to increase with planned expansions
of the SR-47 Expressway and the replacement of the Schuyler Heim Bridge. The city is
working with ACTA (Alameda Corridor Transportation Authority) and Cal-trans to
provide adequate mitigation to reduce residential/resident’s exposure to noise levels
exceeding State sensitive noise receptor standards.
In January 2012, the City of Carson provided comments to the Southern California
International Gateway (SCIG) project Draft EIR. The comment letter noted that Carson
will be impacted by the approximately two million truck trips generated by the proposed
SCIS facility. The City of Carson expressed that the Draft EIR did not discuss potential
impacts to Carson, including, but not limited to, residents and businesses located east
of Alameda Street between the 405 Freeway and Dominguez Street. The City of Carson
has indicated to the Port of Los Angeles that the project’s EIR should analyze project
and cumulative noise impacts, air quality impacts, and health risks within Carson and
identify mitigation measures to reduce potential adverse impacts to residents and
businesses.
C. Market Constraints
Market conditions, and governmental programs and regulations affect the provision of
adequate and affordable housing. Housing Element law requires a city to examine
potential and actual governmental and non-governmental constraints to the
development of new housing and the maintenance of existing units for all income levels.
Market and governmental constraints that potentially affect housing development in
Carson are discussed below.
Land Costs
The price of raw land and any necessary improvements is a key component of the total
cost of housing. The diminishing supply of land available for residential construction
combined with a fairly steady demand for such development has served to keep the
cost of land high in Southern California. In addition, the two factors which most
influence land holding costs are the interest rate on acquisition and development loans,
and government processing times for plans and permits. The time it takes to hold land
for development increases the overall cost of the project. This cost increase is primarily
City of Carson                           54                       2014-2021 Housing Element

due to the accruement of interest on the loan, the preparation of the site for construction
and processing applications for entitlements and permits.
Recent listings in the MLS Alliance for properties offered for sale in Carson, which are
suitable for redevelopment with new multifamily residential units, reveal a relatively high
cost for such residentially zoned land. For example, one listed parcel (21745 Dolores
Street), which is zoned RM-12, is being offered for sale for 1.2 million dollars. This
20,130 square foot parcel is located in an area that is transitioning from single-family to
multifamily uses consistent with existing zoning. Based on the allowed density, the site
could accommodate five new residential dwelling units.
In 2012, the average selling price for a 2-bedroom condominium was between $110,000
and $150,000 and a 3-bedroom condominium was between $180,000 and $300,000 in
the City of Carson, while vacant or underdeveloped multifamily-zoned land (RM-12) was
approximately $2.4 million per acre or $1.2 million per half acre as evidenced in the
MLS listing described above. In the case cited above, the land costs alone would be
approximately $240,000 per multifamily unit, provided the listing selling price is
accepted by a potential buyer. This high cost of underdeveloped land (land which is
currently occupied by a single-family residence but which is transitioning from single-
family to multifamily development) indicates a need to provide subsidies, density
bonuses or similar kinds of incentives to make multifamily units (condominiums)
affordable in Carson. The sale price is rising quickly for both vacant land and land with
existing dwelling units, further increasing the difficulty of creating new units.
The City of Carson is approximately 83 percent developed. Residential uses account for
approximately 28 percent of developed land in the City. Although the City has identified
a sufficient number of vacant residentially-zoned parcels to accommodate their
projected housing needs, available vacant residential land will become scarcer over
time. Depending on economic conditions, the cost of vacant land will continue to either
increase or decrease in the City of Carson. However, as a general rule, if the land cost
component in the City of Carson remains within the 35 percent range of overall costs,
then the availability of land should not pose a significant constraint on the development
of housing for all income groups.
Construction Costs
The cost of building materials for residential construction has risen dramatically in
recent years. According to the U.S. Department of Labor, the overall cost of residential
construction materials rose by 2 percent between 2011 and 2012, with steel costs
increasing 0.4 percent and the cost of cement increasing 1.5 percent. With the
slowdown of the real estate market from 2008 until 2012, the price of construction
materials has shown a significant decrease compared to the construction boom. The 2
percent increase in overall construction costs experience over the past year is primarily
due to the cost of labor.
Together, the cost of building material and construction labor are the most significant
cost components of developing residential units. In the current southern California
City of Carson                            55                          2014-2021 Housing Element
market, construction costs are estimated to account for upwards of 50 percent of the
sales price of a new home. Typical construction costs for a high-density apartment (20
units per acre) development are estimated at $150,000 per unit including $10,000 per
unit for structured parking. Hard construction costs over podium parking are
approximately $200,000 per unit, including $35,000 per unit for the parking structure.
Variations in the quality of materials, type of amenities, labor costs and the quality of
building materials could result in higher or lower construction costs for a new home.
Pre-fabricated factory built housing, with variation on the quality of materials and
amenities may also affect the final construction cost per square foot of a housing
project. Furthermore, the unit volume – that is the number of units being built at one
time – can change the cost of a housing project by varying the economies of scale.
Generally, as the number of units under construction at one time increases, the overall
costs decrease. With a greater number of units under construction, the builder is often
able to benefit by making larger orders of construction materials and pay lower costs
per material unit.
Density bonuses granted to a project, can also impact construction costs. Municipalities
often grant density bonuses as an incentive for the builder to provide affordable units at
the project site. The granting of a density bonus provides the builder with the
opportunity to create more housing units and therefore more units for sale or lease than
would otherwise be allowed without the bonus. Since additional units can potentially
increase the economy of scale, the bonus units could potentially reduce the construction
costs per unit. This type of cost reduction is of particular benefit when density bonuses
are used to provide affordable housing.
 Availability of Financing
Interest rates are determined by national policies and economic conditions, and there is
little that local governments can do to affect these rates. Jurisdictions can, however,
offer interest rate write-downs or direct subsidies to households to extend home
purchasing opportunities to a broader economic segment of the population. In addition,
government insured loan programs may be available to reduce mortgage down
payment requirements.
Under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions are required to
disclose information on the disposition of loan applications as well as the income,
gender, and race of loan applicants. As shown in Table 30, a total of 396 conventional
mortgage loan applications were submitted to local lenders for the purchase of homes in
Carson during 2010. Approximately 65 percent of home purchase loan applications
were approved and approximately 21 percent were denied. Approximately 14 percent
were withdrawn by the applicant. This includes those that were discarded due to the
incompleteness of the applications. There were a total of 122 home improvement loan
applications made to local lenders in Carson, however, approximately 41 percent were
approved and 35 percent were denied.
City of Carson                           56                        2014-2021 Housing Element

In comparison to Carson, as shown in Table 30, Los Angeles County had a total of
54,482 conventional mortgage loan applications submitted to local lenders for the
purchase of homes in the County during 2010. Approximately 71 percent of the home
purchase loan applications were approved and approximately 15 percent were denied.
Fourteen percent were withdrawn by the applicant. This includes those that were
discarded due to the incompleteness of the applications.
Overall, as indicated above, home improvement loans have lower approval rates than
home purchase loans within the City. This may indicate a significant gap between those
households wanting to improve their homes and those who were actually able to obtain
conventional financing to complete such improvements. This indicates a need for the
City to continue to offer financial assistance to households that cannot qualify for a
conventional home improvement loan, in order to encourage and support the
rehabilitation and preservation of Carson’s existing affordable, owner-occupied housing
stock.
                                                          Table 30
                              City of Carson and Los Angeles County
                                          Disposition of Loans: 2010
                                                      Conventional Home Purchase Loans
    Jurisdiction
                         Total Applications             Approved*                     Denied               Other
   City of Carson                 396                        256                         83                  57
    Percentage                   100%                       64.6%                      21.0%              14.4%
    L.A. County                 54,482                     38,827                      8,054               7,601
    Percentage                   100%                       71.3%                      14.8%              14.0%
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data for 2010
Notes: *Approved loans include: loans originated and applications approved, but not accepted.
D. Governmental Constraints
Numerous factors in both the private and public sectors affect housing affordability. Actions
by the City can have an impact on the price and availability of housing in the City. Land use
controls, site improvement requirements, building codes, fees, and other local programs
intended to improve the overall quality of housing may serve as constraints to housing
development.
Zoning
Carson’s Zoning Ordinance establishes several residential zoning districts in order to
accommodate a variety of housing types and densities. Residential zoning in the City
ranges from one unit per 5,000 square feet net area (Residential, Single-Family) to 25
units per acre (Residential, Multi-Family). The City has also approved several specific
plans that permit single-family detached units on lots less than 5,000 square feet. Some
City of Carson                                             57                                 2014-2021 Housing Element

residential units are located in commercial or industrial zones and are classified as
legal, non-conforming uses.
The City’s Zoning Ordinance also establishes various mixed use residential (MUR)
overlay zones in the City that allow a combination of residential uses with commercial
retail and office uses. The residential and mixed use residential overlay zones are as
follows:
          Residential, Single-Family (RS) Zone. This zone was created for the
          establishment, expansion and preservation of residential areas which are to be
          developed with single-family detached dwellings and such other activities
          considered harmonious with such low density residential development.
          Residential, Multiple Dwelling (RM) Zone. This zone was created for the
          establishment, expansion and preservation of residential areas which are to be
          developed with multiple dwellings or combinations of single-family and multiple
          dwellings, and such other activities considered harmonious with such medium
          and high density residential development.
          Residential Agricultural (RA) Zone. This zone was created for single-family
          residential uses together with compatible crop cultivation and related
          agricultural activities on land which is not yet fully utilized for residential
          purposes.
          Mixed-Use – Carson Street (MU-CS) Zone. This zone was created primarily to
          create a downtown retail and residential district which will provide a distinctive
          core area along Carson Street which includes the Civic Center. This
          designation          provides        for      pedestrian-oriented,        mixed-use
          (commercial/residential) development which may include market rate,
          affordable or senior housing and transit-oriented development. This zone
          permits 35 dwelling units per acre. If the dwelling units are affordable or senior
          units, the maximum permitted density is 55 units per acre.
          Mixed-Use – Sepulveda Boulevard (MU-SB) Zone. This zone was created
          primarily to create a retail, office and residential district along the south side of
          Sepulveda Boulevard two hundred forty (240) feet east of Marbella Avenue and
          four hundred (400) feet west of Avalon Street. This designation provides for
          mixed-use (commercial/ residential) development which may include market
          rate, affordable or senior housing development, residential or commercial
          development. The lots are very shallow in this area which makes conventional
          development difficult. The purpose of this zone is to create the flexibility needed
          to develop a vibrant residential/commercial corridor.
Land Use Controls Development Standards
There are land use controls for setbacks, lot area, lot width, frontage, height, private
open space, parking regulations, separation between buildings, landscaping, and
recreational facilities that limit the density of development in Carson. Along with density
City of Carson                               58                        2014-2021 Housing Element

  bonuses, the City allows deviations from the development standards for projects that
  contain at least 10% affordable or senior units. The City recently adopted a density
  bonus ordinance that further describes the incentives permitted for affordable housing
  projects that qualify for a density bonus. The Planning Commission may grant such
  deviations as it deems necessary while evaluating the overall impact and design of the
  project. Applicable development standards for residentially zoned properties in Carson
  are depicted in Table 31.
                                                                Table 31
                                                         City Of Carson
                                      Residential Development Standards
                                                                            Setback
                                Land Use                                                                          Other
      Zone District                                  Minimum                                   Maximum
                                 Category                            Front    Rear    Side                    Requirements
                                                      Lot Size                                  Height
Residential Agricultural                                                              3 to 5-   30-feet    130-150 sq. ft. open
                              Low Density
     Single-Family                                 5,000 sq. ft     20-feet  15-feet
                              Residential                                              feet      (2 sty)   space required
      Residential             Low Density          5,000 sq. ft.                      3 to 5-   30-feet    130-150 sq. ft. open
                                                                    20-feet  15-feet
     Single-Family             Residential                                             feet      (2 sty)   space required
      Residential
                              Low Density          5,000 sq. ft.                      3 to 5-   30-feet    130-150 sq. ft. open
     Single-Family                                                  20-feet  15-feet
                               Residential                                             feet      (2 sty)   space required
          (R8)
      Residential                                                                                          30-40% Net Project
                            Medium Density                                           6 to 10-   30-feet
  Multiple Dwelling                                5,000 sq. ft.    20-feet  15-feet                       Area required for
                               Residential                                             feet      (2 sty)
        (RM-12)                                                                                            Open Space
       Residential                                                                                         30-40% Net Project
    Multiple Dwelling         High Density         5,000 sq. ft.                     6 to 10-   30-feet
                                                                    20-feet  15-feet                       Area required for
         (RM-25)               Residential                                             feet      (2 sty)
                                                                                                           Open Space
       Mixed-Use                                                                                        1
                                                                                                           Max FAR: 1.5
       Residential             Mixed-Use                                                        45-feet
                                             2    20,000 sq. ft.    10-feet  15-feet  10-feet              Min. 100-ft lot
     Carson Street             Residential                                                       (3 sty)
                                                                                                           frontage
       Mixed-Use                                                                                           Max FAR: 1.5
                               Mixed-Use                                                        30-feet
       Residential                                20,000 sq. ft.     5-feet   5-feet  5-feet
                               Residential2                                                      (2 sty)   Min. 100-ft lot
    Sepulveda Blvd.                                                                                       frontage
                                                                                                          CUP Required
     Mobile Home
                                  Varies          1,200 sq. ft.     15-feet   5-feet  5-feet      N/A      Average Required
          Parks
                                                                                                           Site size: 2,200 sq.
                                                                                                           ft.
  1
   55-foot building height permitted for affordable or senior projects.
  2
   Required to meet residential condominium development & design standards
   Source: Carson General Plan, 2004
    Carson Municipal Code
  The City requires sufficient parking for residential projects to avoid the need for either
  residents or guests to park on the street. The reason for this is to avoid a safety hazard
  and ensure that surrounding developments are not adversely impacted. The Planning
  Commission may grant deviations from the parking requirements when accessing the
  overall impact and design of the project. The City’s residential parking requirements are
  included in Table 32.
  City of Carson                                                59                            2014-2021 Housing Element

                                             Table 32
                                         City of Carson
                                    Parking Requirements
            Use                                     Off-street Parking Required
Single-family RS, RA Zones   2 spaces within a garage
 Single-family in RM Zone    2 spaces within either a garage or carport
                             2 spaces within a garage, dwelling or carport for each dwelling. In addition,
Multifamily or Condominium   1 guest space for every multifamily unit with 3-bedrooms or more and 1
                             guest space for every 2 multifamily units with 2-bedrooms or less.
Multifamily or Condominium   1 covered space for every studio unit. 2 covered spaces for each unit with
 in a MUR Overlay District   one or more bedrooms. 1 guest space for every four units.
                             2 spaces for each mobile home and 1 guest space of every
     Mobile Home Park
                             4 mobile homes.
On- and Off-Site Improvements
On and off-site improvements may be required in conjunction with development based
on the location of the project and existing infrastructure. Dedication and construction of
streets, alleys, and other public easements and improvements may be required to
maintain public safety and convenience.
The City’s standards and requirements for streets, sidewalks, and other site
improvements are found in the Municipal Code. The following summarizes the City’s
standards for roadway and right-of-way widths.
        Residential entrance streets from General Plan highways, through collector
         streets, streets adjacent to schools, and multiple residential use streets- 64 feet
         total width (40 feet street width and 12 feet of right-of-way on both sides)
        Interior collector and local streets, cul-de-sac streets, and loop streets- 60 feet
         total width (36 feet of street width and 12 feet of right-of-way on both sides)
        Alleys- 30 feet total width
Concrete sidewalks shall be installed for residential developments along all frontages
where residential lots are adjacent to street right-of-way. Concrete sidewalks shall be full
width walks for major and secondary highways and all industrial and commercial
property adjacent to public right-of-way. Tree well locations shall be as specific by the
Director of Public Works and Director of Parks and Recreation and shall be required
when street trees are to be installed and sidewalks are adjacent to the curb, Wheelchair
ramps shall be provided at every new corner where curbs and gutters are to be
City of Carson                                60                             2014-2021 Housing Element

constructed where the construction of the sidewalk is proposed.
Street lights shall be provided and installed on all streets. Marbelite street light standards
shall be specified for the street lighting system unless waived by the city if it would not be
in keeping with the neighborhood pattern or if it would be impractical to underground
existing overhead utilities and existing wood poles.
Street trees and/or landscaping and irrigation systems shall be installed along all streets
and highways in each division of land per the General Plan. The locations of trees and
types of species of trees or landscaping shall be approved by the Parks and Recreation
Director and the Director of Public Works. This requirement may be waived if the City
finds that topographical, soil or other conditions make the planting of trees or
landscaping unreasonable or impractical.
New subdivisions may be required to dedicate land for public facilities such as schools,
parks, libraries, fire stations or other public uses based on the land requirements for such
facilities in the adopted Specific Plan or General Plan.
The on- and off-site improvements required by the City are necessary to adequately
provide the infrastructure and public facilities that support housing development. These
requirements ensure public safety and health and do not unduly hinder housing
development.
Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types
Housing Element law specifies that jurisdictions must identify adequate sites to be made
available through appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the
development of a variety of housing types for all income levels, including multi-family rental
housing, factory-built housing, mobile homes, emergency shelters, and transitional
housing. The following paragraphs describe the City’s provisions for these types of housing
through its land use controls.
Multi-Family Rental Housing: Multi-family housing comprises 11 percent of the City’s
existing housing stock. Under the City’s General Plan, multi-family units are permitted in
either the Medium Density Residential (MDR) land use category (maximum permitted
density of 12 units per acre); and the High Density Residential (HDR) land use category
(maximum permitted density of 25 units per acre). The applicable zoning designations are
RM-12 and RM-25, respectively.
Mobile Home Parks: There are approximately 2,412 mobile homes in the City of Carson
which comprise 9.3% of the City’s existing housing stock. Mobile home parks in Carson
are permitted with the approval of a conditional use permit in the RA, RS, and RM
zones, subject to certain limitations. In addition, the City has established, through its
Rent Control Ordinance, rent protection for the 2,412 households that reside in mobile
home parks in the City. Any proposed rent increases must be justified using established
criteria. Requested rent increases are generally adjusted and sometimes denied by a
City-established Mobile Home Rent Control Board.
City of Carson                              61                       2014-2021 Housing Element

Mixed-Use Projects: Mixed use projects in the Carson Street (MU-CS) Zone and the
Sepulveda Boulevard (MU-SB) Zone are required to maintain a maximum floor area
ratio (FAR) residential or mixed-use of 1.5, with a minimum floor area ratio for ground
floor commercial uses within a mixed-use development required to be 0.15. The
maximum floor area ratio for ground floor commercial uses within a mixed-use project is
0.7. Subterranean garages are not included in the FAR calculation for mixed-use
projects. Depending on the location of the project, the maximum residential density may
be either 35 du’s/acre with 55 du’s/acre permitted for affordable and senior housing
(Carson Street) or 25 du’s acre with 35 du’s per acre permitted for affordable and senior
housing (Sepulveda Boulevard). These development standards encourage the
incorporation of housing in mixed-use projects by essentially limiting commercial
development to less than half the size of the proposed project.
Second Units: The City’s Zoning Ordinance provides for the ministerial approval of second
dwelling units on single-family zoned lots which can serve to create new cost-effective
housing opportunities while using existing infrastructure. Development standards that are
applicable to second units include the following:
        Minimum Lot Size
            o Seven thousand five hundred square feet required within the RS
                (Residential, Single-Family) Zone.
            o Six thousand five hundred square feet required within the RM (Residential,
                Multiple-Family) Zone.
        Unit Sizes
            o Zero (0) bedroom, one bathroom and kitchen: five hundred square foot
                maximum.
            o One (1) bedroom, one bathroom and kitchen: six hundred fifty square foot
                maximum.
            o Two (2) bedrooms, one bathroom and kitchen: seven hundred square foot
                maximum.
        Required Setbacks
            o A detached second dwelling is required to be set back a minimum of ten
                feet from the primary residential structure and a minimum of six feet from
                accessory structures. Side yard setbacks are five feet and rear yard
                setbacks are fifteen feet.
            o If a second unit is proposed above an accessory structure, the minimum
                side yard setback is ten (10) feet, including the accessory structure.
        Permitted Height
            o A second dwelling unit is limited to two stories, with the maximum building
                height for a second dwelling unit established at thirty feet.
City of Carson                             62                        2014-2021 Housing Element

        Required Parking
            o Studio Unit: 1 uncovered off-street parking space
            o 1 Bedroom Unit: 1 space in a garage or carport
            o 2 Bedroom Unit: 2 spaces within a garage (applies also to any unit
               exceeding 700 square feet).
Transitional and Supportive Housing and Emergency Shelters: Pursuant to State law, the
City permits transitional or supportive housing in all residential zones in the City. These
types of facilities are subject to the same standards as other similar residential uses in
the same residential zoning district.
The City identified the Manufacturing Light (ML) and Manufacturing Heavy (MH) zone
districts as appropriate zone districts to permit transitional and supportive housing and
emergency shelter facilities by right. Appendix D includes a map that denotes the ML
and MH zone districts in the City of Carson. Buildings located in these areas are
generally industrial office/warehouse buildings with ample parking. There are multiple
parcels of available vacant developable land in the ML and MH zone. All identified areas
are in close proximity to public transportation lines and personal services and retail,
such as grocery stores, drug stores, and clinics and medical services. The amount of
available parcels within both the ML- and MH-zoned sites are more than able to
accommodate an emergency shelter to meet the estimated need of 21 homeless
individuals in the City, and any future homeless needs. This estimated capacity does
not include the potential to convert currently vacant or underutilized buildings in ML and
MH zones into an emergency shelter, which can also meet the City’s homeless needs.
One particular ML zoned site that can be readily used as an emergency shelter is
located at 1135 Janis Street, which is located in the light industrial park area north of the
91 Freeway and east of Avalon Boulevard (Site 4). The site size is 4 acres occupied by
a building with 6,000 square feet available for emergency shelter purposes.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities: Under Senate Bill (SB) 520, which became
effective January 1, 2002, the City is required to analyze potential and actual constraints
that could affect the development, maintenance, and improvement of housing for
persons with disabilities. In the event that these constraints are governmental, the
Element must identify those measures that will be effective in removing the constraints
that may hinder the City from meeting the need for housing for persons with disabilities.
In accordance with SB 520, a review of zoning and land use, development procedures,
policies, and practices, and building codes was conducted in order to identify any
potential constraints that could affect the provision of housing that would be accessible
to persons with disabilities. The results of this analysis are summarized below according
to three general categories of potential constraints:
        Zoning and Land Use. The City treats residential care facilities with six or fewer
         persons as a single-family use. These facilities are allowed by right in any zone
         where single-family homes are permitted under State law. The City’s Zoning
         Code defines family as any number of persons living together in a room or
City of Carson                            63                        2014-2021 Housing Element

         rooms comprising a single dwelling unit and related by blood, marriage, or
         adoption, or any group of persons not related by blood, marriage of adoption but
         inhabiting a dwelling unit.
        Permits and Processing Procedures. There are no permit requirements for
         residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons. The City provides formal
         procedures for reasonable accommodation in their Zoning Code. The process
         begins with a formal application to the City’s Planning Department. A request for
         accommodation is granted where all the following are established:
             o The accommodation requested is intended to be used by an individual
                with a disability, who resides or will reside on the property; and
             o The requested accommodation is necessary to afford an individual with a
                disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy a residential use; and
             o The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or
                administrative burden on the City; and
             o The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration n
                the nature of the land use and zoning program of the City.
        Building Code. The City has adopted the International Building Code which
         includes provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act. The City has added no
         amendments to the Building Code that would place constraints on
         accommodation of persons with disabilities.
Based on a review of City’s development procedures and policies, no specific
constraints were identified. The City’s Zoning Ordinance does not contain any
provisions that would preclude the development of housing for persons with disabilities.
Planning Entitlement and Building Permit Fees
Planning entitlement and building permit fees are collected by the City to defray project
entitlement and review costs incurred by the Planning and Building and Safety
Divisions. Table 33 includes the fees charge for basic planning entitlement applications.
Building permit fees, on the other hand, are based on the total valuation of the property,
which are depicted in Table 34.
Table 35 identifies an entitlement fee comparison survey of the planning and building
fees of Carson’s surrounding communities. The survey indicates that Carson has much
lower fees than these communities thereby making it less costly to build in Carson. In
addition, to help keep costs down, the City Council may waive building fees.
City of Carson                              64                        2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                  Table 33
                                             City of Carson
                                   Planning Entitlement Fees
                                            Fee                                                  Fee
                 Fee                                                   Fee
                                         Schedule                                             Schedule
     General Plan Amendment                $4,500            Development Agreement             $5,000
            Zone Change                    $4,500             Environmental Review             $1,000
       Ordinance Amendment                 $4,500                  Specific Plan               $8,000
              Variance                     $2,000                     Landscape Plan Check
       Conditional Use Permit          $750 -$2,500             2,500-7,500 sq.ft.              $135
        Tentative Tract Map                $5,500               7,501-15,000 sq.ft.             $200
                                                               15,001-30,000 sq.ft              $410
        Tentative Parcel Map               $4,000
                                                                30,001 to one acre              $500
                                                  Table 34
                                             City of Carson
                                        Building Permit Fees
                               Total Valuation                                        Fee Schedule
  $0 to $700                                                                              $53.40
  $701 to $25,000                                                                         $80.04
  plus for each additional $1,000 or fraction in excess of $1,000                         $20.80
  $25,001 to $50,000                                                                     $579.60
  plus for each additional $1,000 or fraction in excess of $25,000                        $16.20
  $50,001 to $100,000                                                                    $984.60
  plus for each additional $1,000 or fraction in excess of $50,000                        $12.00
  $100,001 and over                                                                     $1,584.60
  plus for each additional $1,000 or fraction in excess of $100,000                       $8.00
The following survey compares the costs of planning entitlement fees charged by the
City of Carson to fees charged by other municipalities. For example, Carson requires a
fee of $4,500 for a zone change, while Long Beach, Los Angeles, Los Angeles County,
Torrance, and El Segundo zone change fees are all more costly.
City of Carson                                    65                            2014-2021 Housing Element
                                                               Table 35
                                         Carson and Surrounding Areas
                                          Entitlement Fee Comparisons
                                      General Plan                                      Tentative Tract
        Jurisdiction                                              Zone Change                                  Variance
                                       Amendment                                              Map
Carson                                     $4,500                     $4,500                 $5,500             $2,000
Long Beach                                $10,930                    $10,930               $5,628.95           $6,011.50
                                                                              *
Los Angeles                                   N/A                     $9,121                 $6,964             $4,970
                                                                                                    **
Los Angeles County                         $3,000                    $12,604               $15,059              $8,461
Torrance                                   $6,608                     $6,608                 $1,998             $6,681
El Segundo                                 Deposit                    Deposit                $5,360             $8,220
Source: City and County Planning Departments
Note: * For single-family dwelling (up to 4 lots) ** Tentative map-minor land division.
School Impact Fees
The City of Carson is served by two school districts: Los Angeles Unified School District
and Compton Unified School District. Both districts charge impact fees on residential
development, as shown in Table 36. These fees can add significantly to the cost of
development. Senior housing, however, is exempt from school fees because it does not
impact the demand for schools.
                                                               Table 36
                                                     School Impact Fees
                         School District                                                         Fee
               Compton Unified School District                                           $2.97 per square foot
            Los Angeles Unified School District                                          $4.00 per square foot
Source: Compton Unified School District, Los Angeles Unified School District
Other than school impact fees, there are no other development impact fees imposed by
Carson on new residential development in the City.
Total Typical Fees by Type of Unit
As a means of assessing the cost that fees contribute to development in Carson, the
City has updated and calculated the total Building, Planning, and other fees associated
with single-family and multi-family dwelling units. The typical total development fees for
a 1,500 square foot, two bedroom/two bathroom single-family unit (building valuation of
$300,000 per unit) is approximately $12,700, while the typical total development fees for
City of Carson                                                 66                              2014-2021 Housing Element
a 1,000 square foot, two bedroom/one bathroom multi-family unit (building valuation of
$200,000 per unit) is $10,700.
The City of Carson’s development fees represent a small portion of the overall cost of
residential development and are comparable to other Los Angeles jurisdictions. The City
has worked hard to keep fees low and will continue to do so, utilizing allocated funds to
promote development of affordable housing, housing for extremely low-income
households and residents with disabilities.
Building Codes and Enforcement:
The City of Carson's building codes are based upon the ICC (International) Building,
Housing, Plumbing, Mechanical, and Electrical Codes with minor amendments. These codes
are considered to be the minimum necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare. The local enforcement of these codes does not add significantly to the cost of
housing.
Local Processing and Permit Procedures:
Residential building applications (with an estimated valuation of $50,000 or more)
require a Development Plan to be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission.
The following criteria are required to be considered by the Planning Commission when
reviewing the Development Plan:
     1. Compatibility with the General Plan, any specific plans for the area, and
         surrounding uses.
     2. Compatibility of architecture and design with existing and anticipated
         development in the vicinity, including the aspects of site planning, land coverage,
         landscaping, appearance and scale of structures and open spaces, and other
         features relative to a harmonious and attractive development of the area.
     3. Convenience and safety of circulation for pedestrians and vehicles.
     4. Attractiveness, effectiveness and restraint in signing graphics and color.
     5. Development scheduling (if phased development) which will satisfy the above
         criteria in each phase.
     6. Conformance to any applicable design standards and guidelines which have
         been adopted. Such design standards and guidelines may be generally
         applicable or may specify different requirements for different areas.
If the estimated valuation of the project is less than $50,000, the Development Plan can
be approved by the Planning Director.
Development Plans that require Planning Commission review and approval usually
involve 3-4 months of processing time prior to the grant of the entitlement.
City of Carson                             67                        2014-2021 Housing Element

Development Plans that require only Planning Director review and approval require 1-2
weeks of processing time.
Following Planning Commission approval of a Development Plan or Conditional Use
Permit, there is a 15-day appeal period. Finally, the developer must submit detailed
plans to the City’s Building and Safety Division to ensure compliance with the Building
Code. Combined, these items can easily add up to several months. However, in order to
avoid project delays, Planning Division staff works with developers throughout the
process, presenting options such as reducing plan check time by working with building
officials early on to ensure that plans meet Code requirements when they are submitted.
Under current Code requirements, multifamily residential projects are required to obtain
approval of a conditional use permit. Typical processing times are from six to eight
weeks. If a negative declaration is required under the California Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA), there is a mandatory 20-day review period. The current requirement to
obtain approval of a conditional use permit applies both to renter and owner-occupied
(condominium) multifamily projects. The following affirmative findings are required to be
made:
The proposed use and development will be consistent with the General Plan.
The site is adequate in size, shape, topography, location, utilities, and other factors to
accommodate the proposed use and development.
    1. There will be adequate street access and traffic capacity.
    2. There will be adequate water supply for fire protection.
    3. The proposed use and development will be compatible with the intended
         character of the area.
The conditional use permit (CUP) requirement for multifamily residential projects in the
City can act as an impediment to the approval of housing in Carson. In the previous
Housing Element, the City proposed to amend its Zoning Code to exempt all multifamily
residential projects from the conditional use permit requirement. However, further
analysis and ongoing development activity has shown that the requirement of a
conditional use permit on multifamily development projects has not been a constraint on
the development of housing in the City.
The current conditional use permit application process runs concurrently with other
required entitlement applications being processed (such as site plan and design review)
resulting in no additional processing time or delays created by the conditional use
permit requirement. In addition, as noted in Table 33, planning entitlement fees in
Carson are comparatively lower than fees charged by other jurisdictions. The City also
enables developers to waive the CUP requirement for multifamily projects through the
Density Bonus Program, which provides the opportunity for affordable housing units.
Finally, the City has received no negative feedback from the development community or
others in regards to the conditional use permit requirement for multifamily residential
projects. The City has solicited developers’ opinions on the City’s CUP requirement for
City of Carson                           68                       2014-2021 Housing Element

multi-family developments and has found that developers do not find the requirement as
a constraint to the development of housing in the City. There have been numerous
recently completed and currently proposed developments in the City that demonstrate
development activity within the City even with the CUP requirement on multi-family
developments:
    1. The Gateway at City Center: An 86-unit affordable senior building with ground
         floor retail, including a restaurant.
    2. The Renaissance at City Center: A 150-unit apartment development with
         additional ground floor retail.
    3. Via 425: A new four-story, 65-unit affordable apartment community. The
         development includes live-work units along Carson Street. Construction was
         completed in May 2012.
    4. 616 E. Carson Street- A mixed-use community that will include 152
         condominiums and ground floor retail.
    5. The Boulevards at South Bay- The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
         provides for a mix of commercial, retail, and entertainment uses, a hotel, and up
         to 1,550 single-family and multifamily units.
    6. Via 425 (Phase 2)- A 40-unit affordable apartment community.
    7. Magnolia Walk- 12 units of affordable detached condominiums.
    8. Affirmed Housing- 40 units of affordable family units.
City of Carson                               69                   2014-2021 Housing Element
City of Carson 70 2014-2021 Housing Elemen
V.       HOUSING RESOURCES
The following narrative describes and analyzes the resources available for the
development, rehabilitation and preservation of housing in the City of Carson. Section A
begins with an overview of the availability of land resources or residential sites for future
housing development in Carson and an evaluation of the City’s ability to provide adequate
sites to address its identified share of future housing needs. Section B presents the
financial resources available to support the provision of affordable housing in the community.
Finally, Section C discusses the administrative resources available for the operation of local
housing programs.
A. Availability of Sites for Housing
An important component of the Carson Housing Element is the identification of sites for
future housing development, and evaluation of the adequacy of these sites in fulfilling
the City’s share of regional housing needs (as determined by SCAG). Table 37 shows
Carson’s residential development potential on vacant lands located within one-half mile
of existing infrastructure. As illustrated by this table, the City provides for the
development of 2,190 net new units within the current City limits and near existing
development, services, and infrastructure connections. Over 90 percent of Carson’s
future growth is planned at multi-family densities, including a large specific plan area
designated for future development known as “The Boulevards at South Bay.”
In addition to development on vacant lands depicted in Table 37, there is the potential
for new residential development on underutilized sites which are sites currently
developed at densities lower than those permitted under the General Plan. As
discussed in Chapter IV, there are larger parcels (20,000 square feet and larger) in
Carson that are under developed with low density single-family uses (usually one or two
dwelling units) that are zoned for multifamily uses with densities allowing 12 to 25 units
per acre. These properties are providing a significant additional unit potential in various
areas of the City. They also offer the best opportunity for increasing the stock of housing
which can be priced within lower income groups' range of affordability.
A key feature of the City’s land use policy is the use of Specific Plans. Specific Plans
are used in two ways: 1) to encourage and expedite the processing of large-scale
private developments, and 2) to target certain areas of the City with unique planning
needs. Specific Plans generally permit residential densities that exceed those set forth
in the Zoning Code. For example, a large specific plan area (SP-10) includes
development potential for up to 1,550 dwelling units on 42 acres within the specific plan
area at a density of 37 units/acre. This project, currently under development, is known
as “The Boulevards at South Bay” which is a mixed-use development project. The
Boulevards at South Bay proposes 1,150 ownership units and 400 residential rental
units.
City of Carson                             71                         2014-2021 Housing Element

Mixed use residential is also being implemented along Carson Street and Sepulveda
Boulevard in the City. Zoning applicable to these two commercial areas allows for
residential development, provided it is compatible with surrounding non-residential uses.
The Mixed-Use Carson Street zone district permits residential densities at 35 du’s/acre
for residential units and 55 du’s/acre for senior residential projects. The Mixed-Use
Sepulveda Boulevard zone district permits residential densities at 25 du’s/acre for
residential units and 35 du’s/acre for senior residential projects.
Comparison of Site Inventory with RHNA
According to SCAG, Carson has a regional housing need of 1,698 housing units for the
2014-2021 planning period. Given that the City’s residential sites can support the
development of 2,190 units, the City has allocated sufficient land to meet its projected
housing needs. Furthermore, Carson can meet the required distribution of housing units
by income group presented earlier in Table 28.
The General Plan for Carson, adopted in 2002, anticipated an additional 1,839 units
could be constructed in Carson, based on proposed revisions to the Land Use Element.
However, through the establishment of mixed-use overlay districts and the creation of
specific plan areas, this estimate has been exceeded. These mixed-use overlays and
specific plan areas permit residential densities greater than those originally
contemplated in the adopted General Plan. Most all of the residential units constructed
within the mixed-use overlay districts and specific plan areas will be developed as
apartments, town homes, and condominiums at densities ranging as high as 37
du’s/acre (The Boulevards at South Bay). With market rents in Carson at levels
affordable to low income households, this multi-family housing will serve to address the
City’s need for 710 lower income units. In addition, a portion of multifamily units to be
developed in Carson on lots under developed with single-family uses will likely sell at
levels affordable to low -income households without housing subsidies. In those cases
where subsidies are required to make the purchase and rental of homes affordable to
low income households or very-low-income households, the City offers a variety of
programs that offer both mortgage and rental assistance as discussed below.
Methodology for Determining Realistic Capacity
The development capacity resulting in both gross and net new projected units described
in Table 37 was calculated using density allowances contained in the Land Use Element
of the Carson General Plan. In all cases, the “upper limit” of the allowed number of
units was applied to the acreage figures in Table 37, which are in turn derived from the
parcel level inventory included as Appendix C. For example, parcels located in the RS,
and RM-8 zones have a permitted density of 1-8 dwelling units per acre. The unit
capacity in these zones was derived by multiplying the available acres by the 8 dwelling
units per acre allowance. The same methodology was applied to the vacant RM-12 and
RM-25 zoned properties. The actual “net new” units accounts for the application of
development standards such as building setbacks and lot coverage, street dedications,
etc. which reduce the overall unit capacity of the vacant sites that were analyzed.
City of Carson                           72                         2014-2021 Housing Element

All of the sites included in Table 37 are vacant and are available for development since
April 2010. All sites are currently located within the City’s corporate limits and are within
½ mile of essential infrastructure/services. According to the City of Carson Zoning
Code, where no density designation is included with the zoning symbol on the Zoning
Map, one (1) dwelling unit is permitted on each lot. No lot shall be created which has a
net area less than five thousand (5,000) square feet. As explained above, where a
density designation is included with the zoning symbol on the Zoning Map, the
maximum number of dwelling units permitted on a lot or project area is the net lot area
in acres multiplied by the density designation number.
RA-zoned properties can be subdivided to create buildable sites in accordance with the
City’s zoning requirements, which establish a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet. For
example, a parcel located north of West Carson Street and west of Main Street (zoned
RA and identified in Table 37), comprising 61,868 square feet, could be subdivided to
create 12 parcels at 5,000 square feet each.
In addition to the RA, RS and RM zoned vacant parcels included in Table 37, there are
also two mixed-use zone classifications that allow for residential units. One such area is
the Carson Street mixed-use overlay area and the other area is the Sepulveda
Boulevard mixed-use overlay area. The residential density permitted in the Mixed Use-
Carson Street zone designation is 35 du’s/acre with 55 du’s/acre permitted if the
residential units are affordable or for seniors. The projected gross and net new units for
this area was based on the lower density allowance (35du’s/acre), except for the 235
units in the proposed City Center project which will be built at a density of 55 dwelling
units per acre. The residential density permitted in the Mixed Use- Sepulveda Boulevard
zone designation is 25 du’s/acre with 35 du’s/acre permitted if the residential units are
affordable or for seniors.
Sites that are currently zoned Commercial-General (CG), Open Space (OS), and
Manufacturing (Light) that indicate potential new units are vacant sites with existing
zoning that is inconsistent with their General Plan designations. Thus, with rezoning,
they are capable of supporting a limited number of potential new dwelling units.
Finally, Specific Plan (SP-10), consisting of nine parcels, is the 154-acre Boulevards at
South Bay development which includes a 1,550-unit mixed use project on a 42-acre
portion of the specific plan area (Appendix E). A development agreement includes
proposed apartments and condominiums on 5-10 acre sized parcels within the Specific
Plan area with some units located on former land fill areas. The effective density of this
approved development is between a 35 to 60 du’s/acre range. The number of units
(1,550) is net new units and is derived after accounting for the application of the
development standards and design guidelines of the Specific Plan.
Appendix C contains a list of assessor parcel numbers that comprise these vacant sites
as of 2012, per Los Angeles County Assessors information.
City of Carson                            73                        2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                             Table 37
                                               Inventory of Vacant Sites
                                    Suitable for Residential Development1
 No of                                      General                                                                         Potential
               Square                                                                  2                       Gross               3
Parcels                       Acres           Plan                            ZONING                                         Units
                 Feet                                                                                           Units
Vacant                                   Designation                                                                       (Net New)
                                                            Residential Agricultural Single Family
    7        1,076,367        24.71           LD                                     4                           220          165
                                                                               (RA)
   47         303,177          6.96           LD                Residential Single Family (RS)                    58           12
    2          55,164          0.33           LD             Residential Multiple Dwelling (RM-8)                  2            1
    2          21,778          0.50         LD/MD           Residential Multiple Dwelling (RM-12)                  6            4
    1           8,445          0.19           HD            Residential Multiple Dwelling (RM-18)                  3            2
    1          16,552          0.38           HD            Residential Multiple Dwelling (RM-25)                  9            8
                                                            Mixed Use Residential Carson Street
   11         379,843          8.72          MU-R                                       5                        474          401
                                                                             (MU-CS)
                                                           Mixed Use Residential Sepulveda Blvd.
    2          55,314          1.27          MU-R                                       6                         43           37
                                                                             (MU-SB)
    2          45,756          1.05           MD                   Commercial-General (CG)                        12           10
    8          34,647           .80           LD                        Open Space (OS)                            8            0
    1           4,862           .11           LD                    Manufacturing-Light (ML)                       1            0
                                                                                              7
    9        6,727,552         154           MU-R                    Specific Plan (SP-10)                      1,550        1,550
                                                           Total Potential Housing Units at Ultimate
   93        8,729,457        200.4                                                      8                      2,386        2,190
                                                                            Build Out
Notes:
All of the sites included in this table are vacant and were available for development as of April 2010. All sites are currently located
 within the City’s corporate limits and are within ½ mile of essential infrastructure.
2. According to the City of Carson Zoning Code, where no density designation is included with the zoning symbol on the Zoning
 Map, one (1) dwelling unit is permitted on each lot. No lot shall be created which has a net area less than five thousand (5,000)
 square feet.
4.          Where a density designation is included with the zoning symbol on the Zoning Map, the maximum number of dwelling
 units permitted on a lot or project area is the net lot area in acres multiplied by the density designation number. The actual “net
 new” units accounts for the application of development standards such as building setbacks and lot coverage, street dedications,
 etc. which reduce the overall unit capacity of the vacant sites that were analyzed. The actual “net new” units assume 85 percent
 developable area.
These RA-zoned properties can be subdivided to create buildable sites in accordance with the City’s zoning requirements, which
 establish a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet. For example, a parcel located north of West Carson Street and west of Main
 Street zoned RA and identified in Table 37 (above), comprising 61,868 square feet, could be subdivide to create 12 parcels at
 5,000 square feet each.
The residential density permitted in the Mixed Use- Carson Street zone designation is 35 du’s/acre with 55 du’s/acre permitted if the
 residential units are affordable or for seniors. This increased density provision is available independent of densities granted
 through the City’s Density Bonus program, and can be utilized even without participation in the Density Bonus program. Includes
 235 units in the proposed City Center project that will be developed at 55 du’s/acre.
The residential density permitted in the Mixed Use- Sepulveda Boulevard zone designation is 25 du’s/acre with 35 du’s/acre
 permitted if the residential units are affordable or for seniors. This increased density provision is available independent of densities
 granted through the City’s Density Bonus program, and can be utilized even without participation in the Density Bonus program.
Specific Plan (SP-10), consisting of nine parcels, is the 154-acre Boulevards at South Bay development which includes a 1,550-unit
 mixed use project on a 40-acre portion of the specific plan area that has been approved for development. The effective density of
 this approved development is between a 35 to 60 du’s/acre range. The number of units (1,550) is net new units and is derived
 after accounting for the application of the development standards and design guidelines of the specific plan. The proposed
 housing units will be constructed on 5 to 10 acre- sized parcels within the 40-acre area currently set aside in the Specific Plan area
 for housing. The developmental density would be 38.75 dwelling units per acre.(Please see Exhibit E-1 in Appendix
Appendix C contains a list of assessor parcel numbers that comprise these vacant sites as of 2012, per Los Angeles County
 Assessors information.
City of Carson                                                  74                                    2014-2021 Housing Element

B. Financial Resources
There are a variety of potential funding sources available for housing activities in general.
Due to both the high costs of developing and preserving housing and limitations on both the
amount and uses of funds, a variety of funding sources may be required. The following
describes in detail the two primary local funding sources for housing currently used in the
City of Carson including Carson Housing Authority Funds and City CDBG funds. Both of
these sources could potentially be used to assist in the support and development of
affordable housing.
Housing Authority Funds
Redevelopment low-mod housing set-aside funds are one of the primary sources of
financing used for the preservation, improvement, and development of affordable
housing. Previously, as required by California Redevelopment Law, Carson’s
Redevelopment Agency set aside 20 percent of all tax increment revenue generated from
the redevelopment project area for the purpose of increasing and improving the community’s
supply of housing for low- and moderate-income households. This set-aside was placed
in a separate low- and moderate--income housing fund and could be spent anywhere within
the City limits. Housing units developed using the Agency’s 20 percent low-mod housing
set-aside funds were to remain affordable to the targeted income group for a period of
time not less than 55 years for rental housing and 45 years for owner housing.
On Dec. 29, 2011, the California Supreme Court ruled to uphold ABx1 26, which dissolved
all redevelopment agencies (RDAs) in the State. A companion bill, ABx1 27, which would
have allowed the RDAs to continue to exist, was also declared invalid by the court. The
court’s decision required that all RDAs within California be eliminated no later than
February 1, 2012. The City of Carson Redevelopment Agency was dissolved as of
February 1, 2012 and the City selected the Carson Housing Authority to be the Successor
Agency responsible for all enforceable obligations owed.
The Carson Housing Authority has $8 million in cash balances and $20.1 million in bond
projects to be used for the development and preservation of affordable housing. The
Housing Authority is planning to assist the following projects/programs:
     1. Via 425 Phase II (401-409 E Carson Street) – The Carson Housing Authority is
         under an Affordable Housing Agreement with the Related Companies to build a
         40-unit multi-family affordable housing development on the Authority-owned
         property located at 401-409 E. Carson Street. The project will consist of
         housing for very low-, low-, and moderate-income households. The product
         types range from one-bedroom to three-bedroom units, and will all be market-
         rate quality. As part of the project, the developer will also provide upgraded
         amenities such as common community space and a large courtyard designed
         for gathering and casual dining. The courtyard is further enhanced by a
         children’s play area with benches and pathways bordered with landscaped
         planters. The design will be Phase II to the existing Via 425 development
City of Carson                            75                       2014-2021 Housing Element

         adjacent to the property. The site plan includes the following:
               8 one-bedroom units;
               20 two-bedroom units;
               12 three-bedroom townhome units; and
               86 under podium parking spaces.
         A regulatory agreement restricting income affordability levels will be recorded
         against the property to specify the terms of affordability restrictions of the units
         to very low-, low-, and moderate-income residents. These terms will be in effect
         for a minimum of 55 years following the issuance of the Certificate of
         Occupancy. Affordability restrictions are as follows:
               4 very low-income units
               15 low-income units
               21 moderate-income units
    2. Carson City Center (708-724 E. Carson Street and 21720-21814 Avalon Blvd.)–
         The senior portion of this project was completed in 2011 and Phase II, which
         includes 150 market rate apartments, is 90% complete. Phase II is scheduled to
         open in Summer 2013. The senior housing portion provides 42 units for very-
         low income senior households and 43 units for moderate income senior
         households.
    3. The Boulevards at South Bay - This project is approved for 1,550 housing units
         and the developer is currently under negotiation with the Carson Housing
         Authority (successor agency for Redevelopment Agency) to provide up to 10%
         of the units as affordable housing.
    4. Arbor Green (21227-21237 Figueroa Street) - Affirmed Housing Group is the
         developer for this project. This site is currently under construction and when
         completed will provide 40 unit of affordable housing. The affordability mix
         includes: 4 very low-income units, 15 low-income units, and 21 moderate-
         income units.
    5. Annual Rental Subsidies – Continue annual rental subsidies to the Carson
         Terrace and Avalon Courtyard projects.
    6. First time Home Buyer Program – A HOME Funds federal grant was awarded to
         the City’s Community Development Department in February 2013. Funding for
         this program will begin in the Fall of 2013 when HOME Funds become
         available.
    7. Residential Rehabilitation Program – A HOME Funds federal grant was
         awarded to the City’s Community Development Department in February 2013.
         Funding for this program will begin in the Fall of 2013 when HOME Funds
         become available.
City of Carson                             76                        2014-2021 Housing Element

The Housing Authority Funds and other grant funds will be used in a variety of ways to
facilitate the development and preservation of affordable housing. The City recognizes that
the development of affordable housing cannot be accomplished through the efforts of the
City alone. Partnerships must be developed with other private and governmental funding
agencies, as well as, with private for-profit and non-profit housing developers.
Housing Authority Funds will be used to provide financial assistance in the approximate
amount of $4.8 million in support of affordable housing at Via 425 Phase II. Financing for the
project also includes owner equity and equity raised from Low Income Housing Tax Credits.
The project will include 40 units of affordable housing and is the second phase of the existing
Via 425 development, a 65-unit affordable housing development completed in 2012. The
Authority is also using funds to assist in the development of the Arbor Green project which is
financed with equity from Low Income Housing Tax Credits, private debt, and Authority
assistance. The Authority will provide $5.5 million in assistance to finance the development
of this project. Approximately $15 million has been budgeted to provide financial assistance
for the development of affordable housing at The Boulevards at South Bay. This project has
been planned for 2 million square feet of commercial/retail and approximately 575 for-sale
housing units and 830 rental housing units. Housing Funds would be used in support of
making a percentage of the housing units affordable to low income households.
HOME Funds will also be used to preserve and improve existing housing through the
Single Family Residential Rehabilitation Program. The Program, targeted to low and
moderate income homeowners, provides financial and technical assistance to correct code
violations and provide for basic housing repairs. Financial assistance is provided to
homeowners in the form of loans, which are deferred second mortgages with three percent
deferred interest, due upon sale of the property. HOME Funds were awarded in February
2013 and will be available in Fall 2013.
Housing Authority Funds will be used to provide rental subsidies to low-income households at
the Carson Terrace and Avalon Courtyard housing developments in order to make rental
units affordable. The Housing Authority will contribute approximately $230,000 annually for
rental subsidies.
CDBG Funds
Through the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program, HUD provides funds to
local governments for funding a wide range of community development activities. The
City of Carson receives approximately $1,100,000 annually in CDBG funds from HUD
which it utilizes to fund housing rehabilitation programs, public service activities, capital
improvement projects and administration.
Another source of housing assistance in the City of Carson is through the local Public
Housing Authority (PHA). The local PHA serving the City of Carson is the Los Angeles
County Housing Authority (LACHA). LACHA administers the Section 8 rental subsidy
program in the City of Carson for both tenant-based and project-based assistance.
LACHA administers approximately 340 Section 8-assisted units annually. The City has
City of Carson                                77                        2014-2021 Housing Element
seven apartment projects that are publicly assisted, but not public housing developments.
Table 38 lists the additional potential funding sources that are available for housing
activities. They are divided into four categories, including: federal, state, county and private
resources.
                                               Table 38
  Resources Available for Housing and Community Development Activities
         Program Name                       Description                         Eligible Activities
  1. Federal Programs
                              Grant program for housing and             Χ  Acquisition
                              community development activities          Χ  Rehabilitation
  Community Development Block available through the County’s annual     X  Home Buyer Assistance
  Grant                       grant to Carson.                          X  Economic Development
                                                                        X  Homeless Assistance
                                                                        X  Public Services
                              HOME funds are made available on an       Χ  Acquisition
                              annual competitive basis through the      Χ  Rehabilitation
  State and Federal Home      State Department of Housing and           X  Home Buyer Assistance
  Investment Partnerships Act community Development (HCD) Small         X  Rental Assistance
  (HOME) Funds                Cities Program. Available to develop      X  New Construction
                              and support affordable rental housing
                              and home ownership opportunities.
                                                                        X Rental Assistance
                              Rental assistance payments to owners
  Section 8 Rental Assistance
                              of private market rate units on behalf of
  Program
                              Very Low Income tenants.
                                                                        Χ  Acquisition
                              Grants to non-profit developers of        Χ  Rehabilitation
  Section 202                 supportive housing for the elderly.       X  New Construction
  Supportive Housing for the
  Elderly
                                                                        Χ Rehabilitation
                              HUD insures mortgages made by             Χ New Construction
                              private lending institutions to finance
  Section 207                 the construction or rehabilitation of
  Multifamily Rental Housing  multifamily rental housing by private or
                              public developers.
                                                                        Χ Rehabilitation
                              HUD insures mortgages made by             Χ New Construction
                              private lending institutions to finance
  Section 207
                              the construction or rehabilitation of
  Manufactured Home Parks
                              manufactured home parks consisting
                              of at least 5 spaces.
                              HUD insures mortgages made by               Acquisition
                                                                        Χ
                              private lending institutions to finance   Χ Rehabilitation
  Section 213                                                             New Construction
                              the construction, rehabilitation,         Χ
  Cooperative Housing
                              acquisition, improvement or repair of     Χ Improvement
                              cooperative housing projects.
City of Carson                                  78                             2014-2021 Housing Element

         Program Name                           Description                       Eligible Activities
                                 HUD insures mortgages under Section Χ      Acquisition
  Section 223(f)                 207 pursuant to Section 223(f) to        Χ Refinancing
  Existing Multifamily Rental
                                 purchase or refinance existing
  Housing
                                 multifamily projects originally financed
                                 Grants to non-profit developers of           Acquisition
  Section 811                                                             Χ
                                                                              Rehabilitation
  Supportive Housing for Persons supportive housing for persons with      Χ
                                 disabilities, including group homes,     Χ   New Construction
  with Disabilities
                                 independent living facilities and        Χ   Rental Assistance
                                 intermediate care facilities.
                                 Tax credits are available to individuals
                                 and corporations that invest in low      Χ   New Construction
                                                                          Χ
  Low Income Housing Tax Credit income rental housing. Usually, the tax       Rehabilitation
                                                                          Χ
  (LIHTC)                        credits are sold to corporations with a      Acquisition
                                 high tax liability and the proceeds from
                                 the sale are used to create the
                                 housing.
  2. State Programs
                                                                              New Construction
  California Housing Finance     Below market rate financing offered to Χ     Rehabilitation
  Agency (CHFA) Multiple Rental  builders and developers of multi-family Χ    Acquisition of Properties from 20 to
                                                                          Χ
  Housing Program                and elderly rental housing. Tax exempt          150 units
                                 bonds provide below-market mortgage
                                 money.
  California Housing Finance     CHFA sells tax-exempt bonds to make Χ        Home Buyer Assistance
  Agency Home Mortgage           below market loans to first time
  Purchase Program               homebuyers. Program operates
                                 through participating lenders who
                                 originate loans for CHFA purchase.
                                                                             Homebuyer Assistance
                                 Grants to cities and counties to make
                                 deferred-payment second mortgage
                                 loans to qualified buyers of new
                                 homes, including manufactured homes Χ
                                 on permanent foundations, in projects
  Building equity and growth in  with affordability enhanced by local
  Neighborhoods Program          regulatory incentives or barrier
  (BEGIN)                        reductions
                                 Grants to enable very low and low        Χ   Housing Acquisition
  Cal Home                       income households to become or           X   Housing Rehabilitation
                                 remain homeowners. City must apply       X   Homebuyer Assistance
                                                                          X
                                 for funds through HCD in response to         Homebuyer Counseling
                                 periodic Notices of Funding Availability
                                 (NOFAs).
City of Carson                                       79                          2014-2021 Housing Element

         Program Name                         Description                        Eligible Activities
                                                                         Χ Acquisition
                                20 percent of Agency funds are set       Χ Rehabilitation
                                aside for affordable housing activities  Χ New Construction
                                governed by state law. Annual set-
  Redevelopment Housing Fund    aside contribution is approximately
                                $545,000, plus $100,000 in repayment
                                of past deferrals.
                                                                             New Construction
  California Housing Finance    Below market rate financing offered to Χ     Rehabilitation
  Agency (CHFA) Multiple Rental builders and developers of multi-family Χ    Acquisition of Properties from 20 to
                                                                         Χ
  Housing Program               and elderly rental housing. Tax exempt         150 units
                                bonds provide below-market mortgage
                                money.
  California Housing Finance    CHFA sells tax-exempt bonds to make Χ        Home Buyer Assistance
  Agency Home Mortgage          below market loans to first time
  Purchase Program              homebuyers. Program operates
                                through participating lenders who
                                originate loans for CHFA purchase.
                                                                            Homebuyer Assistance
                                Grants to cities and counties to make
                                deferred-payment second mortgage
                                loans to qualified buyers of new
                                homes, including manufactured homes Χ
                                on permanent foundations, in projects
  Building equity and growth in with affordability enhanced by local
  Neighborhoods Program         regulatory incentives or barrier
  (BEGIN)                       reductions
                                Grants to enable very low and low        Χ   Housing Acquisition
  Cal Home                      income households to become or           X   Housing Rehabilitation
                                remain homeowners. City must apply       X   Homebuyer Assistance
                                                                         X
                                for funds through HCD in response to         Homebuyer Counseling
                                periodic Notices of Funding Availability
                                (NOFAs).
                                The City can support low income          Χ New Construction
                                housing developers in their effort to    Χ Rehabilitation
                                obtain bonds in order to construct       Χ Acquisition
  Tax Exempt Housing Revenue    affordable housing. The City can issue
  Bond
                                housing revenue bonds requiring the
                                developer to lease a fixed percentage
                                of the units to low income families and
                                maintain rents at a specified amount
                                below market rate.
                                The City is a participant in the ICLFA   Χ Downpayment assistance
                                which provides bond funds under a
  Independent Cities Lease      “FreshRate” program for mortgage
  Finance Authority (ICLFA)     loan downpayments for low and
                                moderate income applicants. It places
                                a cap on closing costs and fees and
                                can be used for downpayment
                                assistance on single-family homes.
City of Carson                                     80                          2014-2021 Housing Element

         Program Name                          Description                          Eligible Activities
 3. County Programs
                                The MCC Program offers the first time X Home Buyer Assistance
                                homebuyer a federal tax credit. This
                                credit reduces the amount of federal
                                taxes to be paid. It can also help the
  Mortgage Credit Certificate   first-time homebuyer qualify for a loan
  (MCC) Program
                                by allowing a lender to reduce the
                                housing expense ration by the amount
                                of tax savings, helping to qualify for a
                                mortgage loan.
 4. Private Resources/Financing Programs
                                Loan applicants apply to participating     Χ Home Buyer Assistance
                                                                           Χ Home Buyer Assistance
                                lenders for the following programs:        Χ Rehabilitation
                                -      Fixed rate mortgages issued by      Χ
                                                                             Home Buyer Assistance
                                      private mortgage insurers.
  Federal National Mortgage     -      Mortgages which fund the
  Association (Fannie Mae)             acquisition and rehabilitation of a
                                       home.
                                -      Low Down-Payment Mortgages
                                      for Single-Family Homes in
                                      underserved low-income and
                                      minority communities
                                Non-profit mortgage banking                Χ  New Construction
                                consortium designed to provide long        Χ
  California Community                                                        Rehabilitation
                                                                           Χ
  Reinvestment Corporation      term debt financing for affordable multi-     Acquisition
  (CCRC)                        family rental housing. Non-profit and
                                for profit developers contact member
                                banks.
  Federal Home Loan Bank        Direct subsidies to non-profit and for-    Χ New Construction
  Affordable Housing Program    profit developers and public agencies
                                for affordable Low Income ownership
                                and rental projects.
                                Home Works - Provides standard             Χ  Home Buyer Assistance combined
                                mortgages that include rehabilitation         with Rehabilitation
                                loan. City provides gap financing for
  Freddie Mac                   rehabilitation component. Households
                                earning up to 80% MFI qualify.
                                Federal law requires that banks,           X Rehabilitation
                                                                           X Housing Development
                                savings and loans, thrifts, and their
  Community Reinvestment Act    affiliated mortgaging subsidiaries
  (CRA)                         annually evaluate the credit needs for
                                public projects in communities where
                                they operate.
City of Carson                                      81                            2014-2021 Housing Element

C. Administrative Resources
The provision of affordable housing in any community requires both financial resources
as well as administrative resources. Housing programs require that a number of entities
work together in partnership to bring the necessary resources together to provide for
affordable housing. Provided below is a brief discussion of some of the administrative
resources that the City of Carson has available to provide for housing programs.
In previous years, Carson’s Redevelopment Agency administered low-mod housing set-
aside funds in the amount of 20 percent of all tax increment revenue generated from the
redevelopment project area. These funds were used for the purpose of increasing and
improving the community’s supply of housing for low and moderate income households.
These low-mod housing set-aside funds were placed in a separate low and moderate
income housing fund and could be spent anywhere within the City limits. With the
dissolution of the Carson Redevelopment Agency, the Carson Housing Authority now
administers the Agency’s low-mod housing set-aside funds and remaining obligations.
Housing units developed by the Housing Authority must remain affordable to the targeted
income group for a period of time not less than 55 years for rental housing and 45 years
for owner housing. The Housing Authority staff meets with for-profit and non-profit housing
developers for the purpose of discussing potential low and moderate income housing
projects.
Housing development projects within the City of Carson are managed by the Community
Development Department. Through the coordinated effort of these divisions, the needs for
affordable housing are assessed and planned for, proposed developments are regulated in
accordance with the City’s planning and zoning codes, and funding is available through the
Housing Authority. For-profit and non-profit housing developers are valuable resource
partners in the development of affordable housing. The City has successfully worked with
housing developers to complete affordable housing projects, including the Gateway at City
Center, an 86-unit affordable senior housing building and Via 425, a 65-unit affordable
apartment community located on Carson Street. One popular funding mechanism is the
use of state tax credit funding from the Tax Credit Allocation Committee (TCAC). Tax
credits are available to individuals and corporations that invest in low income rental
housing. The tax credits are sold to individuals or corporations with a high tax liability and
the proceeds from the sale are used to create affordable housing. TCAC projects are
expected to provide additional affordable housing units in the future.
City of Carson                            82                         2014-2021 Housing Element

VI.      HOUSING PLAN
Chapters II to V establish the housing needs, constraints, and resources in Carson. The
Housing Plan presented in the following chapter sets forth the City's housing goals,
policies and programs to address Carson's identified housing needs.
A.       Goals and Policies
The following goals and policies reflect a revision to those previously adopted in the City’s
2006-2014 Housing Element to incorporate what has been learned from the prior element,
and to adequately address the community's identified housing needs. These goals and
policies will serve as a guide to City officials in daily decision making.
GOAL 1:         IMPROVEMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF THE EXISTING HOUSING
                STOCK WHILE PRESERVING AFFORDABILITY.
                POLICY 1.1: Work toward the elimination and prevention of the spread of
                blight and deterioration, and the conservation, rehabilitation and
                redevelopment of blighted areas within the City.
                POLICY 1.2: Provide financial assistance to encourage private sector
                investment in the City.
                POLICY 1.3: Promote economic well being of the City by encouraging the
                development and diversification of its economic base.
                POLICY 1.4: Ensure that housing meets all applicable code requirements,
                without imposing unnecessary costs.
                POLICY 1.5: Establish and maintain development standards that support
                housing development while protecting the quality of life.
                POLICY 1.6: Support conversion of mobilehome parks to resident
                ownership upon demonstration of resident support and the ability to
                maintain quality housing.
GOAL 2:         MAINTENANCE           AND        ENHANCEMENT          OF    NEIGHBORHOOD
                QUALITY.
                POLICY 2.1: Develop safeguards against noise and pollution to enhance
                neighborhood quality.
                POLICY 2.2:     Assure residential safety and security.
City of Carson                                83                       2014-2021 Housing Element

               POLICY 2.3: Improve housing and assistance of low and moderate income
               persons and families to obtain homeownership.
               POLICY 2.4: Encourage community involvement in addressing the
               maintenance and improvement of housing stock and neighborhood context.
               POLICY 2.5: Continue to improve streets, drainage, sidewalks, alleys,
               street trees, parks and other public amenities and infrastructure.
               POLICY 2.6: Promote continued maintenance of quality homeownership
               and rental housing by offering loans to encourage preventative maintenance
               and repair.
               POLICY 2.7: Require excellence in the design of housing through the use
               of materials and colors, building treatments, landscaping, open space,
               parking, environmentally sensitive and sustainable building design.
               POLICY 2.8: Address the incidence of foreclosure in the City through
               housing rehabilitation programs and proactive code enforcement.
GOAL 3:        T H E C I T Y S H A L L S E E K T O P RO V I D E A N A D E Q U A T E
               S U P P L Y O F H O U S I N G FO R A L L E C O N O M I C S EG M E N T S
               OF THE CITY.
               POLICY 3.1: Facilitate and encourage diversity in types, prices, ownership,
               and size of single-family homes, apartments, townhomes, mixed-use housing,
               transit-oriented development, and live-work housing.
               POLICY 3.2: Work to expand the resource of developable land by
               making underutilized land available for development.
               POLICY 3.3: Facilitate a mix of affordability levels in residential projects
               and dispersal of such units to achieve greater integration of affordable
               housing throughout the community.
               POLICY 3.4: Promote the availability of housing which meets the special
               needs of the elderly, homeless, persons with disabilities and large
               families.
               POLICY 3.5: Encourage the development of second units as a source of
               smaller affordable housing units.
               POLICY 3.6:     Promote the development of multifamily housing.
               POLICY 3.7: Encourage residential development along transit corridors and
               in close proximity to employment, transportation and activity centers.
City of Carson                             84                        2014-2021 Housing Element
               POLICY 3.8: Integrate and disperse special needs housing within the
               community and in close proximity to transit and public services.
               POLICY 3.9: Explore continued improvements to the entitlement process to
               streamline and coordinate the processing of development permits, design
               review, and funding of affordable housing projects.
GOAL 4:        PROTECTION         OF    THE    EXISTING     SUPPLY      OF    AFFORDABLE
               HOUSING.
               POLICY 4.1:     Establish funding sources for affordable housing.
               POLICY 4.2: Minimize the permit and city costs for affordable housing
               developments.
               POLICY 4.3: Encourage the preservation of affordable rental units to
               ownership units.
               POLICY 4.4:      Limit the conversion of affordable rental units to ownership
               units.
               POLICY 4.5: Encourage California State University Dominguez Hills to
               build student, faculty and staff housing to meet the needs of their campus.
GOAL 5:        HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES TO ALL PERSONS REGARDLESS OF
               RACE, RELIGION, ETHNICITY, SEX, AGE MARITAL STATUS,
               HOUSEHOLD COMPOSITION, OR OTHER ARBITRARY FACTOR.
               POLICY 5.1: Support the development and enforcement of Federal and
               State anti-discrimination laws.
               POLICY 5.2: Make fair housing information and contact agencies
               available as a part of the City’s Public Information Program.
GOAL 6:        LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTIES
               WITH        COMMON           AREA        OWNERSHIP,             SUCH        AS
               C O N D O M I NI U M S A N D P L A N N E D U N I T D E V E L O P M E N T S .
               POLICY 6.1: Amend existing, and ensure that future, association
               covenant documents address: proper maintenance of individual units as
               well as common areas, collection of assessments, etc.
               POLICY 6.2: Consider assisting the renovation of common areas in
               troubled developments.
City of Carson                             85                        2014-2021 Housing Element

               POLICY 6.3: Consider design solutions to enhance “policing” of troubled
               development (e.g. replacement of solid walls with open fencing, security
               lighting along streets, etc.)
               POLICY 6.4: Educate homeowners about the rehabilitation assistance
               programs through the city.
               POLICY 6.5: Continue to monitor federal, state, and regional programs and
               funding sources designed to improve areas of troubled housing.
               POLICY 6.6: Develop socially minded programs, such as the COPS
               Program, to instill a sense of community in the residents and to advance the
               practice of community policing as an effective strategy to improve public safety.
               POLICY 6.7: Continue to work toward increasing and stabilizing the number
               of owner-occupied units within condominiums and planned unit developments.
GOAL 7:        CONSERVATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND REDUCTION OF
               ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN ALL AREAS OF RESIDENTIAL
               DEVELOPMENT.
               POLICY 7.1:     Educate the public in the area of energy conservation.
               POLICY 7.2:     Promote the use of alternative energy sources.
               POLICY 7.3: Promote financial reimbursement programs for the use of
               energy efficient building products and appliances.
               POLICY 7.4: Promote transit oriented development.
B. Affordable Housing Strategies and Programs
The City has adopted various strategies and programs to support the development of
affordable housing in the community and to implement the housing goals and policies
enumerated above. Table 39 provides information on quantified objectives and past
performance in achieving these objectives. Some of the programs included in Table 39
have been updated to reflect affordable housing objectives for the current planning
period.
The programs included in Table 39 fall into eight categories: Housing Improvement,
Housing Development Assistance, Support of Affordable Housing, Rental Assistance,
Home Ownership Assistance, Fair Housing, Energy Conservation, and Foreclosure
Programs.
City of Carson                              86                        2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                                             Table 39
                               Evaluation of 2007-2014 Affordable Housing Strategies and Programs1
                    Responsible   Funding                                                                                                                    Recommended
     Program                                   Description/Objective(s)                Goals           Timeframe              Accomplishments
                      Agency       Source                                                                                                                         Actions
Housing Improvement
Residential        Housing &      CDBG    Provide financial assistance        Assist 8 households     Annually     Loans and grants were provided for      Age of housing
Rehabilitation     Neighborhood           through loans and grants to         annually                             substantial rehabilitation of owner-    stock and
Program            Development            provide basic housing repairs and                                        occupied single-family dwellings. From  community demand
(Neighborhood      Division               remedy code violations. (Single-                                         2010-2012, the program assisted 134     justify continuation
Pride Program)                           family homes as well as                                                  housing units (70 single-family homes   of program.
                                          mobilehomes are eligible.)                                               and 64 mobilehomes).
Code               Code           City    Code Enforcement Division           Respond to 1,000        Annually     The City continued an ongoing effort    Continue program
Enforcement        Enforcement    General responds to complaints of           complaints annually                  to combat the incidence of blighted     to protect health,
Program           and Building & Fund    violations of City’s property                                            and otherwise substandard housing       safety, and welfare
                   Safety                 maintenance codes by issuing                                             through a combination of efforts        of residents.
                   Divisions              notices to property owners to                                            including enforcement, citation, and
                                          bring their properties into                                              referral to the City’s housing
                                          compliance, and provides                                                 rehabilitation programs. The Code
                                          followup inspections. Building &                                         Enforcement Division has responded
                                          Safety Division performs same                                            to approximately 2,000 complaints to
                                          function relative to the City’s                                          assure the public’s health, safety, and
                                          building codes.                                                          welfare.
Residential        Building &     City    This program, established by City   Approximately 400       Annually     The City continued the ongoing          Continue program
Property Report    Safety         General Ordinance, requires that a RPR      residential inspections              program and processed approximately     to protect health,
(RPR) Program     Division       Fund    be obtained from the City before    per year                             538 residential property reports.       safety, and welfare
                                          the sale, exchange, or transfer of                                                                               of residents.
                                          a previously-occupied residential
                                          property. The report enables the
                                          City to verify that residential
                                          buildings meet certain Zoning
                                          and Building Code requirements
                                          at the time of sale/exchange/
                                          transfer.
Foreclosure        Building &     City    The program provides the City       Approximately 260       Initiated in N/A (Program initiated in 2013)         Initiate this
Registration       Safety         General with the authority to assess        residential properties  2013,                                                program starting in
Program           Division       Fund    penalties for irresponsible         per year                Ongoing                                              2013 and
                                          property owners of foreclosed                               program                                              implement on-
                                          properties and provides financial                           thereafter                                           going thereafter.
                                          resources to track and maintain
                                          vacant properties.
Housing Improvement
(continued)
    1
       Indicates New Program
       Indicates Continued Program
       Indicates Discontinued Program
    City of Carson                                                                 87                                                    2014-2021 Housing Element

                  Responsible   Funding                                                                                                                  Recommended
     Program                                   Description/Objective(s)                Goals         Timeframe            Accomplishments
                     Agency      Source                                                                                                                      Actions
Residential         Public      City      Offers a range of neighborhood     Increase the numbers   Contacts   Currently 200 active neighborhood       Continue program
Neighborhood        Safety      General   safety programs through the        of block captains and  with block watch groups and block captains         to protect health,
Safety Program     Division    Fund      Public Safety Division including   neighborhood watch     captains   citywide. The Division continues to     safety, and welfare
                    and Los               neighborhood watch, property       groups, and their      and        offer the following services:           of residents.
                    Angeles               identification, community forums,  involvement in their   neighborho Neighborhood/Business/Park Watch;
                    County                residential security survey, crime communities            od watch   Disaster Preparedness; Graffiti
                    Sheriff’s             prevention, and community                                 groups     Abatement; and referrals to other City
                    Department            relations.                                                occur on a programs, including Code
                                                                                                    continuous Enforcement.
                                                                                                    basis
                                                                                                    throughout
                                                                                                    the year
Mobilehome Park     Housing &   City      Protect the affordability of       Approximately 17 units Annually   Loans and grants were provided for      Continue program,
Maintenance         Neighborho  General   mobilehome units through rent      to be assisted through            substantial rehabilitation of owner-    as this serves to
Program            od          Fund      control regulation, and provision  rehabilitation loans              occupied single-family dwellings. From  preserve/maintain
                    Developme             of loan and grant assistance for   annually. Rent                    2010-2012, the program assisted 134     a form of affordable
                    nt Division           mobilehome rehabilitation.         increase applications             housing units (70 single-family homes   housing.
                                                                             reviewed and                      and 64 mobilehomes).
                                                                             Mobilehome Rental
                                                                             Review Board hearings
                                                                             scheduled as
                                                                             applications are
                                                                             received and
                                                                             processed.
Lead-Based Paint    Housing &   CDBG      Provide testing and abatement to   75 units tested        Annually   This inspection program is conducted    Continue program
Testing and         Neighborho            single-family and mobilehome       annually                          in conjunction with other housing       to protect the
Abatement           od                    units that are acquired or                                           rehabilitation programs in the City.    health, safety and
Program            Developme             rehabilitated.                                                       From 2010-2012, the program             welfare of the
                    nt Division                                                                                assisted 134 housing units (70 single-  residents. Current
                                                                                                               family homes and 64 mobilehomes),       plans are to
                                                                                                               which included some lead-based paint    incorporate
                                                                                                               testing and abatement. One home was     asbestos into the
                                                                                                               abated annually.                        testing and
                                                                                                                                                       abatement
                                                                                                                                                       program.
Housing Development Assistance
Development       Planning      Housing   Development assistance to          Provide as many        Ongoing    The City’s Housing Authority has been   Continue program
Funding for       Division and  Authority promote the development of         affordable units as    program,   designated as the successor agency      to continue to
Multifamily       Housing &     Funds     affordable multifamily housing.    market conditions and  2014-2021  for the Carson Redevelopment            provide and
Housing          Neighborhood                                               funding sources permit            Agency and is currently implementing    expand the supply
                  Development                                                over the eight-year               projects and programs previously        of decent, safe,
                  Division                                                   planning horizon                  managed under the Agency including      sanitary, and
                                                                                                               development assistance for affordable   affordable housing
                                                                                                               multifamily housing. To date, the       to low- and
                                                                                                               program has provided $13.9 million      moderate-income
                                                                                                               subsidy to the Carson City Center       residents.
                                                                                                               Project facilitating the development of
                                                                                                               86 senior units, 42 very low-income
                                                                                                               units, and 43 moderate-income units.
   City of Carson                                                                 88                                                  2014-2021 Housing Element

                   Responsible   Funding                                                                                                                    Recommended
     Program                                    Description/Objective(s)                 Goals        Timeframe            Accomplishments
                      Agency      Source                                                                                                                        Actions
Mixed Use          Planning     City       Require the development of         Continue efforts to     Ongoing   In 2012, the development of a 65-unit    Continue program
Development       Division and General    housing in mixed-use projects      retain qualified        program,  tax credit affordable housing project to to continue to
                   Housing &    Fund and   including the development of       developers and en-      2014-2021 be located at 425 E. Carson Street       provide and
                   Neighborhood Housing    specific plans that feature mixed- courage them to                   was completed. Also in 2012, the City    expand the supply
                   Development  Authority  use as a key component.            incorporate mixed uses            continued to work with developers to     of affordable
                   Division     Funds      Organize special marketing         into development                  complete a planned project at 616        housing in a mixed-
                                           events for the development         proposals, including              Carson Street for 152 dwelling units.    use configuration.
                                           community, post Inventory of       the incorporation of
                                           Vacant Sites on City’s webpage,    affordable housing
                                           and assist with the identification units.
                                           of funding sources.
Housing            Planning     Housing    Encourage the development of       Continue efforts to     Annually  The City assisted in the development     Continue program
Development        Division and Authority  safe and affordable housing.       retain qualified                  of the Carson City Center Project and    to continue to
Through            Housing &    Funds      Development agreements             developers and                    approved a 65-unit tax credit project at provide and
Development        Neighborhood            between developers and local       encourage them to                 425 E. Carson Street.                    expand the supply
Agreements        Development             governments outline the            submit qualified                                                           of decent, safe,
                   Division                regulations and policies           proposals, so as to                                                        and sanitary
                                           governing the development, often   provide sustainable                                                        housing for all
                                           including a requirement for        housing developments                                                       segments of the
                                           affordable housing.                for all segments of the                                                    population.
                                                                              population (including
                                                                              rental and owner-
                                                                              occupied housing).
Assess Use of      Planning     City       Evaluate alternative means to      Identify suitable sites Ongoing   The City has identified sites            Continue program.
City-              Division and General    provide for affordable housing     for housing             program,  comprising approximately $20 million     Assess feasibility of
Owned/Publicly-    Housing &    Fund       development including long-term    development and         2014-2021 in land value and is projected to        retaining a qualified
Owned Land for     Neighborhood            leasing of City-owned or publicly- encourage such                    accommodate 150 housing units.           development
Affordable         Development             owned land for housing             development on those                                                       project on
Housing           Division                development.                       sites.                                                                     Agency/City land
                                                                                                                                                         meeting Agency
                                                                                                                                                         criteria.
Alternative        Planning     State of   Assess a variety of alternative    Identify financing      Ongoing   The City has identified $100 million in  Continue program.
Affordable         Division and California funding mechanisms for the         mechanisms that can     program,  alternative financing solutions and      Pursue and retain
Housing Finance    Housing &    , HUD,     construction of new affordable     facilitate the          2014-2021 investment opportunities. The City will  several qualified
Programs          Neighborhood and        housing.                           development of new                continue to work with developers to      financing sources
                   Development  private                                       affordable housing                obtain TTAC tax credit approval and      and investment
                   Division     sector                                                                          access CDBG funding such as the          partners.
                                funds                                                                           BEGIN program.
    City of Carson                                                                  89                                               2014-2021 Housing Element

                  Responsible   Funding                                                                                                                  Recommended
    Program                                    Description/Objective(s)                Goals         Timeframe             Accomplishments
                     Agency      Source                                                                                                                      Actions
Development of    Planning     Housing    Evaluate, encourage, and           Identify suitable sites Ongoing   The City has identified $15 million for Continue program
Special Needs     Division,    Authority  facilitate the development and     for special needs       program,  developer assistance. The City          so that the needs
Housing          Housing &    Funds      maintenance of special needs       housing development     2014-2021 recently assisted in the development    of these special
                  Neighborhood State of   housing for seniors, the           and provide incentives            of The Gateway at the Carson City       needs housing
                  Development  California homeless, and persons with         and/or identify                   Center Project, which is an 86-unit     communities are
                  Division     , HUD,     physical and developmental         alternative funding               affordable senior building with ground  accommodated.
                               Los        disabilities.                      sources to facilitate             floor retail. The city will continue to
                               Angeles                                       such development                  offer developer assistance to provide
                               County,                                                                         special needs housing as needed.
                               Los
                               Angeles
                               Homeles
                               s
                               Services
                               Authority,
                               private/n
                               on-profit
                               service
                               agencies
Emergency         Planning     HUD/Los    Amend the existing zoning          Provide suitable sites  Ongoing    The City prepared and adopted an       Continue to monitor
Shelters         Division,    Angeles    ordinance to permit emergency      for the development of  program,  amendment to the Zoning Code            the inventory of
                  Housing &    Homeles    shelters by right in the ML zone   emergency shelters      2014-2021 Ordinance to permit emergency           sites appropriate to
                  Neighborhood s          and subject only to the same       within the City to meet           shelters by-right in the ML             accommodate
                  Development  Services   permitting processes and           estimated homeless                (Manufacturing Light) and MH (Heavy     emergency
                  Division,    Authority  regulatory requirements as other   needs                             Industrial) zone districts along with   shelters, and work
                  Building &              uses in the same zone.                                               development and operational             with appropriate
                  Safety                                                                                       standards.                              organizations to
                  Division                                                                                                                             ensure the needs
                                                                                                                                                       of the homeless
                                                                                                                                                       population and
                                                                                                                                                       extremely low-
                                                                                                                                                       income households
                                                                                                                                                       are met.
Transitional and  Planning     HUD/Los    Amend the existing zoning          Ensure that the         Ongoing   The City prepared and adopted an        Continue to monitor
Supportive        Division,    Angeles    ordinance to permit transitional   housing need for all    program,  amendment to the Zoning Code            the inventory of
Housing          Housing &    Homeles    and supportive housing in all      residents is met by     2014-2021 Ordinance to identify transitional and  sites appropriate to
                  Neighborhood s          residential zones within the City, providing opportunities           supportive housing as a residential     accommodate
                  Development  Services   subject only to those              for transitional and              use and permitted in all residential    transitional and
                  Division,    Authority  standards/regulations that apply   supportive housing to             zones, subject only to those            supportive housing,
                  Building &              to other residential land uses of  be accommodated                   standards/regulation that apply to      and work with
                  Safety                  the same type in the same zone.    within the City.                  other residential uses of the same type appropriate
                  Division                                                                                     in the same zone.                       organizations to
                                                                                                                                                       ensure the needs
                                                                                                                                                       of the homeless
                                                                                                                                                       population and
                                                                                                                                                       extremely low-
                                                                                                                                                       income households
                                                                                                                                                       are met.
   City of Carson                                                                  90                                                 2014-2021 Housing Element

                   Responsible    Funding                                                                                                                   Recommended
     Program                                    Description/Objective(s)                 Goals         Timeframe           Accomplishments
                      Agency       Source                                                                                                                        Actions
Housing Development Assistance (continued)
Single Room        Planning      Redevelo   Amend the existing zoning          Ensure that the         Ongoing   The City prepared and adopted an         Continue to monitor
Occupancy (SRO) Division,        pment      ordinance to permit SRO’s in at    housing need for all    program,  amendment to the Zoning Code             the inventory of
Housing           Housing &     Agency     least one non-residential zone as  residents is met by     2014-2021 Ordinance to permit SRO’s in at least    sites appropriate to
                   Neighborhood  Housing    a principally permitted use and as providing opportunities           one zone as a permitted use.             accommodate
                   Development   Set-       a conditionally permitted use in   for transitional and                                                       transitional and
                   Division,     Aside      appropriate residential zones.     supportive housing,                                                        supportive housing,
                   Building &    Funds,                                        including SROs, to be                                                      including SROs,
                   Safety        State of                                      accommodated within                                                        and work with
                   Division      California                                    the City.                                                                  appropriate
                                 , HUD,                                                                                                                   organizations to
                                 and                                                                                                                      ensure the needs
                                 private                                                                                                                  of the homeless
                                 sector                                                                                                                   population and
                                 funds                                                                                                                    extremely low-
                                                                                                                                                          income households
                                                                                                                                                          are met.
Reasonable         Planning      Redevelo   Amend the existing zoning          Provide information in  Ongoing   The City prepared and adopted an         Provide information
Accommodation      Division,     pment      ordinance and adopt a              public places on the    program,  amendment to the Zoning Code to          in public places
(housing for the   Housing &     Agency     “reasonable accommodation”         City’s reasonable       2014-2021 adopt a reasonable accommodation         regarding the
persons with       Neighborhood  Housing    ordinance to facilitate the        accommodation                     ordinance to facilitate the development  reasonable
disabilities)     Development   Set-       development of housing for         ordinance and                     of housing for persons with disabilities accommodation
                   Division,     Aside      persons with disabilities.         Residential                       on March 20, 2012.                       ordinance that
                   Building &    Funds,                                        Rehabilitation Program                                                     expands upon the
                   Safety        State of                                                                                                                 provisions of the
                   Division      California                                                                                                               Residential
                                 , HUD,                                                                                                                   Rehabilitation
                                 and                                                                                                                      Program and make
                                 private                                                                                                                  information on this
                                 sector                                                                                                                   program more
                                 funds                                                                                                                    widely available to
                                                                                                                                                          residents. Commit
                                                                                                                                                          to assisting
                                                                                                                                                          residents in need of
                                                                                                                                                          reasonable
                                                                                                                                                          accommodation
                                                                                                                                                          and offer financial
                                                                                                                                                          assistance through
                                                                                                                                                          Residential
                                                                                                                                                          Rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                                          Program and
                                                                                                                                                          continue to direct
                                                                                                                                                          eligible residents to
                                                                                                                                                          apply for funds.
    City of Carson                                                                   91                                                2014-2021 Housing Element

                    Responsible Funding                                                                                                                   Recommended
     Program                                   Description/Objective(s)                Goals         Timeframe             Accomplishments
                       Agency    Source                                                                                                                        Actions
Housing for        Planning     General   Continue to offer specific         Facilitate the          Ongoing   N/A (Program initiated in 2013)          Initiate this
Persons with       Division,    Fund      regulatory incentives throughout   development of          program,                                           program starting in
Developmental      Housing &              the planning period; apply for     housing for persons     2014-2021                                          2013 and
Disabilities      Neighborhood           funding to encourage               with developmental                                                         implement on-
                   Development            development of units specifically  disabilities                                                               going thereafter.
                                          for persons with developmental
                                          disabilities, when funding is
                                          available; outreach to potential
                                          developers; and initiate a
                                          cooperative outreach program
                                          with the Harbor and South
                                          Central Regional Centers within
                                          1-year of Housing Element
                                          adoption.
Support of Affordable Housing
Preservation of    Housing &    Housing   Monitor at-risk housing, inform    Ensure that existing    Ongoing   150 units within the City have five-year Continue program
At-Risk Housing   Neighborhood Authority tenants of potential conversion to units are not lost and  program,  renewal contracts with the Department    so that units at risk
                   Development  Funds     market rate status, and educate    that existing tenants   2014-2021 of Housing and Urban Development or      are preserved.
                   Division               tenants on potential purchase of   are not displaced.                Section 8 vouchers. There were no
                                          units.                                                               affordable units at-risk of conversion
                                                                                                               during the previous planning period.
Development of     Planning     Housing   Facilitate the development of      Provide as many         Ongoing   The City has provided $13.9 million      Continue program
Multifamily        Division,    Authority multifamily housing. Identify      affordable units as     program,  subsidy to the Carson City Center        to increase the
Housing           Housing &    Funds     potential sites suitable for       market conditions and   2014-2021 Project which includes development of    supply of
                   Neighborhood           multifamily housing development    funding sources permit.           86 senior units, 42 very low-income      multifamily
                   Development            and acquire site(s) or retain                                        units, and 43 moderate-income units.     housing,
                   Division               qualified developer to acquire                                       Currently, there are other multifamily   particularly
                                          site(s).                                                             developments approved or underway        affordable
                                                                                                               on Carson Street, including Via 425, a   multifamily
                                                                                                               65-unit affordable apartment             housing, in the
                                                                                                               community; a mixed-use development       community.
                                                                                                               that will include 150 condominiums on
                                                                                                               the former Avalon Carson mobilehome      The City will
                                                                                                               park; and the Boulevards at South Bay    monitor the
                                                                                                               Specific Plan area, which                effectiveness of the
                                                                                                               accommodates over 1,500 housing          requirement to
                                                                                                               units.                                   obtain a conditional
                                                                                                                                                        use permit for
                                                                                                                                                        multifamily
                                                                                                                                                        housing, and revise
                                                                                                                                                        the requirement, as
                                                                                                                                                        appropriate.
   City of Carson                                                                 92                                                 2014-2021 Housing Element

                    Responsible     Funding                                                                                                                Recommended
     Program                                      Description/Objective(s)                 Goals        Timeframe            Accomplishments
                       Agency        Source                                                                                                                      Actions
Density Bonus      Planning        Not       In the context of affordable        Use strategically to   Ongoing   The City prepared and adopted an       Continue program
Program           Division        applicabl housing, a density bonus permits    foster the development program,  amendment to the Zoning Code           to encourage
                                   e         developers to increase the          of affordable housing  2014-2021 Ordinance to include a Density Bonus   housing developers
                                             square footage or number of         where appropriate                Program on September 20, 2010.         to utilize the
                                             units allowed on a piece of                                                                                 density bonus
                                             property if they agree to restrict                                                                          program in order to
                                             the rents or sales process of a                                                                             increase the supply
                                             certain number of units to                                                                                  of affordable
                                             persons meeting certain income                                                                              housing units within
                                             criteria. It also exempts such                                                                              the City.
                                             projects from the CUP
                                             requirement.
Support of Affordable Housing (continued)
Mobilehome Park    Planning        Private   City and/or Redevelopment           Monitor and evaluate   Ongoing   The City is currently monitoring       Continue
Ownership/Conve    Division,       financing Agency will assess a variety of     conversion application program,  potential conversion of mobilehome     monitoring
rsion Program     Housing &       sources   alternative funding mechanisms      process and provide    2014-2021 parks to condominium uses.             conversion activity
                   Neighborhood              for mobilehome parks that           alternative financial                                                   and providing park
                   Development               convert to condominium use with     analysis.                                                               residents
                   Division                  resident support.                                                                                           information as to
                                                                                                                                                         their options.
Second Unit        Planning        City      City will implement strategies to   Remove constraints on  Ongoing   The City anticipates that 3-5 second   Continue program
Dwelling           Division,       General   encourage the development of        property owners and    program,  dwelling units will be constructed by  to increase supply
                                               nd
Program           Housing &       Fund      2 units in within the City.         assist them with       2014-2021 2014 and has updated its ordinance to  of second dwelling
                   Neighborhood                                                  development of their             address existing second dwelling units units in the City.
                   Development                                                   properties with second           and the maintenance and
                   Division                                                      dwelling units.                  rehabilitation of those units.
Incentives for     Planning        City      The City will prioritize incentives Encourage private      Ongoing   N/A (Program initiated in 2014)        Develop menu of
Large Multifamily  Division,       General   for developers to encourage the     development of         program,                                         incentives and
Units             Housing &       Fund      inclusion of units with three or    housing units with     2014-2021                                        advertise at City
                   Neighborhood              more bedrooms to accommodate        three or more                                                           Hall and the City’s
                   Development               low-income large family             bedrooms that can                                                       website information
                   Division                  households.                         accommodate larger                                                      about available
                                                                                 households.                                                             development
                                                                                                                                                         incentives and any
                                                                                                                                                         available funding
                                                                                                                                                         sources. Initiate
                                                                                                                                                         this program
                                                                                                                                                         starting in 2013
                                                                                                                                                         and implement on-
                                                                                                                                                         going thereafter.
    City of Carson                                                                    93                                                2014-2021 Housing Element

                    Responsible   Funding                                                                                                                     Recommended
     Program                                     Description/Objective(s)                Goals           Timeframe            Accomplishments
                      Agency       Source                                                                                                                          Actions
Rental Assistance
Section 8 Rental   Los Angeles    HUD        Provide rental subsidies to very  Work with LACHA to        Annually  The Los Angeles County Housing           Continue working
Assistance         County                    low income households.            monitor existing                    Authority provides the City              with LACHA to
Program           Housing                                                     vouchers and                        approximately 330-340 Section 8          monitor existing
                   Authority                                                   certificates, and pursue            vouchers annually.                       vouchers and
                   (LACHA)                                                     additional assistance.                                                       certificates to
                                                                                                                                                            preserve housing
                                                                                                                                                            options for very low
                                                                                                                                                            income residents
Rental Assistance  Housing &      Housing    Foster and maintain quality       Provide rental            Annually  The City assists 125 households          Continue providing
(General)         Neighborhood   Authority  affordable rental housing for low subsidies to low and                through this program. Assistance is      rental subsidies to
                   Development    Funds      and very low income households.   very low income                     valued at $206,000 annually.             preserve housing
                   Division                                                    households pursuant to                                                       options and assure
                                                                               affordability covenants                                                      continued decent,
                                                                                                                                                            safe, and sanitary
                                                                                                                                                            housing for low and
                                                                                                                                                            very low income
                                                                                                                                                            households
Homeownership Assistance
First Time Home    Housing &      Redevelo   Provide first time home buyers    N/A                       N/A       The City assisted in closing 19 loans    N/A (Discontinued
Buyers             Neighborhood   pment      with down payment assistance                                          during the previous planning period.     Program)
Program           Development    Agency
                   Division       Housing
                                  Set-
                                  Aside
                                  Funds
Homeownership Assistance (continued)
Mortgage Credit    California     State of   Offers first time home buyers a   Sustain affordable        Annually   The City currently provides             Continue program
Certificate        Housing        California Federal tax credit, reducing the  home ownership                      information on the Mortgage Credit       to support home
Program           Finance        Housing    amount of Federal taxes to be     opportunities in the City           Certificate Program at City Hall, and is ownership
                   Agency         Bond       paid, thus assisting those home   of Carson.                          involved with ongoing coordination       opportunities for
                                  Funds      buyers to qualify for a mortgage                                      with lenders to assist first-time home   low and moderate
                                             loan.                                                                 buyers.                                  income households
                                                                                                                                                            within the City.
Fair Housing
Discrimination     Housing        CDBG       Preserve fair housing practices   Handle/investi-gate       Annually   The City processed and assisted in      Continue program
Investigation,     Rights Center,            through the investigation of      75complaints annually               addressing approximately 240             to promote and
Tenant/            under contract            complaints of discrimination in                                       complaints during the previous           maintain fair
Landlord           with Housing              rental and for-sale housing. Also                                     planning period.                         housing
Mediation, and     &                         provides dispute resolution                                                                                    opportunities within
Legal Services     Neighborhood              services in tenant/landlord                                                                                    the City.
Assistance        Development               matters, and legal representation
                   Division                  where necessary.
    City of Carson                                                                  94                                                  2014-2021 Housing Element

                    Responsible   Funding                                                                                                                Recommended
     Program                                    Description/Objective(s)                Goals        Timeframe            Accomplishments
                       Agency     Source                                                                                                                     Actions
Energy Conservation
Energy              Planning     Los        Encourage use of, and support     Facilitate energy      Ongoing   The City continues to support the       Continue and
Conservation       Division,    Angeles    and assist in the publicizing of, conservation in        program,  ongoing energy conservation             expand program s
                    Housing &    County,    energy-saving programs provided   housing development    2014-2021 programs from Southern California       to promote green
                    Neighborhood Edison     by the utility companies.                                          Edison, Southern California Gas         housing
                    Development  Internatio                                                                    Company, and the South Bay              development.
                    Division     nal,                                                                          Environmental Services Center by
                                 Southern                                                                      providing information to help residents
                                 California                                                                    take advantage of energy saving
                                 Gas                                                                           programs. The Gateway, a senior
                                 Compan                                                                        housing project at Carson City Center,
                                 y                                                                             was developed as a “green” housing
                                                                                                               project and integrates energy saving
                                                                                                               design standards.
Foreclosure Programs
Foreclosure Crisis  Housing &     Private   Refer residents dealing with a    Prevent loss of        Ongoing   Approximately 27 families were          Continue program
Program            Neighborhood sector/no  mortgage crisis to entities which homeowners’            program,  assisted under this program from the    of assisting
                    Development  n-profit   provide pre-foreclosure services  residences through     2014-2021 period 2010-2012.                       homeowners to
                    Division     sources    and post-foreclosure activity     foreclosure processes.                                                   prevent mortgage
                                                                                                                                                       defaults by
                                                                                                                                                       providing referrals
                                                                                                                                                       to counseling and
                                                                                                                                                       education services
                                                                                                                                                       as appropriate.
Neighborhood        Housing &    HUD,       Stem neighborhood decline         Complete acquisition,  Ongoing   Approximately 20 homes were             Implement program
Stabilization       Neighborhood State of   resulting from foreclosures by    rehabilitation, and    program,  rehabilitate under this program from    of acquisition,
Program            Development  California purchasing, rehabilitating, and   resale of 3-5 homes to 2014-2021 the period 2010-2012.                   rehabilitation, and
                    Division     (HCD)      reselling abandoned foreclosed    moderate income                                                          resale to sustain
                                            residential properties            families.                                                                the viability of
                                                                                                                                                       residential
                                                                                                                                                       neighborhoods.
Sites Inventory Programs
    City of Carson                                                                 95                                               2014-2021 Housing Element

                   Responsible Funding                                                                                                           Recommended
     Program                                Description/Objective(s)                Goals         Timeframe          Accomplishments
                      Agency    Source                                                                                                                Actions
Sites Inventory    Planning    General Provide appropriate land use        Provide adequate sites Ongoing   N/A (Program initiated in 2014)    Initiate this
Monitoring         Division    Fund    designations/classifications and    to accommodate the     program,                                     program starting in
Program                               maintain an inventory of suitable   City’s RHNA and        2014-2021                                    2014 and
                                       sites for residential development.  affordable housing                                                  implement on-
                                       Develop and implement a formal      goals.                                                              going thereafter.
                                       ongoing (project-by-project)
                                       evaluation procedure pursuant to
                                       Government Code Section
                                       56863. Should an approval of
                                       development result in a reduction
                                       of capacity or assumed
                                       affordability below the residential
                                       capacity needed to accommodate
                                       the remaining need for lower-
                                       income households of 710 units,
                                       the City will identify and zone
                                       sufficient sites to accommodate
                                       the shortfall. Make the vacant
                                       residential sites inventory
                                       available on the City’s website to
                                       non-profit and for-profit housing
                                       developers.
    City of Carson                                                              96                                              2014-2021 Housing Element

C. Affordable Housing Implementation Strategies
The following provides more detailed explanations of the various affordable housing
programs and strategies included in Table 39. Many of these programs are programs that
are being continued from the prior planning period while other programs have been newly
created to respond to new housing needs and to new State housing element law
requirements.
Housing Improvement
1.       Residential Rehabilitation Program
         The Program is targeted to low and moderate income homeowners. Financial and
         technical assistance is provided to correct code violations and provide for basic
         housing repairs. Financial assistance is provided in the form of loans to homeowners.
         The loans are deferred second mortgages with 3 percent deferred interest, due upon
         sale of the property. The program is targeted to specific neighborhoods in need of
         neighborhood revitalization. The goal is to rehabilitate approximately 8 homes
         annually.
2.       Code Enforcement Program
         The City’s Property Maintenance Program provides inspections and property owner
         contact in order to ensure compliance with the property maintenance requirements
         within the City. This Program is intended to address conditions of physical blight
         resulting from violations of property maintenance regulations.
3.       Residential Property Report (RPR) Program
         A Residential Property Report (RPR) is required to be obtained from the City
         before the sale, exchange, or transfer of previously occupied residential property.
         The report is based on an inspection that must be performed by the City’s
         Building and Safety Division before the property is transferred. The report
         protects both the buyer and seller and allows the City to verify that residential
         buildings meet certain zoning and building code requirements at time of sale.
         Some transfers of property are exempt from these requirements.
4.       Foreclosure Registration Program
         Residential foreclosure rates are forecast to continue at high levels through 2016.
         In addition, many property owners have abandoned these foreclosed properties
         and have contributed to the deterioration of neighborhoods. In order to protect
         neighborhoods from blight resulting from inadequate maintenance and security of
         foreclosed properties, a number of California cities are requiring owners to register
City of Carson                                      97                 2014-2021 Housing Element

         with the city until the property is sold. The City of Carson has established the
         Foreclosure Registration Program (FRP) in order to take preventative measures in
         future blight management and code violations. The program provides the City with
         the authority to assess penalties for irresponsible property owners and provides
         financial resources to track and maintain vacant properties. The FRP charges a
         registration fee of approximately $450 per parcel to cover potential costs of
         remediation. Upon transfer of the property, the deposit funds are returned unless
         fines were incurred by the property owner.
5.       Residential Neighborhood Safety Program
         The City’s Public Safety Department offers a range of neighborhood safety
         programs including business and residential neighborhood watch programs,
         disaster preparedness resources, and a graffiti abatement program.
6.       Mobile Home Park Maintenance Program
         This program provides protection for mobile home park tenants. There are
         currently 2,412 mobile home park spaces in the City. Mobile home parks
         constitute a significant proportion of the low- and moderate-income housing in
         the City. The City of Carson has rent control for mobile home spaces only, and
         the City’s rent control ordinance is administered by a board appointed by the City
         Council.
7.       Lead Based Paint Testing and Abatement Program
         The Lead Based Paint Testing and Abatement Program provides testing for lead
         base paint for housing and mobile home structures that are acquired or
         rehabilitated with the use of HUD funds.
Housing Development Assistance
8.       Development Funding for Multifamily Housing
         The City’s Housing Authority provides development assistance to promote the
         development of affordable multifamily housing. This assistance can take the form
         of direct subsidies provided to affordable housing developers, provision of
         infrastructure, and/or the write-down of land costs.
9.       Mixed-Use Development
         This program is intended to encourage the development of mixed-use projects in
         the City, including the development of specific plans that requires housing as a
         key component of the proposed development. Specifically, the program includes
         organizing special marketing events for the development community, posting the
City of Carson                                     98              2014-2021 Housing Element

         Inventory of Vacant Sites on the City’s website, and assisting with the
         identification of funding resources.
10.      Housing Development Through Development Agreements
         Development Agreements are used by the City to lessen the unpredictability of
         the project review and entitlement process by outlining the regulations and
         development policies that will be imposed on a particular housing project,
         including affordable housing projects, within a binding Development Agreement.
11.      Asses Use of City-Owned/Publicly-Owned Land for Affordable Housing
         Where practicable, the City offers publicly owned land for the purposes of
         assisting in the construction of affordable housing.
12.      Alternative Affordable Housing Finance Programs
         There are a number of housing finance programs that are available to assist in
         the production of affordable housing, including state and federal programs. This
         program is designed to identify those programs which are suitable for the type of
         housing to be constructed and to provide assistance in securing and utilizing
         these financing resources.
13.      Development of Special Needs Housing
         Special needs housing, including housing for the elderly, extremely low/very low-
         income residents, and persons with disabilities are a priority for the City. As
         such, the City offers guidance to housing developers on the needs of these
         groups and suggests ways in which proposed housing projects can
         accommodate their needs.
         In regards to the need of the homeless, such programs serving the City of Carson
         are administered by the Los Angeles County Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA).
         LAHSA is a joint powers authority created by the City and the County of Los Angeles for
         the purpose of planning, coordinating, and managing resources for homeless
         programs. LAHSA is the lead agency for developing a Continuum of Care (COC)
         strategy for the region to meet the needs for homeless persons for emergency shelters
         and to provide services and housing to transition homeless from emergency housing to
         transitional and permanent housing. For a variety of services, Los Angeles County is
         divided into eight Service Planning Areas (SPAs). LAHSA utilizes these SPAs in
         planning, coordinating, and managing resources for homeless programs. The City of
         Carson is located in SPA 8—South Bay.
City of Carson                                      99                 2014-2021 Housing Element

14.      Emergency Shelters
         The City prepared and adopted an amendment to the Zoning Code Ordinance to
         permit emergency shelters by-right in the ML (Manufacturing Light) and MH
         (Heavy Industrial) zone districts along with development and operational
         standards. This program commits the City to continue to monitor the inventory of
         sites appropriate to accommodate emergency shelters, and work with
         appropriate organizations to ensure the needs of the homeless population and
         extremely low-income households are met.
15.      Transitional and Supportive Housing
         The City prepared and adopted an amendment to the Zoning Code Ordinance to
         identify transitional and supportive housing as a residential use and permitted in
         all residential zones, subject only to those standards/regulation that apply to
         other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. This program commits
         the City to continue to monitor the inventory of sites appropriate to accommodate
         emergency shelters, and work with appropriate organizations to ensure the
         needs of the homeless population and extremely low-income households are
         met.
16.      Single-Room Occupancy Units
         The City prepared and adopted an amendment to the Zoning Code Ordinance to
         permit SRO’s in at least one zone as a permitted use. This program commits the
         City to continue to monitor the inventory of sites appropriate to accommodate
         emergency shelters, and work with appropriate organizations to ensure the
         needs of the homeless population and extremely low-income households are
         met.
17.      Reasonable Accommodation
         The City prepared and adopted an amendment to the Zoning Code to adopt a
         reasonable accommodation ordinance to facilitate the development of housing
         for persons with disabilities on March 20, 2012. This program commits the City to
         provide information in public places regarding the reasonable accommodation
         ordinance that expands upon the provisions of the Residential Rehabilitation
         Program and make information on this program more widely available to
         residents. The program commits the City to assisting residents in need of
         reasonable accommodation and offer financial assistance through the
         Residential Rehabilitation Program by directing eligible residents to apply for
         funds.
City of Carson                                   100                2014-2021 Housing Element

18.      Housing for Persons with Developmental Disabilities
         The housing needs of persons with developmental disabilities are typically not
         addressed by Title 24 Regulations, and requires in addition to basic affordability,
         slight modifications to existing units, and in some instances, a varying range of
         supportive housing facilities. To accommodate residents with developmental
         disabilities, the City will seek State and Federal monies, as funding becomes
         available, in support of housing construction and rehabilitation targeted for
         persons with developmental disabilities. Carson will also provide regulatory
         incentives, such as expedited permit processing, and fee waivers and deferrals,
         to projects targeted for persons with developmental disabilities. To further
         facilitate the development of units to accommodate persons with developmental
         disabilities, the City shall reach out annually to developers of supportive housing
         to encourage development of projects targeted for special needs groups. Finally,
         as housing is developed or identified, Carson will work with the Harbor and South
         Central Los Angeles Regional Centers to implement an outreach program
         informing families within the City of housing and services available for persons
         with developmental disabilities. Information will be made available on the City’s
         website.
Support of Affordable Housing
19.      Preservation of At-Risk Housing
         The City has established a program to monitor affordable housing units assisted
         by the Housing Authority that are at risk of converting to market rate. This
         program will be expanded to serve as an early warning system to monitor all at
         risk units in the City. Owners of such units will be contacted to assess the
         owner’s intent to prepay a federally-assisted mortgage or to renew or opt out of
         project-based Section 8 contracts. The owners will be encouraged to consider
         renewal of HUD Section 8 contracts. Owners who want to opt-out of a Section 8
         contract, prepay a HUD subsidized mortgage or sell their property upon the
         expiration of the rental subsidy will be encouraged to provide 18-24 months
         advanced notice to tenants. Through the program, tenants will be informed of the
         potential conversion of their units to market rate, and they will be educated on the
         potential tenant purchase of units.
20.       Development of Multifamily Housing
         The City of Carson Housing Authority assists with the development of new
         multifamily rental housing. These units are targeted to families earning up to 50
         percent of the area median income, adjusted for family size. Sites for new
         construction of affordable multifamily housing will be considered based on the
         development and financing feasibility of multifamily housing affordable to
City of Carson                                    101                2014-2021 Housing Element

         households at targeted income levels consistent with the Affordable Housing
         Strategy. The Agency will provide financial assistance for new multifamily rental
         housing construction not to exceed the amount of the affordability gap remaining
         after all available leverage sources of non-local subsidies have been exhausted.
         The City of Carson currently requires the approval of a conditional use permit for
         multifamily housing in the City. In the previous Housing Element, the City
         proposed to amend its Zoning Code to exempt all multifamily residential projects
         from the conditional use permit requirement. However, further analysis and
         ongoing development activity has shown that the requirement of a conditional
         use permit on multifamily development projects has not been a constraint on the
         development of housing in the City.
21.      Density Bonus Program
         The City’s Density Bonus Program provides density bonuses to affordable
         housing projects in accordance with State law. It also exempts affordable
         housing projects from the conditional use permit requirement. The City also
         allows deviations from the development standards for projects that contain at
         least 10% affordable or senior units.
22.      Mobile Home Park Ownership/Conversion Program
         The City has established policies protecting the supply of affordable housing,
         including limiting the conversion of mobile home park spaces to ownership
         spaces and providing for the protection of mobile home park tenants since mobile
         home parks constitute a significant portion of the low- and moderate-income
         housing in the City. As such, the City has established a program to address
         mobile home park closures or conversions and to assist mobile home park
         owners in finding alternative funding mechanisms to prevent closure or
         conversion.
23.      Second Dwelling Unit Program
         Under this program, the City will inform eligible property owners through updated
         brochures and posting of information on the City's website of opportunities to
         develop second-units and the City’s development requirements for these units.
         The overall strategy to encourage this type of residential development in the City
         includes the following elements:
         Commit to specific incentives to encourage and facilitate the development of
         second units early enough in the planning period to provide realistic opportunities
         for second-unit development.
         Commit to re-evaluating the requirement for a two-car garage for second units
         that have two bedrooms or exceed 700 square feet in size and amend the Code
         accordingly.
City of Carson                                    102                2014-2021 Housing Element

         Commit to advertising second-unit development opportunities at community and
         senior centers, in community newsletters and local utility bills as well as
         establishing pre-approved design prototypes to encourage and stimulate the
         development of second units.
         Establish an annual monitoring program that will evaluate the program’s
         effectiveness in promoting second-unit development commensurate with the
         City’s regional housing need. If the results of the monitoring indicate the
         development standards are unduly impeding second-unit development, the
         program should commit Carson to take immediate action to amend its second-
         unit ordinance and Housing Element to remove identified constraints and adopt
         more effective incentives.
24.      Incentives for Large Multifamily Units
         It is crucial that affordable units constructed in the City are available for families, as
         well as other special needs groups: however, larger units are often more costly to
         develop. Under this program, the City will prioritize incentives for developers to
         encourage the inclusion of units with three or more bedrooms to accommodate low-
         income, large family households. Incentives may include, but are not limited to: (1)
         Regulatory concessions/waivers; (2) Fee waivers/financial assistance; (3)
         Streamlined entitlement review/approvals; and (4) Technical assistance for
         financing/funding of development projects. Individual projects will be evaluated to
         determine if they qualify for any incentives on a case by case basis.
Rental Assistance
25.      Section 8 Rental Assistance Program
         The Section 8 rental assistance program extends rental subsidies to low income
         families and elderly, which spend more than 30 percent of their income on rent. The
         subsidy represents the difference between the excess of 30 percent of the
         monthly income and the actual rent. Section 8 Vouchers provide for rental
         assistance payments to owners of private market rate units on behalf of very low
         income tenants. Vouchers permit tenants to locate their own housing. This
         Program is administered by the Los Angeles County Housing Authority.
         Approximately 340 Section 8 assisted units are provided in the City. The City’s goal
         will be to maintain current levels of assistance. In addition, the City will encourage
         rental property owners to participate in the program with the Housing Authority.
26.      Rental Assistance (General)
         The City of Carson Housing Authority provides on-going rental subsidies to several
         affordable multi-family housing developments through available Housing Authority
         Funds. The rental subsidies serve to make more units affordable for low-income
         households.
City of Carson                                       103                 2014-2021 Housing Element

Homeownership Assistance
27.      Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) Program
         The MCC Program offers first time homebuyers a federal tax credit. This credit
         reduces the amount of federal taxes to be paid, thus assisting first-time
         homebuyers to qualify for a mortgage loan allowing a lender to reduce the
         housing expense ratio by the amount of tax savings.
Fair Housing
28.      Fair Housing Services Program
         Fair Housing services are provided to the residents of the City of Carson by the
         Housing Rights Center. The City funds an annual contract for the Housing Rights
         Center to provide a variety of fair housing services including: annual housing
         audits, fair housing workshops for property managers, owners and tenants
         education, fair housing outreach, and enforcement of housing complaints within
         the Civil Rights (Federal and State) laws and tenant dispute resolution. Services
         will be provided to more than 75 persons annually. This program serves to meet
         a City housing goal to support the enforcement of fair housing laws and services
         to affirmatively further fair housing within the City.
Energy Conservation
29.      Energy Conservation Program
         The City’s Energy Conservation Program is described in Chapter II of the
         element. Many of the energy conservation programs are provided through
         Southern California Edison and the Southern California Gas Company.
         However, the City has partnered with the South Bay Environmental Services
         Center (SBESC) to keep citizens informed on the availability of energy saving
         resources and information. The City has also established a Green Task Force
         (GTF) that provides policy direction and input on energy conservation techniques
         and programs.
Foreclosure Programs
30.      Foreclosure Crisis Program
         The City’s Foreclosure Crisis Program provides pre-foreclosure services and
         post-foreclosure services to assist residents in need of referrals for counseling
         and direction. The program also includes assistance with the rehabilitation and
City of Carson                                      104            2014-2021 Housing Element

         resale of blighted properties that are in foreclosure to qualifying moderate-
         income families.
31.      Neighborhood Stabilization Program
         This program is designed to stem neighborhood decline resulting from
         foreclosures by purchasing, rehabilitating, and re-selling abandoned, foreclosed
         residential properties.
Sites Inventory Programs
32.      Sites Inventory Monitoring Program
         As shown in Appendix C, the City has numerous parcels of vacant land
         appropriately zoned to accommodate the 2014-2021 RHNA, which includes the
         Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan. The adopted Specific Plan can
         accommodate 1,550 new dwelling units at densities between 35 to 60 dwelling
         units per acre. To encourage and facilitate the development of a variety of housing
         types, the City offers development incentives including, but not limited to: (1)
         Regulatory concessions/waivers; (2) Fee waivers/financial assistance; (3)
         Streamlined entitlement review/approvals; (4) Technical assistance for
         financing/funding of development projects. Assistance is prioritized for
         developments that provide units for special needs groups including: large
         households, the elderly, individuals with disabilities, including those with
         developmental disabilities, and extremely low income residents. During the
         planning period the City will provide information on vacant sites identified in the
         Housing Element and any additional areas of the City to interested developers. The
         City will monitor the supply of vacant sites annually and evaluate whether the
         incentives described above are providing the necessary catalyst to ensure
         development is occurring consistent with the Specific Plan’s buildout projections
         and the City’s affordable housing goals.
         To ensure adequate sites are available throughout the planning period to meet the
         City’s RHNA, the City will continue to annually update an inventory that details the
         amount, type, and size of vacant and underutilized parcels to assist developers in
         identifying land suitable for residential development and that also details the
         number of extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income units constructed
         annually. If the inventory indicates a shortage of available sites, the City shall
         rezone sufficient sites to accommodate the City’s RHNA.
         To ensure sufficient residential capacity is maintained to accommodate the RHNA
         need, the City will develop and implement a formal ongoing (project-by-project)
         evaluation procedure pursuant to Government Code Section 56863. Should an
         approval of development result in a reduction of capacity or assumed affordability
         below the residential capacity needed to accommodate the remaining need for
         lower-income households of 710 units, the City will identify and zone sufficient sites
City of Carson                                    105                 2014-2021 Housing Element

         to accommodate the shortfall.
         As noted in Table 39, the City continues to carry out the Residential Rehabilitation
         is one of the City’s primary housing improvement programs. It provides financial
         assistance through loans and grants and technical assistance to repair code
         violations and provide basic housing repairs. The City has completed
         approximately 134 loans and grants over the period 2010-2012. The City’s Code
         Enforcement Program works in conjunction with the Residential Rehabilitation
         Program in that the Building and Safety Division responds to complaints on City
         code violations and provides inspections and cites property owners (2,000 cases
         annually) to bring them into compliance with the City’s codes. Funding through the
         Residential Rehabilitation Program can be used to correct code violations.
         There are a number of Housing Development programs offered by the City. The
         City’s Housing Authority provides development assistance through to promote the
         development of affordable multifamily housing. The Housing Authority has provided
         approximately $13.9 million through development agreements to the Carson City
         Center. An additional $15 million has been made available in financial assistance
         through development agreements the City has in place with local developers for the
         required affordable housing component. Another $15 million has been provided for
         developer assistance to facilitate the development and maintenance of special
         needs housing for seniors, the homeless and persons with disabilities. The City has
         approximately $20 million in land inventory available for affordable housing. This
         program assesses the feasibility of qualified development projects, based on City of
         Carson’s criteria, for the provision of Housing Authority/City owned land to support
         projects in producing affordable housing units.
         The City supports affordable housing programs and provides rental assistance in
         support of affordable housing. Through the Preservation of At-Risk Housing
         Program the City monitors at-risk housing, informs tenants of potential conversion
         to market rate, and educates tenants on potential tenant purchase of units. Through
         the Los Angeles County Housing Authority, the City has approximately 340 Section
         8 rental assisted units providing affordable housing to low income families. The City
         has also provided approximately $230,000 annually in funds for rental assistance.
         This provides assistance for about 125 households to make housing affordable.
         In an effort to promote fair housing within the City annual funding is provided in
         support of fair housing services. Annual funding is provided for contracted fair
         housing services including: dispute resolution services, legal advice and
         representation on tenant/landlord matters, as well as other civil and consumer
         issues.
City of Carson                                     106                2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                             Table 40
                                                        City of Carson
                                       2014 - 2021 Quantified Objectives
Housing Goals                                                               2014 to 2021                         Objective
                                                                         Number of Units                           Units
                                                                              Allocated
New Construction****
Extremely Low Income                                                                0                               223
     Very Low Income                                                              447*                              224
     Low Income                                                                    263                              263
     Moderate Income                                                               280                              280
     Above Moderate Income                                                         708                              708
Total Units                                                                       1,698                            1,698
Rehabilitation**
     Very Low Income                                                                                                 50
     Low Income                                                                                                      50
     Moderate Income                                                                                                100
     Above Moderate Income                                                                                            --
Total Units                                                                                                         200
Conservation***
     Very Low Income                                                                                                  --
     Low Income                                                                                                     265
     Moderate Income                                                                                                  --
     Above Moderate Income                                                                                            --
Total Units                                                                                                         265
Source: SCAG Regional Housing Needs Assessment, 2012. City of Carson Community Development Department
* Includes Very Low and Extremely Low Income; RHNA does not include separate Extremely Low Income category
** Includes rehabilitation of mobile home units and is consistent with the City’s Residential Rehabilitation Program and Mobilehome
  Park Maintenance Program annual goals for the eight-year planning period.
*** Includes the number of affordable units at-risk of conversion from 2014-2024 as outlined in Appendix F.
**** Construction objectives represent the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA allocation.
City of Carson                                                          107                        2014-2021 Housing Element

City of Carson 108 2014-2021 Housing Elemen
                     APPENDIX A
               Public Outreach Materials
City of Carson        APPENDIX A         2014-2021 Housing Element
City of Carson APPENDIX A 2014-2021 Housing Elemen
City of Carson
Housing Element
The City of Carson is in the process of
updating the State-required Housing Element.
Please join us at the upcoming
community workshop event:
Workshop date:
     Tuesday, April 23,2013
     6:30 pm
The event will be held at:
     Carson City Hall
     701 E Carson Street
     Carson, CA 90745
Included in this workshop will be:
     • Purpose and intent of the Housing Element
     • Why and how often the Housing Element is updated
     • The contents of the Housing Element
     • The process for adoption
     • Beneﬁts of Housing Element certiﬁcation
If you have any questions or would like additional information, please contact
Zak Gonzalez II at (310) 952-1700, ext: 1301 or visit the Community
Development Department located in Carson City Hall.

 
                                                    CITY OF CARSON
                                             NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
                                          THE 2014-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that a public hearing will be held before the City of Carson City Council for the purpose of
considering adoption of the 2014-2021 Housing Element. The State of California requires that all local governments
prepare and update housing elements every eight years to identify strategies to conserve, rehabilitate and provide housing
to meet the existing and projected needs of the community.
State law requires that cities adequately plan to meet their share of regional housing as determined by the Southern
California Association of Governments (SCAG). SCAG has determined the projected housing need to be 1,698 units for
the 2014-2021 planning period. The current Housing Element, which was prepared in 2010, has been updated in
accordance with Article 10.6, Sections 65580-65589.5 of the California Government Code. This includes, but not limited
to, updating the population and housing characteristics to reflect current conditions, including the housing needs estimates
for the City of Carson presented in SCAG’s Regional Housing Needs Assessment for the 2014-2021 planning period;
examining the current inventory of potential housing sites to determine the continued availability and appropriateness of
these sites, particularly in terms of the type and density of housing to be developed; updating the Housing Plan to cover
the 2014-2021 planning period; and reexamining and updating constraints on the production, maintenance, and
affordability of housing to reflect current conditions. Under new guidelines prepared by the California Department of
Housing and Community Development (HCD), the City of Carson has chosen to utilize HCD’s Streamlined Update. For
many local governments, such as Carson, much of the information in housing elements is found to be in compliance with
the statute for the previous planning period, is still current, and/or conditions and circumstances have not significantly
changed since the last update.
Also to be considered in conjunction with the subject matter will be an Addendum to the Initial Study/Negative
Declaration (IS/ND) of the 2006-2014 Housing Element in order to address the environmental impacts of the adoption of
the 2014-2021 Housing Element. According to Section 15164(a) of the CEQA Guidelines, the lead agency or responsible
agency shall prepare an Addendum to a previously certified Environmental Impact Report (EIR) or IS/ND if some
changes or additions are necessary but none of the conditions described in Section 15162 calling for preparation of a
subsequent EIR or IS/ND have occurred. The Addendum addresses the environmental effects associated only with
refinements/enhancements to the Housing Element update that have occurred since the adoption of the 2006-2014
Housing Element adoption in September 21, 2010. The conclusions of the analysis in the Addendum remain consistent
with those made in the previous IS/ND.
         WHEN:             Tuesday, October 15, 2013
         TIME:             6:00 PM
         WHERE:            City Hall Council Chambers
                           701 East Carson Street
                           Carson, CA 90745
PERSONS INTERESTED IN THIS MATTER are invited to attend this hearing to express their opinion on the above
matter. Written comments may also be submitted to the City of Carson Planning Division, 701 East Carson Street,
Carson, CA 90745. Copies of all relevant material are available to the general public for review in the Community
Development Department – Planning Division at City Hall, 701 East Carson Street, Carson, CA 90745, or by telephone
(310) 952-1700.
If a challenge is made by any party in court from actions arising out of the public meeting and the public hearing, you may
be limited to raising only those issues you or someone else raised at the public hearing described in this notice, or in
written correspondence delivered to the City Council at, or prior to, the public hearing.
************************************************************************

 
                             APPENDIX B
               State Licensed Residential Care Facilities
City of Carson               APPENDIX B          2014-2021 Housing Element
City of Carson APPENDIX B 2014-2021 Housing Elemen
                                                           Licensed Residential Care Facilities- City of Carson
Facility # Capacity License Status                   Facility Name                                Street Address   City   State Zipcode     Telephone #
 198601621         4 Pending       246 VAN ZANT HOME                                   455 E. 246TH PLACE        CARSON CA         90745 (310) 518-3372
 198600605         4 Licensed      ABAD GROUP HOME                                     23602 CAROLDALE AVE.      CARSON CA         90745 (310) 325-4651
 191600217         6 Licensed      ACOSTA FAMILY HOME                                  1540 CYRENE DRIVE         CARSON CA         90746 (310) 604-8740
 191601301         6 Licensed      ACOSTA FAMILY HOME II                               1811 ABILA STREET         CARSON CA         90745 (310) 513-9966
 198601539         4 Licensed      ANCHOR HOME CARE                                    22908 ANCHOR AVE.         CARSON CA         90745 (310) 989-8017
 198601080         6 Licensed      ANGELIC CARE HOME                                   1138 TURMONT STREET       CARSON CA         90746 (310) 567-9285
 198601118         6 Licensed      AUSTIN HOUSE, THE                                   21206 DOLORES STREET      CARSON CA         90745 (310) 952-9364
 198601391         6 Licensed      BLESSARY'S HOME INC.                                19515 DUNBROOKE AVE.      CARSON CA         90746 (909) 957-8868
 198601179         6 Licensed      CAROLDALE HOME                                      23453 CAROLDALE AVE       CARSON CA         90745 (310) 834-2106
 198202247         6 Licensed      CATO'S QUALITY CARE FACILITY                        1024 EAST HELMICK STREET  CARSON CA         90746 (310) 638-8185
 198601597         4 Pending       CEN FAMILY EXTENSIVE CARE                           17700 EXA CT              CARSON CA         90746 (323) 779-1842
 191600567         6 Licensed      CHANATER FAMILY HOME                                165 E. 232ND PLACE        CARSON CA         90745 (310) 549-6415
 198201550         6 Licensed      EMILY'S HOME                                        359 E. 169TH STREET       CARSON CA         90746 (310) 328-6018
 198201803         6 Licensed      EMILY'S HOME IV                                     19011 EDDINGTON DRIVE     CARSON CA         90746 (310) 378-3669
 198202981         6 Licensed      EMILY'S HOME V                                      19203 CAMPAIGN DRIVE      CARSON CA         90746 (310) 378-3669
 198601622         4 Pending       FARIMAN VAN ZANT HOME                               19209 FARIMAN DRIVE       CARSON CA         90746 (310) 763-9269
 198202955         6 Licensed      FEMA HOME                                           21313 ISLAND AVE.         CARSON CA         90745 (310) 830-0805
 191603371         4 Licensed      FERNANDEZ GUEST HOME                                21413 WATER ST.           CARSON CA         90745 (310) 830-1204
 191671053         6 Licensed      GAMIO GROUP HOME                                    21528 RONAN AVE.          CARSON CA         90745 (310) 834-3918
 198601620         6 Pending       GD HOMES 1                                          23453 CAROLDALE AVENUE    CARSON CA         90745 (714) 422-9263
 198201837         6 Licensed      GRACE CARE CORPORATION                              116 E. 189TH STREET       CARSON CA         90746 (310) 527-0170
 197800725         6 Licensed      GRACE CARE CORPORATION                              317 E. 189TH ST.          CARSON CA         90746 (310) 527-2018
 198201097         6 Licensed      HARRISON'S BOARD & CARE HOMES,INC.                  20108 BELSHAW AVENUE      CARSON CA         90746 (562) 596-2568
 191601075         6 Licensed      HARRISON'S FAMILY HOME ADULT RESIDENTIAL            1617 HELMICK              CARSON CA         90746 (562) 596-2568
 198601343         4 Licensed      HERITAGE HOUSE                                      16317 MCKINLEY AVE        CARSON CA         90746 (310) 902-4893
 198201580         5 Licensed      ISAACS SUPER SUPERVISION                            19202 S. GUNLOCK AVENUE   CARSON CA         90746 (323) 774-3398
 191601019         6 Licensed      JACKSON'S ADULT RESIDENTIAL                         20009 ANNALEE AVENUE      CARSON CA         90746 (310) 639-3467
 198202291         4 Licensed      JADE HOME CARE                                      22133 HANSOM AVENUE       CARSON CA         90745 (310) 513-1806
 191600209         6 Licensed      JOHNIGAN BOARD & CARE                               320 CENTERVIEW DR.        CARSON CA         90746 (310) 324-0515
 198201207         6 Licensed      JONES FAMILY HOME ADULTS                            1773 E. GLADWICK          CARSON CA         90746 (310) 639-4572
 198600586         6 Licensed      KINDWEILER HOME                                     272 EAST 213TH ST.        CARSON CA         90745 (310) 999-8666
 198600302         6 Licensed      LIFESTYLE BOARD AND CARE                            149 EAST 235TH STREET     CARSON CA         90745 (310) 834-9325
 198201863         4 Licensed      LINCOLN HOME IV                                     23018 ARCHIBALD           CARSON CA         90745 (310) 549-1317
 198600504         6 Licensed      LORI'S ADULT RESIDENTIAL                            20024 NORTHWOOD AVENUE    CARSON CA         90746 (310) 637-7902
 191600837         6 Licensed      LOURDES HOME CARE                                   424 W. 228TH STREET       CARSON CA         90745 (310) 518-3526
 198201096         6 Licensed      MEDING'S HOME CARE                                  627 W. 232ND STREET       CARSON CA         90745 (310) 835-8432
 198202562         6 Licensed      MEDING'S HOME CARE II                               123 WEST 220TH STREET     CARSON CA         90745 (310) 830-3286
 191600795         6 Licensed      MERCED'S FAMILY HOME                                1606 E. 220TH ST.         CARSON CA         90745 (213) 835-4330
 198600006         4 Licensed      MILLMONT HOME                                       1118 E. MILLMONT STREET   CARSON CA         90746 (310) 631-1952
 191601177         6 Licensed      MONETA HOME CARE                                    22032 MONETA AVENUE       CARSON CA         90745 (310) 518-5383
 191600687         6 Licensed      NALAS RESIDENTIAL FACILITY                          455 E. 246TH PLACE        CARSON CA         90746 (310) 518-3372
 191601550         6 Licensed      NALAS RESIDENTIAL FACILITY                          19103 ENSLOW DRIVE        CARSON CA         90746 (310) 538-0228
                                                                      Carson Care Facilities 2013                                                       Page 1
                                                    Licensed Residential Care Facilities- City of Carson
191641250   6 Licensed        NALAS RESIDENTIAL FACILITY                        19209 FARIMAN DR.         CARSON CA 90746 (310) 763-9269
198600502  10 Licensed        NEPTUNE HOME                                      22002 NEPTUNE AVENUE      CARSON CA 90745 (310) 834-8059
198600454   6 Licensed        OLIVE'S HOME                                      20020 BROADACRES AVENUE   CARSON CA 90746 (310) 604-6010
191601735 110 Licensed        OLIVIA ISABEL MANOR                               21515 SO. FIGUEROA STREET CARSON CA 90745 (310) 328-5116
198201170   4 Licensed        PEREZ FAM HOME                                    156 W. 234TH STREET       CARSON CA 90745 (310) 834-5199
198201618   6 Licensed        PEREZ FAMILY HOME II                              332 NEILSON STREET        CARSON CA 90745 (310) 320-5430
198201947   6 Licensed        RENTERIA HOME                                     238 WEST 231ST STREET     CARSON CA 90745 (310) 835-3082
191601383   6 Licensed        ROSEWOOD ADULT RESIDENTIAL FACILITY II            20009 ENSLOW DRIVE        CARSON CA 90746 (310) 537-1735
198600994   6 Licensed        RUTH'S HAVENS                                     314 EAST 237TH STREET     CARSON CA 90745 (310) 816-2939
191600793   4 Licensed        SIMPSON FAMILY HOME                               18430 COLTMAN AVE         CARSON CA 90746 (310) 324-8973
191601391   6 Licensed        STEVENS ADULT HOME                                1857 ABBOTTSON            CARSON CA 90746 (310) 637-4344
191670135   6 Licensed        TAYLOR'S RESIDENTIAL CARE                         1037 EAST GLADWICK        CARSON CA 90746 (310) 638-8887
198601025   4 Licensed        TRINITY HOMES                                     17505 HARWICK COURT       CARSON CA 90746 (310) 639-7777
191601557   6 Licensed        WITHERS ADULT RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME               17419 LYSANDER DRIVE      CARSON CA 90746 (310) 635-5957
198202826   6 Licensed        WITHERS ADULT RESIDENTIAL FACILITY #1             841 EAST MEADBROOK STREET CARSON CA 90746 (310) 323-6895
198601296   4 Licensed/PendingYEATIE'S ADULT RESIDENTIAL HOME                   17700 EXA CT              CARSON CA 90746 (323) 779-1842
198203822   6 Licensed        DIMONDALE ADOLESCENT CARE FACILITY                1632 DIMONDALE DRIVE      CARSON CA 90746 (310) 764-5670
198200917   6 Licensed        HARBOR CITY CHILDREN'S FOUNDATION, INC.           24507 MARBELLA AVENUE     CARSON CA 90745 (310) 834-1198
191604301   6 Licensed        OPTIMIST SOUTH BAY GROUP HOME                     20209 TILLMAN AVE         CARSON CA 90746 (310) 537-6028
198206127   6 Licensed        POSITIVE PATH YOUTH DEVELOPMENT CENTER            24825 NEPTUNE AVENUE      CARSON CA 90745 (310) 847-7160
191600883   6 Licensed        T & T HOME FOR BOYS                               19504 TILLMAN AVE.        CARSON CA 90746 (310) 635-2469
191600783   6 Licensed        TURMONT HOME FOR BOYS                             741 E. TURMONT ST.        CARSON CA 90746 (310) 532-5606
198201940   4 Licensed        A & P GUEST HOME                                  1703 EAST ALBREDA STREET  CARSON CA 90745 (310) 872-3023
197607670   5 Licensed        A PARADISE ELDERLY HOME                           178 WEST 231ST STREET     CARSON CA 90745 (310) 876-6917
198601657   6 Pending         ALL HEARTS AND HANDS GUEST HOME                   23518 NAFFA AVE           CARSON CA 90745 (310) 835-5905
197608233   6 Licensed        AMAZING PARADISE HOME CARE                        312 WEST 229TH STREET     CARSON CA 90745 (310) 876-6917
198601641  14 Pending         BAYSIDE GUEST HOME, THE                           138 W. 223RD ST.          CARSON CA 90745 (310) 418-7938
197607844   4 Licensed        CAROLDALE HOME 2                                  23451 CAROLDALE AVENUE    CARSON CA 90745 (310) 834-2106
197800100   6 Licensed        CARSON GUEST HOME                                 22418 CATSKILL AVENUE     CARSON CA 90745 (310) 834-3144
198204950 230 Licensed        CARSON SENIOR ASSISTED LIVING                     345 EAST CARSON STREET    CARSON CA 90745 (310) 830-4010
197606934   6 Licensed        CELEBRITY CARE HOME                               233 W. 234TH STREET       CARSON CA 90745 (310) 830-8366
197608262   6 Pending         FAMILY CARE MANOR II                              211 E. CLARION DRIVE      CARSON CA 90745 (310) 480-6651
198601567   6 Pending         GD HOMES 2                                        23451 CAROLDALE AVE       CARSON CA 90745 (310) 422-9263
197606345   6 Licensed        HARMONY HOME CARE                                 1318 215TH ST             CARSON CA 90745 (310) 549-0218
197607151   6 Licensed        HOME SWEET HOME ASSISTED LIVING                   19304 COSLIN AVENUE       CARSON CA 90746 (310) 869-8009
197606884   6 Licensed        JOTAG HOME CARE                                   105 WEST 225 STREET       CARSON CA 90745 (424) 477-5593
197607674   6 Licensed        M & L GUEST HOME                                  23071 ARCHIBALD AVE.      CARSON CA 90745 (310) 834-1363
198204149   6 Licensed        PLEASANT GUEST HOME                               23042 S. ARCHIBALD AVENUE CARSON CA 90745 (310) 549-0077
197607061   4 Licensed        SEACREST                                          110 E. 229TH PLACE        CARSON CA 90745 (310) 549-1208
198205247   6 Licensed        SOUTH BAY RESIDENTIAL HOME                        430 WEST 214TH STREET     CARSON CA 90745 (310) 533-6068
197606350   6 Licensed        ST. ANTHONY'S CARE HOME                           507 WEST 215TH STREET     CARSON CA 90745 (310) 856-8244
                                                               Carson Care Facilities 2013                                               Page 2
                                           Licensed Residential Care Facilities- City of Carson
198204805 6 Licensed ST. WILLIAMS GUEST HOME                           22023 SOUTH CALLAHAN PLACE CARSON CA 90745 (310) 835-3991
198204659 6 Licensed STAR CARE RESIDENTIAL                             416 EAST 212TH ST.         CARSON CA 90745 (310) 549-5381
198203590 6 Licensed TRADITIONAL CARE MANOR                            211 E. CLARION DRIVE       CARSON CA 90745 (310) 518-7909
191601407 6 Licensed VERGIE'S MANOR                                    553 E. 169TH STREET        CARSON CA 90746 (310) 323-0676
198204584 6 Licensed VILLA ANGELA RESIDENTIAL HOME                     23528 FIGUEROA STREET      CARSON CA 90745 (310) 918-1262
198201821 4 Licensed SOUTH BAY FAMILY HOME                             21821 ARCHIBALD AVENUE     CARSON CA 90745 (310) 320-3630
198201300 6 Licensed TRAVIS SMALL FAMILY HOME                          19809 LEAPWOOD AVENUE      CARSON CA 90746 (310) 538-3468
198201396 2 Licensed UGALDE HOME                                       1458 EAST 215TH STREET     CARSON CA 90745 (310) 952-0491
                                                      Carson Care Facilities 2013                                                Page 3
 
                          APPENDIX C
 List of Vacant Sites Identified by Assessor Parcel Numbers -
                               2013
City of Carson            APPENDIX C          2014-2021 Housing Element
City of Carson APPENDIX C 2014-2021 Housing Elemen
                         General
     APN          Zone    Plan              Address   Acres    Gross Units
                       Designation
 6140003028    CG      MD           742 ALONDRA BLVD     0.75             9
 6140003056    CG      MD           NO ADDRESS           0.30             3
 7336017013    ML-D_RS LD           NO ADDRESS           0.11             1
 7335010904    MU-CS   MU-R         NO ADDRESS           0.17             9
 7335010907    MU-CS   MU-R         NO ADDRESS           4.48         246
 7335011900    MU-CS   MU-R         616 E CARSON ST      0.48           26
 7337011016    MU-CS   MU-R         NO ADDRESS           0.16             8
 7337011900    MU-CS   MU-R         NO ADDRESS           1.70           93
 7337011901    MU-CS   MU-R         NO ADDRESS           0.50           27
 7343011020    MU-CS   MU-R         NO ADDRESS           0.44           24
 7343019900    MU-CS   MU-R         21704 FIGUEROA ST    0.27           14
 7343019901    MU-CS   MU-R         526 W CARSON ST      0.12             6
 7343020902    MU-CS   MU-R         600 W CARSON ST      0.26           14
 7343020903    MU-CS   MU-R         610 W CARSON ST      0.13             7
 7406002039    MU-SB   MU-R         NO ADDRESS           1.05           36
                                    440 E SEPULVEDA
 7406013003                                              0.22             7
               MU-SB   MU-R         BLVD
 7327011900    OS      LD           NO ADDRESS           0.09             1
 7327011905    OS      LD           NO ADDRESS           0.10             1
 7327011906    OS      LD           NO ADDRESS           0.10             1
 7327011907    OS      LD           NO ADDRESS           0.10             1
 7327011908    OS      LD           NO ADDRESS           0.09             1
 7327011909    OS      LD           NO ADDRESS           0.10             1
 7327011910    OS      LD           NO ADDRESS           0.11             1
 7327011911    OS      LD           NO ADDRESS           0.11             1
 7317001030    RA      LD           NO ADDRESS           0.11             1
 7330007906    RA      LD           NO ADDRESS          10.26           89
 7330008902    RA      LD           NO ADDRESS          11.18           97
 7330009903    RA      LD           NO ADDRESS           0.94             8
 7330009913    RA      LD           NO ADDRESS           0.66             5
 7337009033    RA      LD           21414 GRACE AVE      0.46           11
 7337009035    RA      LD           NO ADDRESS           1.09             9
 7343015010    RM-12-D LD           125 W 219TH PL       0.25             3
 7343016087    RM-12-D MD           235 W 220TH ST       0.25             3
 7341014025    RM-18-D HD           NO ADDRESS           0.19             3
 7341012011    RM-25-D HD           279 W 223RD ST       0.38             9
 7335021021    RM-8-D  MD           NO ADDRESS           0.21             1
 7337002009    RM-8-D  LD           NO ADDRESS           0.12             1
City of Carson                    APPENDIX C             2014-2021 Housing Element

                         General
     APN          Zone    Plan              Address    Acres    Gross Units
                       Designation
 6140003057    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.21             1
 7319012011    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.10             1
 7319019011    RS      LD           17707 EXA CT          0.12             1
 7319019012    RS      LD           17701 EXA CT          0.12             1
 7319021018    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.11             1
 7319021019    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.11             1
 7319027031    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.10             1
                                     17610 RAINSBURY
 7319027032                                               0.10             1
               RS                   AVE.
 7319031002    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.10             1
 7319031008    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.10             1
                                     17544 RAINSBURY
 7319031009                                               0.10             1
               RS                   AVE.
 7327008053    RS      LD           21431 S PERRY ST.     0.12             1
 7327008054    RS      LD           21427 S PERRY ST.     0.12             1
 7327008055    RS      LD           21419 S PERRY ST.     0.13             1
 7327008056    RS      LD           21415 S PERRY ST.     0.12             1
 7327008072    RS      LD           21336 ALVAR PL.       0.12             1
 7327008073    RS      LD           21340 ALVAR PL.       0.12             1
 7327008074    RS      LD           21344 ALVAR PL.       0.13             1
 7327008075    RS      LD           21348 ALVAR PL.       0.12             1
 7327008076    RS      LD           21352 ALVAR PL.       0.12             1
 7328007033    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.11             1
 7328007034    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.10             1
 7328009029    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.09             1
 7328010001    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.10             1
 7330014008    RS      LD           339 W 234TH PL        0.11             1
 7332012045    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.09             1
 7334003021    RS      LD           21135 1/2 BOLSA ST    0.96             8
 7334003903    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.14             1
 7336019002    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.10             1
 7336019009    RS      LD           20832 SHEARER AVE.    0.10             1
 7336020002    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.09             1
 7336022029    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.28             2
 7336022035    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.23             1
 7336022075    RS      LD           20808 JAMISON AVE     0.29             2
 7341022027    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.15             1
 7343010032    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.12             1
 7343021035    RS      LD           NO ADDRESS            0.23             2
City of Carson                    APPENDIX C              2014-2021 Housing Element

                           General
     APN           Zone     Plan             Address     Acres     Gross Units
                        Designation
 7404001006    RS       LD           NO ADDRESS             0.09              1
 7404001027    RS       LD           NO ADDRESS             0.10              1
 7404002006    RS       LD           NO ADDRESS             0.10              1
 7404002019    RS       LD           NO ADDRESS             0.10              1
 7404003008    RS       LD           NO ADDRESS             0.10              1
 7404003015    RS       LD           NO ADDRESS             0.10              1
 7404007028    RS       LD           831 E PACIFIC ST       0.10              1
 7404015070    RS       LD           624 E PACIFIC ST       0.15              1
 7404015905    RS       LD           NO ADDRESS             0.14              1
 7404015907    RS       LD           NO ADDRESS             0.14              1
 7406016089    RS       LD           NO ADDRESS             0.14              1
                                                                           836
                                                                    
 7336010013    SP-10                  20330 S Main St      11.72 
 7336010014    SP-10    MU-R         NO ADDRESS            15.13 
 7336010015    SP-10    MU-R         NO ADDRESS            18.69         1,550 
 7336010016    SP-10    MU-R         NO ADDRESS            28.17  (Boulevards 
 7336010017    SP-10    MU-R         NO ADDRESS            27.34  at South Bay 
 7336010018    SP-10    MU-R         NO ADDRESS             8.84       Specific 
 7336010019                                                16.33         Plan)
               SP-10    MU-R         NO ADDRESS
 7336010020    SP-10    MU-R         NO ADDRESS            23.76 
 7336010021    SP-10    MU-R         NO ADDRESS             4.47 
                                                                    
                                                      TOTAL 
                                                      GROSS 
                                                      UNITS               2386
City of Carson                     APPENDIX C               2014-2021 Housing Element

City of Carson APPENDIX D 2014-2021 Housing Elemen
                         APPENDIX D
    Manufacturing Light (ML) and Manufacturing Heavy (MH)
                         Zone Districts
City of Carson            APPENDIX D        2014-2021 Housing Element
City of Carson APPENDIX E 2014-2021 Housing Elemen
         Land Available for Emergency Shelters
         Manufacturing, Heavy Zone - 3,630 ac
         City of Carson
1
   2
 3
     4 5
                               0             4,000
                                     Feet
 
                           APPENDIX E
               Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
City of Carson             APPENDIX E          2014-2021 Housing Element
City of Carson APPENDIX F 2014-2021 Housing Elemen
  The Boulevards at
South Bay Specific Plan
  retail entertainment   restaurant   residential hospitality
                      FEBRUARY 8, 2006
                   AMENDED APRIL 5, 2011
                    Ordinance No: 11-1469
                 CARSON MARKETPLACE, LLC

             The Boulevards at
     South Bay Specific Plan
      (Formerly Carson Marketplace Specific Plan)
                           FEBRUARY 8, 2006
                       AMENDED APRIL 5, 2011
                     Adopted by the Carson City Council
                      Ordinance No. 06-1341 (Original)
                      Ordinance No. 11-1469 (Amended)
                                  Prepared for:
                         Carson Marketplace, LLC
        John Hopkins                                     Bryan Miranda
  Hopkins Real Estate Group                         LNR Property Corporation
17461 Derian Avenue, Suite 106                  4350 Von Karman Avenue, Suite 200
      Irvine, CA 92614                              Newport Beach, CA 92660
      Ph (949) 270-2420                                 Ph (949) 885-8500
     Fax (949) 644-8631                                Fax (949) 885-8503
                                  Prepared by:
                             The Planning Center
                               1580 Metro Drive
                            Costa Mesa, CA 92626
                                (714) 966-9220
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                                                                     I. INTRODUCTION
Table of Contents
1.0	     INTRODUCTION......................................................................................................... 1
         1.1	 Purpose and Intent.....................................................................................................1
         1.2	 Project Overview.........................................................................................................2
         1.3	 Authority to Prepare Specific Plan............................................................................2
         1.4	 Environmental Clearance...........................................................................................2
2.0	     CONTEXT AND CONDITIONS................................................................................... 3
         2.1	 Project Location and Surrounding Uses..................................................................3
         2.2	 Existing Site Conditions.............................................................................................3
         2.3	 Existing Land Use Designations...............................................................................5
              2.3.1	 General Plan ...................................................................................................5
              2.3.2	 Zoning..............................................................................................................5
         2.4	 Consistency with the General Plan and Redevelopment Plan...............................6
3.0	     LAND USE PLAN........................................................................................................ 7
         3.1	 Approach.....................................................................................................................7
         3.2	 Project Objectives.......................................................................................................7
         3.3	 Development Districts................................................................................................8
         3.4	 Land Use Categories................................................................................................10
4.0	     LAND USE ILLUSTRATIVE...................................................................................... 13
5.0	     PLAN elements.................................................................................................... 15
         5.1	 Circulation Concept..................................................................................................15
              5.1.1	 Regional Access...........................................................................................15
              5.1.2	 Internal Circulation.......................................................................................15
              5.1.3	 Parking...........................................................................................................26
              5.1.4	 Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation.............................................................26
              5.1.5	 Public Transportation...................................................................................26
         5.2	 Open Space/Recreation............................................................................................27
         5.3	 Affordable Housing...................................................................................................27
         5.4	 Public Services and Infrastructure..........................................................................30
              5.4.1	  Police and Fire .............................................................................................30
              5.4.2	  Drainage.........................................................................................................31
              5.4.3	  Water and Sewer Systems...........................................................................31
              5.4.4	  Electricity and Solid Waste..........................................................................35
              5.4.5	  Grading, Subsurface Remediation and Cap...............................................36
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                  
April 5, 2011
 1. INTRODUCTION
6.0	     DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS................................................................................ 37
         6.1	   Permitted Uses..........................................................................................................37
         6.2	   General Development Standards............................................................................41
         6.3	   Public Plazas.............................................................................................................44
                6.3.1	 Public Plaza Requirements..........................................................................44
         6.4	   Landscaping . ...........................................................................................................45
                6.4.1	 General Provisions.......................................................................................45
                6.4.2	 Landscape Theme Areas..............................................................................45
         6.5	   Walls and Fences......................................................................................................49
                6.5.1	 General Provisions.......................................................................................50
         6.6	   Signage......................................................................................................................50
         6.7	   Lighting......................................................................................................................56
                6.7.1	 Light Level Requirements............................................................................57
                6.7.2	 Light Control Methods..................................................................................59
                6.7.3	 Site Lighting Exhibits...................................................................................59
         6.8	   Service, Trash and Utility Areas .............................................................................65
         6.9	   Public Art...................................................................................................................66
                6.9.1	 Public Art Requirements..............................................................................66
                6.9.2	 General Provisions.......................................................................................66
         6.10	  Noise and Vibration .................................................................................................68
                6.10.1	 Noise..............................................................................................................68
                6.10.2	 Vibration.........................................................................................................68
         6.11	  Energy Conservation................................................................................................69
         6.12	  Residential Condominium Requirements...............................................................70
                6.12.1	 Private Storage Space..................................................................................70
                6.12.2	 Treatment of Utilities.....................................................................................70
                6.12.3	 Isolation of Vibration and Sources of Structure-Borne Noise..................71
                6.12.4	 Attenuation of Noise.....................................................................................72
7.0	     DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES................................................................... 73
         7.1	   Site Design & Landscape.........................................................................................73
                7.1.1	 Commercial....................................................................................................73
                7.1.2	 Residential.....................................................................................................77
                7.1.3	 Mixed-Use......................................................................................................79
         7.2	   Architecture...............................................................................................................80
                7.2.1	 Commercial....................................................................................................80
                7.2.2	 Residential.....................................................................................................82
                7.2.3	 Mixed-Use......................................................................................................83
8.0	     IMPLEMENTATION................................................................................................... 85
         8.1	   Review and Approval Process.................................................................................85
                                                                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                April 5, 2011
                                                                                                                         I. INTRODUCTION
                8.1.1	 Subdivisions..................................................................................................85
                8.1.2	 Residential Condominiums..........................................................................85
                8.1.3	 Amendments to Specific Plan......................................................................85
                8.1.4	 Minor Modifications......................................................................................85
                8.1.5	 Interpretation.................................................................................................86
                8.1.6	 Conditional Use Permit.................................................................................86
                8.1.7	 Major Modification........................................................................................86
                8.1.8	 Site Plan and Design Review.......................................................................86
                8.1.9	 Other Considerations...................................................................................89
         8.2	   Maintenance..............................................................................................................90
         8.3	   Equivalency Program...............................................................................................90
                8.3.1	 Limitations.....................................................................................................91
                8.3.2	 Use Classification and Impact Assessment Procedures..........................92
                8.3.3	 Submittal and Approval Procedures...........................................................93
         8.4	   Financing...................................................................................................................94
         8.5	   Phasing......................................................................................................................94
List of Figures
Figure 2.1a   Regional and Project Vicinity......................................................................................4
Figure 2.1b   Project Aerial................................................................................................................5
Figure 3.3a   Development Districts.................................................................................................9
Figure 3.4a   Land Use Categories..................................................................................................11
Figure 4.0a   Project Illustrative......................................................................................................14
Figure 5.1a   Vehicular Circulation Concept..................................................................................17
Figure 5.1b   Circulation Sections..................................................................................................18
Figure 5.1c   Section A - Del Amo Entrance (Private)....................................................................19
Figure 5.1d   Section B - Corridor Road in Entertainment Areas.................................................19
Figure 5.1e   Section C1 - Corridor Road with Auxiliary Lanes....................................................20
Figure 5.1f    Section C2 - Corridor Road at Parking Lots............................................................20
Figure 5.1g   Section C3 - Corridor Road with Multi-Purpose Trail..............................................21
Figure 5.1h   Section C4 - Corridor Road at Bus Stops................................................................21
Figure 5.1i    Section D - Loop Road (Private)................................................................................22
Figure 5.1j    Section E - Avalon Entrance......................................................................................22
Figure 5.1k   Section F - Freeway Edge (I-405/Project Interface).................................................23
Figure 5.1l    Section G - Channel-Adjacent Slope (Residential/Project Interface)....................23
Figure 5.1m  Section H - Del Amo Boulevard................................................................................24
Figure 5.1n   Section I - Main Street Entrance...............................................................................24
Figure 5.1o   Non-vehicular Circulation Concept..........................................................................25
Figure 5.2a   Conceptual Landscape for Residential North of Del Amo......................................28
Figure 5.2b   Conceptual Landscape for Residential South of Del Amo.....................................29
Figure 5.4a   Storm Drainage Concept...........................................................................................32
Figure 5.4b   Sanitary Sewer Concept............................................................................................33
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                     
April 5, 2011
 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 5.4c   Domestic and Reclaimed Water Concept.................................................................34
Figure 6.4a   Landscape Themes....................................................................................................40
Figure 6.4b   Conceptual Landscape for Corridor Road...............................................................48
Figure 6.5a   Walls and Fences.......................................................................................................52
Figure 6.6a   Conceptual Sign Locations.......................................................................................53
Figure 6.6b   Conceptual Sign Illustratives....................................................................................54
Figure 6.6c   Conceptual Freeway Signs Illustrative.....................................................................55
Figure 6.7a   Site Lighting Exhibit Key Map...................................................................................60
Figure 6.7b   Section A - Del Amo Entrance...................................................................................61
Figure 6.7c   Section B - Corridor Road in Entertainment Areas.................................................61
Figure 6.7d   Section C - Typical Corridor Road............................................................................62
Figure 6.7e   Section D - Loop Road (Private)................................................................................62
Figure 6.7f    Section E - Freeway Edge (I-405/Project Interface).................................................63
Figure 6.7g   Section F - Channel-Adjacent Slope (Residential/Project Interface).....................63
Figure 6.7h   Section G - Del Amo Boulevard................................................................................64
List of Tables
Table 4.1      Land Use Summary.....................................................................................................13
Table 6.1      Permitted Uses............................................................................................................38
Table 6.2-1   General Development Standards...............................................................................41
Table 6.2-2   Building Height Development Standards.................................................................43
Table 6.6      Sign Standards............................................................................................................51
Table 6.7-1   Light Intensity Minimum Requirements....................................................................57
Table 6.7-2   Luminaire Photometric Classification.......................................................................59
Table 8.3      Equivalency Matrix: Examples of Land Use Conversion Factors..........................91
Appendices
Appendix A 	           PLANT PALETTE
Appendix B 	           LIGHTING PALETTE
Appendix C 	           Consistency Analysis
Appendix D 	           EIR SUMMARY
APPENDIX E 	           MITIGATION MONITORING PROGRAM
APPENDIX F 	           EQUIVALENCY PROGRAM
                                                                            The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                           April 5, 2011
                                                                                                            I. INTRODUCTION
1.0	 INTRODUCTION
1.1	     Purpose and Intent
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan describes the elements, character, location and method of
implementation for this 168-acre development project, 157 acres of which represent a former landfill.
The purpose is to implement the vision for urban infill and the reuse and recycling of land through the
establishment of land uses, design criteria, development regulations, infrastructure plans and implementation
procedures that will guide development in an orderly fashion, consistent with City policies and procedures.
The intent is also to implement and provide
                                                      Project Background                    incorporated as a city in 1968, its
consistency with the goals, objectives and               A Brief History of                 landscape was pockmarked with
policies of the City of Carson General Plan                      Carson                     dozens of refuse dumps, landfills,
and Redevelopment Plan.                                                                     and auto dismantling plants that
                                                    Although the City of Carson has         none of its neighbors would
                                                    a long and colorful history that        have in their own cities (source:
This Specific Plan is forward thinking in           dates back to the actual founding       Growing Pains of a Young City,
that it allows some degree of flexibility in        of California, it is a very young       http://ci.carson.ca.us/Extra/
                                                    community in terms of its age           GrowingPains.htm).
its implementation to accommodate the               as an independent city. Carson
inevitable changes in economic conditions,          was incorporated as a city in           As California has grown, planners,
market dynamics and technological advances          1968. Compare that to Carson’s          conservationists      and     those
                                                    neighbor to the east, Long Beach,       concerned with public health
that occur over time. The Specific Plan area        which incorporated almost a             have decried urban sprawl and its
has been divided into three Development             century earlier in 1888, or to its      social and environmental costs,
Districts that respond to the type of uses          neighbor to the west, Torrance,         and developers have gone into
                                                    which became a city in 1921. In         the hinterlands in search of cheap
planned on the site and provide a structure         those intervening years, the area       land where hours-long commutes
for their development. Development Districts        that is now Carson remained an          from these bedroom communities
1 and 2 are both on the former landfill site,       unincorporated portion of Los           to jobs are commonplace. This
                                                    Angeles County, and as a result,        type of development typically has
which will require complex engineering              the young City of Carson is             high municipal costs and it usually
techniques and associated expenditures to           still struggling to overcome the        precedes commercial development
develop safely and in accordance with state         penalties that came with delaying       that can generate enough taxes
                                                    its incorporation.                      for City coffers to pay for the
and federal regulations. Development District                                               infrastructure and services to
3 is immediately across Del Amo Boulevard           In politics, there is an acronym,       support these edge communities.
to the north, on uncompromised land that is         “N.I.M.B.Y.”, which is short for
                                                    “not in my back yard.” People           Sprawl has forced our society to
currently vacant.                                   realize that society needs facilities   look long and hard at reclaiming
                                                    such as garbage dumps, auto             the underutilized urban landscape.
The Specific Plan will be adopted by ordinance      dismantling centers and waste           Everyone from the United States
                                                    treatment plants, but when it           Environmental Protection Agency
and will implement zoning for the site. Going       comes time to build them, no one        to the California Center for Land
beyond the guidance typically found in a            wants them in their own back yard.      Recycling now understands that
zoning ordinance, however, The Boulevards           So when such essential facilities       our society, to become more
                                                    were needed in the South Bay, the       sustainable, needs to facilitate
at South Bay Specific Plan provides applicants,     incorporated cities such as Torrance    and support urban infill types
City staff, the public and decision makers with     and Redondo Beach had the               of development where existing
information on the project’s background,            political clout to resist the location  infrastructure, strong employment
                                                    of such controversial projects          base and community support
overall intent, design standards and guidelines to  within their city borders. Since        services are already in place. The
facilitate the project’s review implementation.     Carson was an unincorporated            Boulevards at South Bay represents
                                                    area for so long, with little political such an opportunity to reclaim a
                                                    representation, it often ended up as    157-acre landfill and replace what
                                                    the dumping ground (both literally      once was a trash dump with the
                                                    and figuratively) of its neighbors.     vibrancy of life.
                                                    By the time Carson finally
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                       
April 5, 2011

 1. INTRODUCTION
1.2	      Project Overview
The Boulevards at South Bay is a prime example of what can be done in the effort to recycle and reclaim
urban land. What was once a landfill and blight on the neighboring community has the opportunity
to become a shining example of civic pride and environmental technology with the construction of a
mixed-use community of residential, retail, commercial and hospitality that will bring residents and tax
generation back to a site that never could have imagined such a bright future.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan provides development standards and guidelines that allow
for a potential mix of approximately 2 million square feet of commercial, a 300-room hotel and up to
1,550 residential units. Section 4 presents a land use illustrative that demonstrates a potential project
configuration.
1.3	      Authority to Prepare Specific Plan
The California Government Code authorizes jurisdictions to adopt specific plans either by resolution
as policy, by ordinance as regulation or a combination of both. The Boulevards at South Bay Specific
Plan is established through the authority granted by the California Government Code, Title 7, Division
1, Chapter 3, Article 8, Sections 65450 through 65457. Both Planning Commission and City Council
hearings are required. In either resolution or ordinance form, the Specific Plan must be adopted by the
Carson City Council.
Upon adoption, this Specific Plan will serve as zoning for the properties involved. It establishes the
necessary plans, development standards, regulations, infrastructure requirements, design guidelines,
implementation programs and mitigation measures on which subsequent project-related development
activities are to be founded. It is intended that local public works projects, design review plans, detailed
site plans, grading permits and building permits or any other action requiring ministerial or discretionary
approval applicable to this area be consistent with this Specific Plan.
1.4	      Environmental Clearance
This specific plan is prepared in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). An
initial study was prepared, and it was determined that an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) was needed
to analyze potential project impacts. Future development projects that are consistent with this specific
plan will not require further environmental documentation nor focused environmental analysis pursuant
to CEQA.
                                                                The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                April 5, 2011
                                                                                    2. CONTEXT & CONDITIONS
2.0	 CONTEXT AND CONDITIONS
2.1	     Project Location and Surrounding Uses
The Boulevards at South Bay is proposed for a currently undeveloped site located at 20400 Main Street
in the City of Carson in the South Bay area of Los Angeles County. It is located approximately 17 miles
south of downtown Los Angeles and approximately 6.5 miles east of the Pacific Ocean. The Project Site
is comprised of approximately 168 acres located southwest of the San Diego Freeway (I-405), north of
the Avalon Boulevard interchange and east of Main Street. The majority of the Project Site, consisting of
157 acres, is located south of Del Amo Boulevard, while the remaining 11 acres are located north of Del
Amo Boulevard.
Figure 2.1a depicts The Boulevards at South Bay in its regional and local context, while an aerial photograph
of the Project Site, in Figure 2.1b, shows the surrounding land uses and adjacent areas.
On a local scale, the Project Site is surrounded by multiple uses. East of I-405, land uses include
neighborhood and regional retail, most notably the South Bay Pavilion at Carson. To the north and east of
the Project Site are the Dominguez Golf and Practice Center and the Victoria Golf Course, respectively.
Residential areas, consisting of one-story and two-story detached residences and mobile homes, are located
to the south and west. The residences are separated from the site by the Torrance Lateral Flood Control
Channel (Torrance Lateral), a concrete-lined drainage channel which parallels the southern and western
border of the site. To the west of the Project Site, extending away from the site on Torrance and Del
Amo Boulevards, are commercial and light industrial uses. Further north on Main Street are light industrial
uses, with the Home Depot Center and California State University, Dominguez Hills, located northeast
of the project.
2.2	     Existing Site Conditions
The site has been essentially vacant since the closing and covering of the landfill in 1965. The site
is predominantly bare soil that becomes green with nonnative grasses following winter rains and turns
brown by summer. The site’s elevation is basically at grade with Del Amo Boulevard to the north and
approximately 20 feet uphill of I-405, which is immediately to the east. The current and planned site sits
approximately 16 feet above the top of the Torrance Lateral and the neighborhoods to the south and west,
while it is approximately 8 feet uphill from the Main Street grade elevation to the west.
On-site, the land is relatively flat with elevations varying in a somewhat random pattern between 26 and 50
feet above the Torrance Lateral. Generally, the site is elevated above existing grades at the edges (except
on the north where it abuts Del Amo) and generally slopes inward. There is an existing street circulation
pattern offering single access points to both Del Amo and Main Street. The streets are located in areas
that originally functioned as a haul road system for trash trucks traveling within the landfill.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                   
April 5, 2011

 2. CONTEXT & CONDITIONS
   Source: PCR, 2005.    Figure 2.1a Regional and Project Vicinity
                              The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                            April 5, 2011
                                                                                  2. CONTEXT & CONDITIONS
 Source: PCR, 2005.                                                       Figure 2.1b Project Aerial
2.3	     Existing Land Use Designations
2.3.1	   General Plan
Prior to adoption of The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan, the entire site was designated Mixed Use-
Business Park (MU-BP) in the City’s General Plan (adopted October 11, 2004). This designation permits a
mixture of commercial and business park/limited industrial uses in the same building, on the same parcel,
or within the same area. However, the MU-BP designation does not permit residential uses.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan includes residential uses. Accordingly, the Specific Plan project
includes an amendment to the City’s General Plan to change the land use designation to The Boulevards
at South Bay Specific Plan to allow a mixture of entertainment, commercial, office and residential uses.
2.3.2	   Zoning
Prior to adoption of The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan, the site contained two underlying
zoning designations and two overlay designations. The southeast corner and the area north of Del
Amo Boulevard contained the “Regional Commercial” zoning designation and the remainder of the site
contained the “Light Manufacturing” zoning designation. The Regional Commercial zoning designation
accommodates major commercial uses serving the community or subregional area and offering a full
range of retail merchandise and services. The Light Manufacturing zoning designation accommodates
small- and medium-sized industrial and commercial uses.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                 
April 5, 2011

 2. CONTEXT & CONDITIONS
In combination with the underlying zoning designations, the overlay districts provide tailored guidance
to address specific conditions. Prior to adoption of The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan, the site
contained the D (Design) and ORL (Organic Refuse Landfill) Overlays. The Design Overlay required
Site Plan and Design Review of future development within the site to achieve special standards of design,
architectural quality, style compatibility, landscape treatment and functional integration of neighboring
developments. The Organic Refuse Landfill Overlay regulated the uses of organic refuse landfill sites to
ensure that proper mitigation measures were taken to eliminate or minimize hazards and environmental
risks associated with landfill sites. The intent of these Overlays has been woven into the Specific Plan in
the form of regulations and guidelines.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan project includes an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance
to change the designation to The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan. As discussed in Section 3, the
Specific Plan will serve as an overlay to the existing Regional Commercial (RC) zone currently applicable
to Development District 3.
2.4	     Consistency with the General Plan and Redevelopment Plan
State law requires that The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan be consistent with and demonstrate
implementation of the City’s General Plan. Additionally, as state law requires that a redevelopment plan
be consistent with a city’s general plan, The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan must also demonstrate
consistency with the City’s Redevelopment Plan.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan is consistent with and furthers a number of goals and objectives
identified in the City’s General Plan and Redevelopment Plan. Overall, the Project represents a productive
reuse of a brownfield site that is compatible with surrounding uses, and offers Carson residents new
opportunities for residential, retail, entertainment and employment. The project features up to 1,550 new
residential units, bringing needed housing to the City and generating a unique mixed-use environment
that can serve as a signature project for Carson. A complete analysis of the proposed The Boulevards at
South Bay Specific Plan for consistency with the City of Carson General Plan and Redevelopment Plan
is provided in Appendix C.
                                                                The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                               April 5, 2011

                                                                                               3. LAND USE PLAN
3.0	 LAND USE PLAN
3.1	     Approach
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan provides for a potential mix of approximately 2 million square
feet of commercial, retail and entertainment uses; a 300-room hotel; and up to 1,550 residential units. The
Land Use Plan is designed to accommodate these uses through the creation of three development districts
and two land use categories: Commercial Marketplace (CM) and Mixed-Use Marketplace (MU-M). The
development districts and land use categories allow for a greater variety of land uses and customized
development standards. This approach enables The Boulevards at South Bay to create a truly unique and
vibrant center for the City of Carson. Additionally, to respond to changing markets over time, the Specific
Plan and associated Environmental Impact Report (EIR) are designed to be flexible enough to allow the
project to develop a limited increase in commercial square footage with a corresponding reduction in
residential units per the Equivalency Program in the Implementation Section of this Plan.
3.2	     Project Objectives
The following is a list of objectives that apply to the Project.
         1.	 Achieve productive reuse of a large brownfield site by approving a Project capable of
              generating the revenue necessary to pay for and effect remediation of the environmental
              conditions on the Project Site.
         2.	 Promote the economic well-being of the Redevelopment Project Area by encouraging the
              diversification and development of its economic base, and assist in creating both short- and
              long-term employment opportunities for the residents of the Redevelopment Project Area
              and the City.
         3.	 Maximize shopping and entertainment opportunities to serve the population and maintain a
              sustainable balance of residential and nonresidential uses by approving a mixed-use Project
              that includes entertainment, retail shopping, restaurants and residential units.
         4.	 Stimulate private sector investment in the Project Site by implementing a Project that is fiscally
              sound and capable of financing the construction and maintenance of necessary infrastructure
              improvements.
         5.	 Provide a Project that maximizes the advantages of the site’s location in terms of visibility
              and proximity to the San Diego Freeway, supporting the Project’s role as a signature/gateway
              project. Enhance freeway corridors and major arterials that act as gateways by maximizing the
              Project Site’s visibility and creating a vibrant urban core.
         6.	 Increase revenues to the City by approving a Project that provides for a variety of commercial
              and retail activities with the potential to generate substantial sales- and property-tax revenue.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                      
April 5, 2011

 3. LAND USE PLAN
         7.	 Improve the housing stock by approving a Project that includes a substantial residential
              component with rental and for-sale units.
         8.	 Promote the economic well-being of the Project Site by approving a Project that is attractive
              to consumers and residents and that would ensure long-term success of the development.
         9.	 Provide hotel rooms to meet an identified market need, and in doing so, serve nearby
              businesses, community activities and proposed on-site uses.
         10.	 Consistent with other objectives, provide a Project design that interfaces with surrounding
              uses in a manner that provides for a transition between the Project and adjacent areas.
3.3	     Development Districts
As shown on Figure 3.3a, three “Development Districts” have been delineated to describe the different
uses planned for the site. The delineation of the districts will remain the same regardless of how the
site is ultimately developed. Each district has its own zoning, allowed uses and development standards.
Development Districts 1 and 2 cover the 157-acre reclaimed landfill, while Development District 3 is
across Del Amo Boulevard to the north on vacant land. To provide for flexibility, the exact location
of uses within a district will be determined during the tract map and development review process. The
graphics showing the proposed location of buildings are for conceptual purposes to illustrate a likely
development plan that can occur within the controls established by the development standards. The
following is a brief description of the conceptual uses proposed within each of the districts.
Development District 1
Development District 1 (DD 1) is approximately 31 acres north of Corridor Road and abuts the eastern
edge of Main Street and the southern edge of Del Amo Boulevard between Main Street and I-405. DD 1
is designated for Mixed-Use Marketplace (MU-M) and may contain both for-sale and for-rent residential
properties along with neighborhood-serving commercial uses. The residential and commercial uses may
be either vertically or horizontally integrated. For example, commercial uses such as a gym/health club
could be located on the ground floor of multifamily apartments. The mixed-use designation does not,
however, require a mix of uses and DD 1 could be dedicated entirely to residential or commercial uses
allowed by the MU-M designation.
Development District 2
Development District 2 represents approximately 126 acres and is the largest of the development districts,
occupying the majority of the site. This district is surrounded by DD 1 to the north, I-405 to the
east and the Torrance Lateral to the south and west. DD 2 is designated for Commercial Marketplace
(CM) and may contain a combination of entertainment, large-scale commercial tenants, restaurants and
a hotel.
                                                                The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                April 5, 2011

                                                             3. LAND USE PLAN
  Source: The Planning Center, 2009.
                                          Figure 3.3a Development Districts
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                    
April 5, 2011
 3. LAND USE PLAN
Development District 3
Development District 3 (DD 3) consists of approximately 11 acres located north of Del Amo Boulevard,
across from the contiguous Development Districts 1 and 2. DD 3 is designated for Mixed-Use Marketplace
(MU-M). DD 3 may contain a mixture of residential and neighborhood-serving commercial uses. As
in DD 1, DD 3 could be dedicated entirely to residential or commercial uses allowed by the MU-M
designation so long as the maximum square feet or number of units allowed in DD 1 and 3 are not
exceeded. DD 3 is unaffected by the land use restrictions imposed by the landfill status of DD 1 and may,
therefore, contain at-grade housing.
In Development District 3, the Specific Plan will apply as an overlay to the existing Regional Commercial
(RC) zone. The Specific Plan will not replace the underlying zone completely as was done in Development
Districts 1 and 2. All the regulations and development standards for the RC zone contained in Chapter 1
(Sections 9131.1 through 9138.71) of the Carson Municipal Code shall apply in addition to the regulations
and development standards of The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan. Depending upon the types of
development proposed, development shall be permitted and processed pursuant to either the regulations
and development standards for the RC zone or the regulations and development standards for The
Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan.
3.4	     Land Use Categories
Below is a brief description of each land use category in The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan and
the location of each use by development district. An illustration of the land use categories is provided in
Figure 3.4a.
Commercial Marketplace (CM)
This category includes commercial uses intended to serve a broad population base and offer a wide
range of services to both the community and the region. Typical uses in this category include larger
regional commercial uses such as major department stores and promotional retail-type stores, and smaller
neighborhood commercial uses such as grocery stores and banks. Additional uses include commercial
recreation and entertainment uses such as movie theaters and arcades, hotels, restaurants and highway-
oriented and smaller neighborhood retail and service uses. Commercial Marketplace is intended to provide
the City’s primary regional shopping center. These uses are allowed in all districts.
Mixed-Use Marketplace (MU-M)
The “Mixed-Use Marketplace” land use category provides opportunities for the vertical or horizontal
integration of housing with smaller commercial services. MU-M does not, however, require a mix of uses
and development can consist entirely of either residential or commercial uses. This category is applied to
Development Districts 1 and 3. The densities and intensities will vary within this land use designation based
on actual uses proposed. The minimum allowable floor area ratio (FAR) for vertical mixed-use development
that includes residential uses will be 1.5. Residential densities will not exceed 60 du/ac. Density for residential
components shall be calculated as the number of units divided by the acreage of the site, regardless of the
presence of other land uses. This category permits all uses allowed in the Commercial Marketplace category
described above, with the exception of stand-alone stores greater than 50,000 square feet.
10                                                                     The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                      April 5, 2011

                                                            3. LAND USE PLAN
  Source: The Planning Center, 2009.      Figure 3.4a Land Use Categories
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                  11
April 5, 2011
 3. LAND USE PLAN
This page intentionally left blank.
12                                  The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                 April 5, 2011
                                                                                                    4. LAND USE ILLUSTRATIVE
4.0	 LAND USE ILLUSTRATIVE
The development standards and guidelines contained within The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
permit a range of uses and intensities. To gain an understanding of what could be developed under the
Specific Plan, the following illustrative presents conceptual drawings of building footprints and locations.
It is important to note that the illustrative is purely conceptual and that a final plan may vary provided it
complies with the regulations proposed herein.
The illustrative seeks to create a vibrant mix of commercial and residential uses by integrating up to 1,550
residences with nearly 2 million square feet of retail and service stores, restaurants, entertainment venues
and a 300-room hotel. Table 4.1 provides a breakdown of the potential mix of residential and commercial
uses, while Figure 4.0a presents a conceptual illustration.
                                                             Table 4.1 	
                                                        Land Use Summary
                                                                 Specific Plan           Units or
                                Land Use Types                Land Use Category     Square Footage
                  Development District 1 (31 Acres)
                  Residential, Ownership Units                       MU-M                  900 units
                  Residential, Rental Units                          MU-M                  400 units
                  Commercial Recreation & Entertainment              MU-M                  75,000 sf
                  Neighborhood-Serving Commercial                    MU-M                  50,000 sf
                  Restaurant                                         MU-M                  25,000 sf
                  Subtotal                                                       150,000 sf      1,300 units
                  Development District 2 (126 Acres)
                  Commercial Recreation & Entertainment               CM                  139,000 sf
                  Hotel (300 Rooms)                                   CM                  200,000 sf
                  Regional Commercial                                 CM                 1,370,000 sf
                  Neighborhood-Serving Commercial                     CM                   30,000 sf
                  Restaurant                                          CM                   56,125 sf
                  Subtotal                                                      1,795,125 sf         0 units
                  Development District 3 (11 Acres)
                  Residential, Ownership Units                       MU-M                  250 units
                  Neighborhood-Serving Commercial                    MU-M                  50,000 sf
                  Subtotal                                                       50,000 sf         250 units
                  TOTAL                                                          1,995,125 sf      1,550 units
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                  13
April 5, 2011

 4. LAND USE ILLUSTRATIVE
Source: Nadel Retail Architects, 2010.      Figure 4.0a Project Illustrative
14                                     The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                    April 5, 2011
                                                                                              5. PLAN ELEMENTS
5.0	 PLAN elements
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan contains a number of elements in addition to the land use
plan. Elements such as circulation, urban design, open space and recreation, infrastructure and utilities,
and public services are just as critical to the success of the project. These plan elements are discussed
below in detail.
5.1	     Circulation Concept
The circulation concept for The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan is an integral part of the overall
land use plan and has been developed consistent with a number of circulation objectives. Foremost
among these are the following:
         1.	 To reinforce and serve the land use concepts,
         2.	 To provide adequate accessibility for internal and external trips by future residents and visitors,
         3.	 To provide a sufficient amount of convenient parking for the commercial and residential uses,
         4.	 To provide opportunities for a variety of transportation options, and
         5.	 To provide an aesthetically pleasing environment while achieving the above objectives.
5.1.1	   Regional Access
The San Diego Freeway (I-405), Harbor Freeway (I-110), Artesia Freeway (SR-91), and Long Beach
Freeway (I-710) provide regional access to the Project Site. I-405 is located adjacent to the Project Site’s
eastern boundary, I-110 is located west of the Project Site, and SR-91 is located approximately 2.5 miles
north of the Project Site. I-710, which is located on Carson’s eastern boundary, links the City with the
Long Beach and Harbor areas. Locally, access to the Project Site is available via Main Street (a north-south
thoroughfare on the western side of the Project Site), Avalon Boulevard (an exit from I-405 and a major
north-south arterial), and Del Amo Boulevard (an east-west arterial which bisects the northern portion
of the Project Site).
The City of Carson is pursuing improvements to the Avalon Boulevard/I-405 interchange as an off-site
improvement for The Boulevards at South Bay. This interchange would also improve general freeway
access and circulation in the area surrounding the site. Interchange improvements include: (1) the extension
of Lenardo Drive to Avalon Boulevard; (2) realignment and reconfiguration of the I-405 southbound on
and off-ramps that currently intersect with Avalon Boulevard; (3) a new I-405 southbound on-ramp to be
the east leg to the new Avalon Boulevard/Lenardo Drive intersection, and (4) reconfiguration of the I-405
northbound off-ramp to allow left-turn movements to southbound Avalon Boulevard
5.1.2	   Internal Circulation
Project access and the proposed internal circulation system is shown on Figure 5.1a. The existing roadways
(see Figure 2.1b) will be vacated and replaced by two primary routes, referred to as Corridor Road and
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                     15
April 5, 2011

 5. PLAN ELEMENTS
Loop Road. Corridor Road (also known as Lenardo Drive) connects the Main Street entry with the
Avalon Boulevard/I-405 entry. Loop Road begins at Del Amo Boulevard and ends at Corridor Road in a
semicircular manner. Corridor Road is proposed to follow essentially the same alignment as the current
roadway, Lenardo Drive, and will extend to connect to Avalon Boulevard. The alignment of the proposed
Loop Road is approximately 150 to 400 feet east or north of the current roadway, Stamps Drive.
The Boulevards at South Bay can be accessed at seven points, each of which will be attractively landscaped
and signed for vehicles and pedestrians. Internal roadways will be comprised of a combination of both
publicly and privately owned and maintained streets. Corridor Road will be publicly dedicated. The funding
for the maintenance of the road will be provided through a Community Facilities District or similar funding
structure. Illustrations of street sections are provided in Figures 5.1c–n.
Access points for Development Districts 1 and 2 would include the intersections of Del Amo Boulevard
and Loop Road and Main Street and Corridor Road, as well as the Avalon Boulevard exit from I-405.
At Del Amo Boulevard and Loop Road (see Figure 5.1c), the intersection would be developed with two
inbound and four outbound lanes on Loop Road, south of Del Amo Boulevard. This configuration
would provide for one left-turn lane, one left/through lane and two right-turn lanes on the northbound
approach. This intersection would be signalized. An additional right-in/right-out access point would be
provided at the eastern edge of the for-sale residential south of Del Amo Boulevard (approximately 200
feet from the Loop Road entrance) and connect to Corridor Road. The connecting road will be straight
and not loop through the commercial or residential areas.
The Main Street at Corridor Road (Figure 5.1n) access point would also be signalized. The proposed westbound
lane configuration would consist of one left-turn lane and one right-turn lane, while the eastbound lane
configuration would consist of two through lanes. At the Avalon Boulevard ramp of I-405 (see Figure 5.1j), three
northbound lanes guide vehicles into the site onto Corridor Road while three southbound lanes allow vehicles to
exit The Boulevards at South Bay and access the freeway or Avalon Boulevard.
Once inside Development Districts 1 and 2, vehicles travel along Corridor Road and Loop Road. Corridor
Road would have multiple different street sections with the public right of way typically spanning 80 feet.
Through the entertainment areas, Corridor Road would have four travel lanes, a median and auxiliary
lanes on both sides, as shown in Figure 5.1d. When outside of the entertainment area and adjacent to
the parking lots, the Corridor Road would have four travel lanes with a median or turn lane, as shown in
Figures 5.1e. through 5.1h. Loop Road would be a four-lane private roadway which includes a 10-foot
median (Figure 5.1i), except at the Del Amo entrance (Figure 5.1c), where the median is 14 feet.
The primary ingress and egress location for Development District 3 (DD 3) would be provided at the
intersection of Del Amo Boulevard and Loop Road, where the north leg of the intersection would
provide for entry and exit. The proposed design for the north leg of this intersection is two inbound and
three outbound lanes. This configuration would allow one left-turn lane, one shared through/right-turn
lane and one right-turn lane on the southbound approach. A second access driveway would intersect
westbound Del Amo Boulevard between the intersections of Del Amo Boulevard and Loop Road (on the
east) and Del Amo Boulevard and Main Street (on the west). This access driveway would provide right-
turn-in/right-turn-out movements only. A third access driveway would intersect northbound Main Street
at the northwestern edge of DD 3 and would provide right-turn-in/right-turn-out movements only.
16                                                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                  April 5, 2011

                                                                      5. PLAN ELEMENTS
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.        Figure 5.1a Vehicular Circulation Concept
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                            17
April 5, 2011
 5. PLAN ELEMENTS
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.   Figure 5.1b Circulation Sections
18                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                April 5, 2011
                                                                                                                5. PLAN ELEMENTS
   Figure 5.1c  Section A - Del Amo Entrance (Private)
   Note: The building setbacks of 20 to 30 feet vary according to the height of the building adjacent to the roadway.  The setback
   is 20 feet for buildings up to 28 feet in height.  For buildings above 28 feet in height, a 30-foot setback is required.  Building
   heights refer to the base building height as defined in Table 6.2-2.
   Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
   Figure 5.1d  Section B - Corridor Road in Entertainment Areas
   Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                           19
April 5, 2011
 5. PLAN ELEMENTS
   Figure 5.1e  Section C1 - Corridor Road with Auxiliary Lanes
   Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
   Figure 5.1f  Section C2 - Corridor Road without Auxiliary Lanes
   Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
20                                                  The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                 April 5, 2011
                                                                5. PLAN ELEMENTS
Figure 5.1g Section C3 - Corridor Road with Multi-Purpose Trail
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
Figure 5.1h Section C4 - Corridor Road at Bus Stop
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                      21
April 5, 2011
 5. PLAN ELEMENTS
 Figure 5.1i  Section D - Loop Road (Private)
 Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
Figure 5.1j  Section E - Avalon Entrance
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
22                                            The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                           April 5, 2011
                                                                                                                  5. PLAN ELEMENTS
Figure 5.1k  Section F - Freeway Edge (I-405/Project Interface)
  * Parking stall and 6’ high green screen presence vary according to location of section along freeway edge. Parking stall is optional.
  Refer to Figure 6.5d for green screen location.
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
Figure 5.1l  Section G - Channel-Adjacent Slope (Residential/Project Interface)
  * Parking stall presence varies according to location of section along the channel. Parking stall is optional.
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                23
April 5, 2011

 5. PLAN ELEMENTS
 Figure 5.1m  Section H - Del Amo Boulevard
 Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
 Figure 5.1n  Section I - Main Street Entrance
 Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
24                                             The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                            April 5, 2011
                                                                          5. PLAN ELEMENTS
Source: Nadel Architects, 2010.           Figure 5.1o Non-vehicular Circulation Concept
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                25
April 5, 2011
 5. PLAN ELEMENTS
5.1.3	   Parking
The various uses, such as residential, commercial, restaurant, entertainment and hotel, will be required to
meet the parking standards specified in the Development Standards section of this Plan. The amount
of parking will vary depending on the number of units proposed and square footage of particular non­
residential use. The parking will be provided through a combination of surface parking and parking
structures, with the structures having a maximum height limit of 50 feet.
As described in the Development Standards section of this Plan, shared parking is permitted to help
maximize the efficiency of parking lots. Shared parking is permitted subject to the completion of a
parking study and approval by the Planning Manager. For instance, shared parking would be ideal in a
situation with offices adjacent to restaurants, since parking could be used by the offices during the day and
by restaurants during the evening.
5.1.4	   Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation
External bicycle access will be primarily from Class II and Class III bicycle routes along Main and Del
Amo, while external pedestrian access will come from sidewalks on those same streets. Internally, bicycle
circulation is provided along both sides of roadways through a combination of Class II along the Loop
Road, and Multipurpose path along the Corridor Road southwest side section. Pedestrian circulation
will be provided throughout The Boulevards at South Bay via sidewalks and pathways. The routing of
pedestrian and bicycle circulation is conceptually shown on Figure 5.1o.
The intent is to provide maximum connectivity for pedestrians and bicyclists between the diverse uses within
the Plan. Multi-purpose paths (pedestrian and bicycle traffic) are proposed both at the Project’s Del Amo
entrance and from Avalon Boulevard into the Project’s southeastern entrance. At the Del Amo entrance, the
bike lanes will be painted Class II lanes. At the Avalon entrance, the multi-purpose path will run alongside the
roadway and will be divided for safety. Multi-purpose paths provide for concurrent, side-by-side use by both
bicyclists and pedestrians and are similar to Class I bicycle paths (although multi-purpose paths are wider to
allow for side-by-side use).
5.1.5	   Public Transportation
Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) Bus Routes 446 and 447 are located along Avalon Boulevard and
MTA Bus Route 205 is located along Del Amo Boulevard east of Avalon Boulevard. The Project shall
be designed to allow for at least four bus stops to service the site by MTA, as well as other transportation
services. Bus pull-outs located on Del Amo Blvd. near the entrance of the project shall be 10 feet by 100
feet in dimension. The bus pull-outs located on the southerly part of Lenardo Drive shall be 10 feet by
160 feet in dimension. The 160 foot total dimension will include 100 feet for the bus and 60 feet for a
three vehicle pull-out area. Conceptual locations of bus pull-outs are shown on Figure 5.1a. The project
applicant shall participate in the fair share funding for the North-South Shuttle and the Carson Circuit
and shall be subject to an annual payment to provide transit service for the residents and to serve the
commercial area.
26                                                                  The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                    April 5, 2011

                                                                                         5. PLAN ELEMENTS
5.2	     Open Space/Recreation
The City parks and open space requirement for residential development of three acres of park per 1,000
residents will be met through a combination of land dedication, improvements, private recreation, and in-
lieu fees per Section 9207.19, Park and Recreational Facilities, of the City development code. The intent
is to provide an appropriate amount and distribution of public and/or private open spaces through a
combination of open spaces in and near the Project.
Residents living within The Boulevards at South Bay will enjoy a combination of common and private
open and recreation spaces within the Project boundaries. Amenities such as pools, clubhouses, courtyards,
lawn areas, and jogging paths are just some of the features that could be provided. Figures 5.2a and 5.2b
present conceptual illustrations of landscaped open spaces and amenities for the residential uses north
and south of Del Amo Boulevard.
Public open spaces are also important components for the commercial uses in The Boulevards at South
Bay. Public open spaces such as walkways, multi-purpose paths and plazas provide gathering spaces for
people shopping, eating or just enjoying the atmosphere. These spaces are an especially important feature
of the lifestyle and entertainment area of The Boulevards at South Bay. The Development Standards
section of this Plan requires a minimum amount of public plaza space for the lifestlye and entertainment
area and prescribe dimensions for walkways and pathways throughout the Project. Specific standards are
outlined in Table 6.2-1 and in section 6.3 of this Plan.
It is envisioned that public open space areas within The Boulevards at South Bay may also include water
features at the lifestyle/entertainment portion of the Project.
5.3	     Affordable Housing
The Boulevards at South Bay project is within Redevelopment Project Area 1 and the Redevelopment
Agency will be responsible for affordable housing production in accordance with the Redevelopment
Plan and applicable law. The Agency will address affordable housing for this Project through an Owner
Participation Agreement.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                               27
April 5, 2011
                    28
                                                                                                                                                                                           5. PLAN ELEMENTS
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                             Source: CCA, 2005.                                                        Figure 5.2a Conceptual Landscape for Residential North of Del Amo
                                             Note: Illustrations are purely conceptual in nature.  Final landscaping
                                             to be determined with the submittal of a Development Plan.
                             April 5, 2011
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
April 5, 2011
                                            Source: CCA, 2005.                                                        Figure 5.2b Conceptual Landscape for Residential South of Del Amo
                                            Note: Illustrations are purely conceptual in nature.  Final landscaping
                                                                                                                                                                                          5. PLAN ELEMENTS
                   29                       to be determined with the submittal of a Development Plan.
 5. PLAN ELEMENTS
5.4	     Public Services and Infrastructure
5.4.1	   Police and Fire
Police services are provided by the Los Angeles County Sheriff ’s Department. There is one existing
Carson Sheriff Station, located at 21356 South Avalon in Carson. This station also provides police services
for West Compton, Gardena, Torrance, and Rancho Dominguez. To ensure the safety of residents and
patrons of The Boulevards at South Bay, the project will provide private security services that will patrol
the entire site and coordinate with the Sheriff ’s Department. Additionally, a one-person unit operated by
the Sheriff ’s Department will patrol the commercial portions of The Boulevards at South Bay.
The Project will include a Community Safety Center for use by the site’s private security force and the Los
Angeles County Sheriff ’s Department. The Center includes a front desk/reception area, a community
meeting room, work space for law enforcement and public safety personnel, a video monitoring console
and restrooms. Digital video cameras will be placed throughout the non-residential components of the
project, with the feed being recorded at the Community Safety Center and accessible via the internet at
the Carson Sheriff ’s Station. The Center shall be staffed by either a Sheriff ’s Department Community
Services officer or personnel approved by the Sheriff ’s Department. The Center will likely be integrated
into the commercial component of the Project, although the exact location will be determined as part of
a Development Plan consistent with the procedures identified in the Implementation Section.
Additional security measures will include the adoption of crime prevention programs such as Neighborhood
Watch and advanced coordination with the Sheriff ’s Department for planned events and activities.
Fire protection services in the City of Carson are provided by the Los Angeles County Fire Department
(LACoFD). The Boulevards at South Bay is located within Division I of the Central Region in the
Battalion 7 service area. There are six primary fire stations that provide both fire and emergency medical
service to the City of Carson, with four of the stations located within Carson’s boundaries. The nearest
response unit to The Boulevards at South Bay is Fire Station No. 36, located at 127 West 223rd Street,
approximately 1.5 miles south of the site. Other response units in the area include Station No. 10 at 1860
East Del Amo Boulevard and Station No. 116 at 755 Victoria Street. The latter two stations are located
approximately 2.4 miles from the site.
In addition to existing stations, the LACoFD “Five-Year Fire Station Plan” identifies a proposed station near
the I-405/110 interchange. A future LACoFD fire station in the proximity of the I-405/110 interchange
would be located north of The Boulevards at South Bay and be particularly accessible to the site’s primary
entrances.
30                                                               The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                April 5, 2011

                                                                                             5. PLAN ELEMENTS
5.4.2	   Drainage
Permanent drainage systems for The Boulevards at South Bay Project will be designed to protect the
landfill cap. In general, surface drainage from rooftops, parking lots, and hardscape and landscape areas
will be picked up by inlets and conveyed, using a mixture of plastic and reinforced concrete pipes, to the
existing Torrance Lateral Storm Drain Channel owned by the Los Angeles County Flood Control District.
Storm drain pipes will be sealed to reduce the potential for leakage and to prevent the migration of
landfill gas. Groundwater will be picked up above the cap by a perforated pipe subdrain system and then
conveyed via solid-walled pipes to the backbone storm drain system and discharged into the Torrance
Lateral Channel. Any detention of storm flows necessary to not exceed the capacity of the channel will
be accomplished by creating sumps in the parking lot areas. The quality of the water discharged into
the channel will be maintained by the use of on-site filtering systems to be designed prior to installation.
One of the water quality filtering systems to be used is a Modular Wetland System. They are proposed
in the area of Old Stamps where these units can be placed in native soil and surface drainage from the
surrounding parking lot can be treated prior to entering the storm drain system.
The storm drainage backbone infrastructure will be installed during the rough grading phase of construction,
while inlets, area drains systems, and permanent water quality Best Management Practices (BMPs) will be
installed during precise grading activities. Storm drainage systems will generally remain in their current
location in utility corridors. Easements will be granted for those portions of these utility corridors that fall
outside of public right-of-way. The site will be designed to avoid the placement of buildings over these
utility corridors. A conceptual map of the drainage system is provided in Figure 5.4a.
5.4.3	   Water and Sewer Systems
The local utility will supply water to The Boulevards at South Bay Project. An existing 16-inch line in Del
Amo Boulevard and an existing 12-inch line in Main Street will serve the site. Based on discussions with
the current utility (California Water Service), it is not anticipated that any upgrades to off-site facilities
will be needed. An on-site water system will be designed to supply both domestic service, with individual
meters, and fire protection to the development. Water for irrigation and proposed water features will come
from reclaimed water, if feasible. The balance, if any, will be drawn from the domestic water system.
Domestic water infrastructure will be installed at the same time as street improvements are made.
Connections to buildings for potable and fire protection water will be made prior to certificate of
occupancy. Reclaimed water infrastructure will be installed with street improvements, as shown in Figure
5.4c, and connected to the West Basin reclaimed water Line.
The sewer system is owned and maintained by the Los Angeles County Sanitation District. For The Boulevards
at South Bay Project an on-site system will be designed to pick up sanitary flows from points of connection
at each building to the existing 42-inch trunk sewer in Main Street. It is anticipated that the on-site sewer
will be constructed with airtight joints to prevent the migration of landfill gas. Sewer infrastructure will be
installed with street improvements. Connections to buildings will be made prior to certificate of occupancy.
A conceptual map of the sewer and water systems are provided in Figures 5.4b and 5.4c.
Water and sewer systems will generally remain in their current location in utility corridors. Easements will
be granted for those portions of these utility corridors that fall outside of public right-of-way. The site will
be designed to avoid the placement of buildings over these utility corridors.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                    31
April 5, 2011
 5. PLAN ELEMENTS
Source: RBF Consulting, 2010. Figure 5.4a Storm Drainage Concept
32                              The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                             April 5, 2011
                                                                5. PLAN ELEMENTS
 Source: RBF Consulting, 2010.            Figure 5.4b Sanitary Sewer Concept
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                      33
April 5, 2011
 5. PLAN ELEMENTS
 Source: RBF Consulting, 2010. Figure 5.4c Domestic and Reclaimed Water Concept
34                                             The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                            April 5, 2011
                                                                                           5. PLAN ELEMENTS
5.4.4	   Electricity and Solid Waste
The Boulevards at South Bay Project will obtain electricity from the local utility’s Compton Service Center,
which provides electric service to the Carson area. The site may contain on-site electric distribution
substations. Their precise location will be determined upon the submittal of future tract maps. Refer to
Section 6.11 for additional guidance related to methods of energy conservation.
The Boulevards at South Bay Project will contract with a large, private waste hauler, for the collection,
disposal and recycling of solid waste. A comprehensive recycling plan shall be included with plan submittals
prior to building permit approval. The comprehensive recycling plan shall consist of a construction debris
recycling program and a general recycling program for residential and commercial uses. The recycling
program shall specifically require the incorporation of permanent, clearly marked, durable, source-sorted
recycling bins for all structures. The bins shall be continuously maintained to ensure proper operation and
adequate access.
Recycling will also extend to construction activities. Any existing on-site roads that are torn up shall be
ground up on-site and recycled into the new road base. All construction debris shall be recycled in a
practical, accessible manner, to the extent feasible, during the construction phase. Reclaimed building
materials will be used whenever feasible.
Compaction facilities for non-recyclable materials shall be provided for every occupied commercial
building greater than 20,000 square feet in size to reduce both the total volume of solid waste produced
and the number of trips required for collection, to the extent feasible. Trash compaction facilities may
be provided in a centralized locations for multiple commercial buildings. Alternative trash collection
methods may also be used for retail and non- retail uses if approved by the waste management provider
and the Planning Officer. The trash collection system must be approved by the Planning Officer prior to
issuance of the first building permit for a commercial building greater than 20,000 square feet in size.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                 35
April 5, 2011

 5. PLAN ELEMENTS
5.4.5	   Grading, Subsurface Remediation and Cap
Rough grading operations for the project will be done in conjunction with the capping of the landfill that
is part of the approved 1995 Remedial Action Plan (RAP). The top layers of dirt will be removed to
just above the limit of trash and stockpiled on-site. It is anticipated that deep dynamic compaction will
be utilized in some portions of the site prior to cap placement. The gas recovery, cap and subdrainage
systems that are required by the RAP will be installed and covered with the stockpiled material. Once the
cap is in place the site will be brought to design grades with the remainder of the stockpiled material.
Grades will be measured in relation to Mean Sea Level and the Torrance Lateral. Mean Sea Level is a fixed
level while the Torrance Lateral level is measured from the top of the channel and varies slightly across
the site to facilitate positive drainage. The currently proposed grades are approximately 16 feet above
the Torrance Lateral along the western edge of the project and 14 feet along the southern edge of the
project.
The remedial actions to be implemented at The Boulevards at South Bay per the approved 1995 Remedial
Action Plan (RAP) are a combination of the following.
         A.	 Construct a low-permeability cover system for the entire site to contain the buried waste and
             the impacted soil on-site. The cap shall be constructed after the application of deep dynamic
             compaction (see description below) for assisting in settlement control and before the rough
             grading of the site for development purposes.
         B.	 Install groundwater systems along the down-gradient side of the site to intercept/capture
             groundwater contamination coming from the site. The perimeter groundwater system is
             intended to capture off-site migration of the groundwater contamination that exceeds the
             remediation goals.
         C.	 Install a perimeter landfill gas extraction, control and treatment system along the site boundary
             and beneath proposed occupied buildings within the waste zone. The landfill gas control and
             treatment system will be used to minimize potential off-site migration and remediate potential
             impacts to on-site indoor/outdoor air quality in compliance with the relevant regulations.
         D.	 Implement long-term monitoring of the groundwater and landfill gases.
         E.	 Provide for long-term maintenance of the landfill cap.
Deep dynamic compaction is a site preparation method used for compacting and strengthening loose
or soft soils to support buildings, roadways and other heavy construction. The method involves the
systematic and repetitive dropping of heavy weights in a pattern designed to remedy poor soil conditions
at a proposed building site. Because the energy imparted is considerable, compaction can be achieved at
substantial depths below the ground surface. Deep dynamic compaction has proven to be an effective
and economical means to eliminate or minimize foundation piling and assist in controlling differential
settlement in landfills.
36                                                                  The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                   April 5, 2011
                                                                                6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.0	 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
This chapter contains the development standards for The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan.
Development standards are the regulations, requirements and by-laws by which development must abide,
and are indicated by the use of the word “shall.” These standards are mandatory and typically concern
topics such as permitted uses, density, building and property dimensions, and the quantity of parking
and landscaping. Provisions within these standards may also use the word “should,” in which case the
standard is encouraged but not mandatory.
6.1	     Permitted Uses
Permitted Uses, uses requiring a Conditional Use Permit, and prohibited uses within The Boulevards
at South Bay are provided in the following table. This matrix organizes potential uses within each
Development District. Those uses not specifically listed in the table are subject to review based on the
consistency with the purpose and intent of the land use categories and are subject to the Interpretation
procedure of Section 9172.24 of the Carson Municipal Code (CMC). The following additional special
provisions apply:
         A.	 Any single proposed retail store with more than 100,000 square feet (whether contained
              in one or more buildings) which devote more than 10% of their floor area to non-taxable
              goods excluding services such as pharmacy or optician, shall be permitted upon approval
              of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Section 9172.23 of the Carson Municipal Code.
              This requirement shall not apply to discount membership stores, wholesale clubs or other
              establishments selling primarily bulk merchandise and charging membership dues.
         B.	 A conditional use permit shall be required for any proposed residential use north of Del
              Amo Boulevard and within 300 feet of the freeway pavement edge.
         C.    Upon identifying and constructing within all building areas, the allowed number of units
              and/or square footage will be reduced to that built plus 10% additional square footage or
              units, provided the number of residential units does not exceed 1550.
         D. When the Development Agreement expires on March 21, 2021, any development proposed
              for the 168 acres, known as the Boulevards at South Bay, shall be subject to environmental
              review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act.
Of special note is the fact that at-grade residential uses are only permitted in Development District 3.
This is because Development District 1 occupies the former landfill site, while Development District
3 does not. Only elevated residential uses, which separate first-floor units from the ground level using
at least one level of parking, retail uses, or other nonresidential space, are permitted in Development
District 1. This is the result of regulations provided by the Department of Toxic Substances Control that
prohibit ground-floor residential units on former landfill soil.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                              37
April 5, 2011

 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                                                               Table 6.1	
                                                                        Permitted Uses
 P ----------------  Automatically permitted use.
 L ----------------  Automatically permitted use provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein or in Division 8 of the CMC.
 LD --------------   Use permitted provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein or in Division 8 of the CMC, and subject to
                     approval of Planning Manager.
 C ----------------  Use permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit.
 CC --------------   Use permitted upon approval of the City Council as prescribed under other provisions of the CMC.
 [blank cell]------  Not permitted
                                                                                                                                                      Development
           Use Category                                                         Typical Permitted Uses                                                  District
                                                                                                                                                      1    2      3
 Regional Commercial
 Food Sales and Service                   Dog or cat food catering (retail only)                                                                      P     P     P
                                          Food catering (only direct retail sales or retail distribution)                                             P     P     P
                                          Food store: grocery, fish, meat, fruits and vegetables, retail bakery, pastry, candy, health food, take-out
                                                                                                                                                      L     L     L
                                          food, tobacco shop
                                          Poultry shop (no live poultry or slaughtering)                                                              P     P     P
                                          Restaurant (including refreshment stands, soda fountain, drive-in or drive-through restaurants)             P     P     P
 Health Services                          Medical or dental laboratory (as an incidental use in a medical/dental office building or clinic)                 L
                                          Medical or dental office or clinic, public health center                                                    P     P     P
                                          Optical services (for the fitting, grinding or mounting of eyeglasses)                                      P     P     P
                                          Pharmacy                                                                                                    P     P     P
 Office                                   Business, professional, financial, insurance, real estate, utility payments, telegraph, telephone
                                          answering service, messenger service, advertising, newspaper or publishing (no printing), ticket
                                                                                                                                                      P     P     P
                                          agency, travel agency, employment agency, collection agency, detective agency, security service, bail
                                          bondsman
                                          Wholesale business, manufacturer’s agent, broker (no storage or deliveries other than samples)                    L
 Public Assembly                          Arcade, drive-through, pool hall, night club                                                                      C
                                          Auditorium, meeting hall, wedding chapel                                                                    P     P     P
                                          Community center, lodge hall, private club                                                                  P     P     P
                                          Indoor theater (motion picture or live stage)                                                                     P
                                          Outdoor theater (live stage, not a drive-in)                                                                C    LD     C
 Public and Quasi-Public Uses             Church, temple, or other place of religious worship     1
                                                                                                                                                      C     C     C
                                          Fire station, police station, post office, library, museum                                                  P     P     P
 Retail Sales and Service                 Animal services: dog clip & wash, veterinary office or clinic (no animal hospital/kennel)                   P     P     P
                                          Barber shop, beauty shop, reducing salon, manicure parlor                                                   P     P     P
                                          Big box retail (stand-alone retail stores with 50,000 square feet or more)                                        P
                                          Copying, addressographing, mimeographing, photostating, instant printing, blueprinting, silk
                                                                                                                                                      P     P     P
                                          screening, photography, picture framing
                                          Clothing services: laundry or dry cleaning agency, self-service laundry or dry cleaning, hand laundry,
                                                                                                                                                      P     P     P
                                          sponging and pressing, tailor, dressmaker, seamstress, shoe repair
                                          Fix-it shop                                                                                                       P
                                          Furniture redecorating, restoration and upholstering; glass repair, installation or glazing; screen repair;
                                                                                                                                                            P
                                          plumbing shop; lawnmower sharpening
                                          Gas Station                                                                                                 C     C     C
38                                                                                                         The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                        April 5, 2011

                                                                                                                                     6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                                                               Table 6.1	
                                                                        Permitted Uses
 P ----------------  Automatically permitted use.
 L ----------------  Automatically permitted use provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein or in Division 8 of the CMC.
 LD --------------   Use permitted provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein or in Division 8 of the CMC, and subject to
                     approval of Planning Manager.
 C ----------------  Use permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit.
 CC --------------   Use permitted upon approval of the City Council as prescribed under other provisions of the CMC.
 [blank cell]------  Not permitted
                                                                                                                                                    Development
            Use Category                                                       Typical Permitted Uses                                                  District
                                                                                                                                                    1     2     3
 Retail Sales and Service cont.           Hotel                                                                                                           P
                                          Indoor mini-mart, auction house 2                                                                               C
                                          Locksmith, watch repair, small appliance repair, bicycle repair                                            P    P      P
                                          Parcel delivery service                                                                                    P    P      P
                                          Photo-finishing, film developing                                                                           P    P      P
                                          Secondhand store, pawn shop                                                                                     C
                                          Specialized stores for apparel, household supplies, business supplies, promotional retail, service retail  P    P      P
 Studios                                  Costume design, interior decoration, photography, writing, drama, dance, music, arts and crafts
                                                                                                                                                     P    P      P
                                          (including stained glass)
                                          Motion pictures (indoor) 3                                                                                      C
                                          Radio, television, recording                                                                               P    P      P
 Mixed-Use
 Mixed-Use 4                              At-grade apartments, townhomes, condominiums                                                                           P
                                          Elevated apartments, townhomes, condominiums                                                               P           P
                                          Vertically integrated uses: supermarket, food store, variety store, service retail, restaurant, health
                                                                                                                                                     P           P
                                          club/gym
                                          Live-Work Residential                                                                                                  P
                                          All uses permitted in Regional Commercial except theaters and stand-alone stores greater than 50,000
                                                                                                                                                     P           P
                                          square feet
 Parking
 Automobile Parking Structure             Parking lot, parking building/structure, shared parking facilities                                         P    P      P
 Accessory Uses   5
 Public Park or Playground                Park, playground                                                                                           P    P      P
 Private Recreational Facilities          Swimming pool, tennis court, skating rink                                                                  P    P      P
 Passenger Station                        Bus station, rail station, taxi stand                                                                     LD    P     LD
 Alcoholic Beverage Sales                 Alcoholic beverage sales and service in conjunction with a restaurant, department store, supermarket      LD    P     LD
 and Service                              Alcoholic beverage sales and service in conjunction with a variety store, drug store, take-out food,
                                                                                                                                                     C    C      C
                                          mini-market, liquor store, bar, billiards, indoor theater
 Communication and                        Transmitter, receiver, or repeater station; gas distribution, control, or measurement station; electric
                                                                                                                                                     C    C      C
 Utilities Stations                       distribution substation; pumping station; major wireless telecommunication facilities 6
 Storage 7                                Space and facilities to house the inventories, supplies and equipment needed to conduct permitted
                                                                                                                                                     P    P      P
                                          activities.
 Recycling                                Small collection recycling facility                                                                        L    P      L
 Temporary Uses
 Offices                                  Contractor office, real estate office, election campaign office, construction storage                      L    L      L
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                                          39
April 5, 2011
 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                                                                             Table 6.1	
                                                                                     Permitted Uses
 P ----------------      Automatically permitted use.
 L ----------------      Automatically permitted use provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein or in Division 8 of the CMC.
 LD --------------       Use permitted provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein or in Division 8 of the CMC, and subject to
                         approval of Planning Manager.
 C ----------------      Use permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit.
 CC --------------       Use permitted upon approval of the City Council as prescribed under other provisions of the CMC.
 [blank cell]------      Not permitted
                                                                                                                                                                                  Development
             Use Category                                                                    Typical Permitted Uses                                                                     District
                                                                                                                                                                                   1         2           3
 Outdoor Sales                                       Sidewalk, parking lot, and tent sales; Christmas tree sales; pumpkin sales                                                   LD         LD         LD
 Outdoor Festivals                                   Farmer’s market, carnival, pony rides, swap meet, flea market                                                                           CC
                                                     Fireworks stand 8                                                                                                             P          P          P
 Prohibited Uses
 Sexually oriented business establishments
 Vehicle sales and service
 1. See CMC 9138.22 and 9182.25.
 2. Ord. 86-763U, §1; Ord. 87-813, §1.
 3. See CMC 9133.
 4. A conditional use permit shall be required for any proposed residential use north of Del Amo Boulevard and within 300 feet of the freeway pavement edge.
 5. Accessory use: A use of the land or of a building which is: (1) clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building; (2) located on the same lot with the principal use; (3)
 not a generator of additional auto trips, parking needs, or adverse environmental impacts; and (4) occupies equal to or less than 10 percent of the area of the principal use. Where more than one
 accessory use occurs on a site, the total aggregate of all accessory uses must be equal to or less than 10 percent.
 6. Major wireless telecommunication facilities shall be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit from the Planning Commission and the requirements of Section 9138.16 of the Carson
 Municipal Code. Minor wireless telecommunication facilities, as defined in Section 9138.16 of the Carson Municipal Code, are permitted by right and do not require a Conditional Use Permit.
 7. No on-site storage shall be allowed in temporary or permanent cargo containers.
 8. Fireworks stands are permitted per Sections 3101.0–3101.10 of the Carson Municipal Code.
40                                                                                                                         The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                       April 5, 2011

                                                                                                                           6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.2	         General Development Standards
Development standards control the building envelopes for the proposed residential, commercial, service
and entertainment uses. These regulations have been designed to provide for flexibility in site design while
ensuring a consistent and coordinated built environment for The Boulevards at South Bay.
                                                                      Table 6.2-1 	
                                             General Development Standards
                                                 MIXED-USE MARKETPLACE                                               COMMERCIAL MARKETPLACE
 TOPIC
                                                                  (MU-M)                                                                  (CM)
 DENSITY/INTENSITY
 At-grade multifamily                                           60 du/ac max.                                                               n/a
 Elevated multifamily                                           60 du/ac max.                                                               n/a
 Vertical mix of uses1                                      1.50 min., 4.0 FAR max.                                                         n/a
 Commercial uses                                                      n/a                                                                   n/a
 Hotel2                                                          1.0 FAR max.                                                          1.0 FAR max.
 Overall Project                                                                         0.33 FAR (commercial uses only)
 BUILDING SETBACKS
 Perimeter Setbacks:
  Interstate 405                                                 110 feet min.                                                         110 feet min.
  Del Amo Boulevard                                            10–20 feet min.3                                                             n/a
  Main Street                                                  10–20 feet min.3                                                             n/a
  Northern Border4                                      20 feet min. from property line                                                     n/a
  Storm Channel                                                       n/a                                                    70 feet min. from property line
 Internal Setbacks:
                                    20 feet min. from the back of curb for buildings with base building
  Building to Loop Road                                       height up to 28 feet
                                                                                                                                            n/a
  at Del Amo Entry5                 30 feet min. from the back of curb for buildings with base building
                                                          height greater than 28 feet
  Commercial building                     Loop road (private): 10 feet min. from the back of curb
                                                                                                                                            n/a
  to Loop/Corridor Roads                 Corridor road (public): 10 feet min. from the property line
  Residential building to Loop/
                                                 15 feet min. from the back of the sidewalk                                                 n/a
  Corridor Roads
  Commercial building to
                                                    20 feet min. from building to building                                                  n/a
  commercial building (if detached)
  Residential building
  to commercial building
                                                    25 feet min. from building to building                                                  n/a
  or parking structure
  (if detached)
 ENCROACHMENTS6
  Encroachments                                          See Municipal Code §9126.29                                          See Municipal Code §9136.29
 WALKWAYS/PARKWAYS
  Internal                                                        5 feet min.                                                           5 feet min.
  Adjacent to:
   Corridor Road                             8 feet min. including at least 3 feet of landscaping                  8 feet min. including at least 3 feet of landscaping
   Loop Road                                                      5 feet min.                                      8 feet min. including at least 3 feet of landscaping
  Multi-Purpose Path                                        8 feet min. of sidewalk                                               8 feet min. of sidewalk
  (see Figure 5.1l)                                plus an additional 4 feet of landscaping                              plus an additional 4 feet of landscaping
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                                             41
April 5, 2011

 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                                                                            Table 6.2-1 	
                                                                 General Development Standards
                                                                     MIXED-USE MARKETPLACE                                                       COMMERCIAL MARKETPLACE
 TOPIC
                                                                                       (MU-M)                                                                            (CM)
 OPEN SPACE7
                                                      Development 25 du/acre or more in density:
                                                      studios and 1 bedroom: 60 square feet average, 50 square feet min.
                                                      per unit;
                                                      2 bedrooms: 75 square feet average, 65 square feet min. per unit;
 Private Open Space12                                 3+ bedrooms: 100 square feet average, 80 square feet min. per unit;                                                  n/a
                                                      all with a minimum dimension of 5 feet in any direction.
                                                      Development less than 25 du/acre in density:
                                                      100 square feet min. per unit, with a minimum dimension of 5 feet
                                                      in any direction.
                                                      Development District 1 (rental units):
                                                      studio and 1 bedroom: 150 square feet min. per unit
                                                      2 bedrooms: 200 square feet min. per unit;
                                                      3+ bedrooms: 250 square feet min. per unit;
                                                      all with a minimum dimension of 15 feet in any direction.
                                                      Development District 1 (ownership units):
 Common Open Space8                                   studio and 1 bedroom: 200 square feet min. per unit                                                                  n/a
                                                      2 bedrooms: 250 square feet min. per unit;
                                                      3+ bedrooms: 300 square feet min. per unit;
                                                      all with a minimum dimension of 15 feet in any direction.
                                                      Development District 3:
                                                      300 square feet min. per unit, with a minimum dimension of 15 feet
                                                      in any direction
                                                                                                                                            Each commercial use shall provide or contribute towards
                                                                                                                                           public plaza space equal to 25 percent of the total square
 Public Plazas9                                                                             n/a                                            feet (GLA) of building. This standard applies only to those
                                                                                                                                              buildings within the Lifestyle/Entertainment area in
                                                                                                                                                               Development District 2.
 PARKING
 Auto Parking10, 11                                   Residential:                                                                        5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable area, except:
                                                      0 bedrooms (not more than 450 square feet.) 1 space/unit;                           Theatre = 1 space/4 seats
                                                      1 bedroom, and 0 bedroom units that are larger than 450 square                      Hotel =1.0 space/room
                                                      feet: 1.5 spaces per unit;
                                                      2 bedrooms or more: 2 spaces per unit.
                                                      Guest parking: 1 space per 4 units
                                                      Commercial:
                                                      5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable area, except:
                                                      Theatre = 1 space/ 4 seats
                                                      Hotel = 1.0 space/room
 Preferential Auto and Bicycle Parking                Per City Code Section 9165.3                                                        Per City Code Section 9165.3
 1. The FAR for vertically integrated mixed-use is to be calculated using the total square footage of all residential and commercial uses, divided by the total area of the parcel. The 1.50 minimum FAR
 applies only to projects that incorporate residential uses.
 2. Hotel FAR is to be calculated based upon a 5-acre site.
 3. Development north of Del Amo Boulevard shall not be closer than 10 feet from Del Amo Boulevard or Main Street, as measured from the property line . Development south of Del Amo Boulevard
 shall not be closer than 20 feet from Del Amo Boulevard or Main Street, as measured from the property line.
 4. The “Northern Boundary” refers to the northern boundary of Development District 3.
 5. Standard applies to buildings adjacent to Loop Road between Del Amo Boulevard and Corridor Road. See Table 6.2-2 for base building height standards.
 6. Outdoor dining, benches, outdoor displays, or any other ancillary uses as approved by the Planning Manager may encroach into the sidewalk area a maximum of 8 feet from the building frontage.
42                                                                                                                         The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                      April 5, 2011

                                                                                                                                                        6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                                                                              Table 6.2-1 	
                                                                 General Development Standards
                                                                      MIXED-USE MARKETPLACE                                                       COMMERCIAL MARKETPLACE
  TOPIC
                                                                                          (MU-M)                                                                         (CM)
  7. At least 40 percent of common and private open space must be usable for recreation, which is defined as open space that serves a specific function with an average gradient of not more than 5
  percent and excludes sidewalks within the public right-of-way. Usable open space shall be designed in a manner to be appropriate for the end users of the dwelling units. Usable open space excludes
  space located within roadway setback areas. The recreational areas shall be located within reasonable proximity of the dwelling units. Usable open space may include, but is not limited to, balconies,
  terraces, roof gardens, children’s playgrounds, pools, clubhouses, BBQ pits, fire pits, seating areas, and landscape areas within or immediately surrounding these open space areas. Walkways and their
  associated landscaping that serve no purpose other than connecting these spaces shall not be considered usable open space.
  8. Open space includes accessible walkways, landscaping areas and non-private courtyards. Common areas such as clubhouses, pools and spas can satisfy up to 50 percent of the common open space
  requirement. Up to 1/2 of the common open space can be satisfied on other development sites within reasonable proximity to the dwelling units.
  9. Refer to Section 6.3 for additional guidance on the provision of public plazas.
  10. Shared parking will be allowed per the Planning Manager’s approval and subsequent to a parking study if deemed necessary by the Planning Manager.
  11. If DD 3 is developed with only residential units (no commercial), the guest parking requirement shall be 0.5 space per unit. If DD 3 is developed with a combination of residential and commercial
  use, the guest parking requirement shall be 0.25 space per unit.
  12. Each bedroom category must address both its minimum size and average size private open space requirements. Any unit that does not meet the minimum requirement will not have any of its
  private open space counted towards the overall average. No more than 10% of 1 BR, 2 BR or 3 BR units may provide less than the minimum size requirement. If any bedroom category has a shortfall in
  average private open space, that shortfall must be replaced by additional usable open space above the required amount at a one-to-one ratio.
                                                                                            Table 6.2-2	
                                                        Building Height Development Standards
 USE                                          AREA                            BASE                             WITH SECONDARY                                 WITH MAJOR FEATURES1
                                                                         BUILDING                                    FEATURES1
                                                                                Max.                                        Max. Width of Feature                                Max. Width of Feature
                                                                                                      Max. Height                                          Max. Height
                                                                               Height                                      (% of elevation length)                              (% of elevation length)
 RESIDENTIAL
   Multifamily2                                  n/a                           75 feet                    75 feet                     n/a                     75 feet                     n/a
  COMMERCIAL
  Retail                                    >100,000 SF                        32 feet                    42 feet                    30%                      52 feet                    15%
  Retail                               <60,000–100,000 SF                      30 feet                    38 feet                                             48 feet                    20%
  Retail                                >40,000–60,000 SF                      28 feet                    36 feet                                             46 feet                    30%
  Retail                                 15,000–40,000 SF                      28 feet                    34 feet                                             44 feet                    40%
  Retail                                    <15,000 SF                         26 feet                    30 feet                                             36 feet                    50%
  Theater                                        n/a                           60 feet                    70 feet                                             80 feet                    20%
  Hotel                                          n/a                           75 feet                    79 feet                                             85 feet                    15%
  MIXED-USE
  Vertical mix of uses: two-             10,000–30,000 SF                      35 feet                    40 feet                    30%                      45 feet                    30%
  story office/retail over
  at-grade retail
  Other vertical mix of uses2,3                  n/a                        75–85 feet                 75–85 feet                     n/a                   75–85 feet                    n/a
 PARKING
 Parking Structure4                              n/a                           45 feet                    50 feet                     n/a                     55 feet                     n/a
 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
 Accessory Storage                                                            maximum height to be determined according to standard for principal use
 1. Major and secondary features are building elements that are added to building faces to provide architectural interest, without adding to interior floor area. Major features are more prominent
 than secondary features, and are often used to focus visual attention with a vertical element that rises above the base building. Major features may sometimes incorporate secondary features, which
 are physically connected to them. Where such secondary features are an integral part of the major feature, the overall assemblage can be considered collectively as the major feature, with the height
 limitation applying to the highest-most point of the assemblage.
 2. The maximum height of any living space in residential structures cannot exceed 74 feet, 11.9 inches, so as not to be classified as a high-rise structure as defined by Los Angeles County Fire
 Department regulations.
 3. The maximum height for vertically mixed-use buildings is 85 feet when located within 1,000 feet of the project’s easterly border (loosely defined as I-405) as measured along the southern edge of
 Del Amo Boulevard. For buildings along the northern edge of Del Amo Boulevard or beyond the 1,000-foot area described above, the maximum height is 75 feet.
 4. Maximum parking structure height applies to the height of the primary structure only; elevator shafts are excluded.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                                                                            43
April 5, 2011

 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.3	    Public Plazas
This Plan requires each commercial use within the lifestyle and entertainment area to provide or contribute
towards public plaza space equal to 25 percent of the total square feet (GLA) of building. Shown
conceptually in Figure 6.4a, the lifestyle and entertainment area consists of commercial uses such as a
movie theater, restaurants, arcades and various retail shops clustered together and oriented internally
for pedestrians. The conceptual site plan proposes approximately 139,000 square feet of lifestyle and
entertainment uses in Development District 2, as shown in Table 4.1. Based upon the requirement stated
above, 34,750 square feet of public plaza space would be provided within the lifestyle and entertainment
area (139,000 multiplied by 25 percent). The following are public plaza requirements and guidelines.
6.3.1	  Public Plaza Requirements
        A.	 Public plazas may consist of pedestrian-accessible spaces, including outdoor seating areas,
            open space, water features and landscape areas. Please refer to Section 7.0, Design Standards
            and Guidelines, for further information.
        B.	 Outdoor eating areas provided as part of private eating establishments cannot be counted
            towards the public plaza requirement, unless:
            1.	 The eating areas are open and accessible to the public, and have intermittent fencing and/
                 or landscaped obstructions.
            2. 	 If the eating areas are enclosed by fencing or landscaping no greater than four feet in height,
                 these areas may count towards up to 20 percent of the total public plaza requirement.
        C.	 Public plazas shall exclude parking areas, roadways (except for Fire Department access) and
            the first five feet surrounding all sides of the buildings.
        D.	 Public plazas shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet in width and 20 feet in length.
        E.	 Public plaza areas are not intended to serve as space for outdoor sidewalk sales.
        F.	 Uses in the lifestyle and entertainment area do not need to satisfy the public plaza space
            requirement immediately next to their buildings, and are instead encouraged to coordinate
            public plaza space with other uses to provide larger plaza spaces that are centrally located and
            serve multiple buildings. Public plazas are encouraged to be contiguous and connected via
            landscaped pedestrian walkways.
        G.	 Development applications that incorporate public plazas shall be accompanied by design
            plans for the plaza areas, specifying location and extent of landscaping, irrigation systems,
            structures and circulation (vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle).
        H.	 If the lifestyle and entertainment area is not constructed, public plaza space is not required.
44                                                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                   April 5, 2011
                                                                                    6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.4	     Landscaping
6.4.1	   General Provisions
         A.	 Due to the subsurface constraints posed by the site, trees shall generally not be permitted
              to be planted in the soil unless there is reasonable certainty that the proposed tree and its
              location are not determined to pose a threat to the landfill cap by the Department of Toxic
              Substances Control (DTSC).
         B.	 For plantings that will be directly in the soil, the landscape palette for the project shall consist
              primarily of small to medium shrubs, members of the grass family and other plants with
              fibrous root systems, bulbs, culms or rhizomes. For taller species with fibrous and/or surficial
              root systems, this includes, among others, members of the palm and bamboo families.
         C.	 The taller species of trees that have a typical dendritic root structure shall be containerized
              either above or below grade. For containerized trees below grade, a subsurface drainage
              conveyance system will be necessary to convey drainage off-site.
         D.	 Although Pampas Grass (Cortaderia sellowiana) and Giant Reed (Arundo donax) are plants that
              have fibrous root systems, they are invasive exotic plants and their use is strongly discouraged
              due to their ability to escape and naturalize off-site.
         E.	 The plant palette for the project includes, but is not limited to, Bob Perry’s Landscape Plants for
              Western Regions since these plants are either native or adapted to our climate and can survive
              with limited amounts of water. The plant palette is located in Appendix A.
         F.	 The intent is for irrigation of the landscape to be kept to a minimum to conserve water and
              to avoid the impact irrigation may have on the shallow soils and the landfill cap. Therefore
              drip irrigation and a native-plant palette shall be used to the maximum extent feasible.
6.4.2	   Landscape Theme Areas
The Boulevards at South Bay has several landscape theme areas with unique qualities or goals to address
the diversity of edge conditions and planned uses. These themes are conceptual in nature and therefore
not precise and will be clarified further during plan submittal. The following is a description of the
landscape themes for various areas within the Project and a brief discussion of their design intent. For
the conceptual delineation of these themed areas, see Figure 6.4a.
Del Amo Boulevard and Main Street Edges
The Del Amo and Main Street edges shall have landscaped setbacks to buffer the proposed residential and/
or commercial uses from the street. Because the setbacks are measured from the back of the sidewalk, it is
envisioned that a landscape treatment will be applied to the entire setback. These edges shall be designed
to coordinate with the landscape themes in the Carson Street Conceptual Visualization and the Home
Depot Center. This landscape coordination will help connect The Boulevards at South Bay with these two
existing districts and generate a comprehensive image for this area.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                     45
April 5, 2011

 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.     Figure 6.4a Landscape Themes
46                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                April 5, 2011
                                                                                  6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Entries
There will be seven ingress-egress/points of access (see Figure 6.4a for the proposed points of access).
These points of access shall have landscaping that identifies the entries and clearly separates them from
the surrounding context. To attract attention and create a focal point entries shall typically have species
that differ in height, color and texture from the streetscape treatment.
Freeway Edge
This zone will primarily consist of the top of slope and slope bank that parallel the western edge of I‑405
and shall be designed to work in conjunction with the signage and building facades to draw attention to
The Boulevards at South Bay project.
Lifestyle and Entertainment
A Lifestyle and Entertainment component makes up a significant portion of the central core of the Project.
This area shall have a variety of plants from small to very large that will primarily be containerized in large
and small pots, raised planters and trellises. The landscaping should be pedestrian friendly, providing areas
of shade and accents.
Internal Streetscape
The internal streetscape consists of entry drives and Corridor and Loop Roads (see Figure 5.1a). These
form a hierarchy of streetscapes with the opportunity to design them together as an integral element of
the overall plan.
It is expected that these internal streets will typically have landscaped medians and edges (see Figure
6.4b). There shall be continuous shrub and ground-cover plantings in the medians and edges with vertical
landscape and/or hardscape elements at a minimum of every 50 feet along the edges. The landscape plans
for the median and parkway on the public road (Corridor Road) must be approved by the Development
Services Manager.
Parking Lot
The parking lot areas shall achieve, Project-wide, a minimum of 5 percent landscape coverage. The
landscaping may consist of tall vertical elements such as palms or low-lying shrubs and/or groundcovers.
The shrubs and groundcovers should not exceed three feet in height at maturity to keep sight distances
clear for vehicles. Landscaping in the parking lot areas may be grouped or focused to facilitate stormwater
uptake and filtration.
Parking Structure Edge
Parking structure facades visible from the freeway should be designed with enhanced aesthetic treatments to
soften the visual appearance of the structure. Treatments may include, but are not limited to, landscaping,
signage, or special treatment of building materials (use of color or patterns) as approved by the City. If
parking structures are adjacent and visible to residences, the edge of the structure shall achieve 50 percent
coverage of visible concrete surfaces with landscaping. Coverage can be achieved through measures such
as planters along the visible edge of the structure planted with cascading vines, or through a vertical trellis
surface with vines planted at each parking level, or by other means.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                    47
April 5, 2011

 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                     Day Lily and Bird                        Pink Dawn                      Jacaranda Tree
                          of Paradise                         Chitalpa Tree
                                                                                                          Mexican Fan Palm
                                                                                                                       Typical Design
                                          Coral Tree
                                                                                                        At Entertainment Area
                                                                                                                                                        CONSULTANT:
                                                                                                              Pink Dawn Chitalpa Tree
                                 48" Quickcrete Round Pot
                                 QR-CLS4836P w/                                     Mexican Fan Palm
                                 Trailing Lantana                                                                    Star Jasmine
                                                                                    Jacaranda Tree
                                                                                                                                                                                SITE
                                                                                                                           Bougainvillea
                                                                                                                               Bronze Flax
                                                                                                                                                                                            CARSON, CA
                                                                                                                                                                      BOULEVARDS AT SOUTH BAY
                                                                                                                                        Parking Space
                                       Fire Meidiland Rose
Parking Space                                                             Lily of The Nile
                                   Pedestrian Walk
      Deer Grass                                                         Entry Median                    Fire Meidiland Rose
                           Huntington Carpet Rosemary                                                                                                   PROJECT:
Section D - Lenardo Drive Typical Planting                                                                            Typical Section
Source: CCA, 2010.
NTS
                                                                                                                                                                             LANDSCAPE DESIGN
Note: Illustrations are purely conceptual in
nature.  Final landscaping to be determined
with the submittal of a Development Plan.               Figure 6.4b Conceptual Landscape for Corridor Road
                                                                                                                                                                                GUIDELINES
48                                                                                The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                               April 5, 2011
                                                                                                                                                          SHEET NUMBER
                                                                                    6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Channel-Adjacent Slope
There is, and will continue to be, a slope bank along the southern and western edges of the project
immediately adjacent to the access road that serves the Torrance Lateral. The intent of the landscaping
for this zone will be to improve upon the existing unimproved condition, stabilize slopes with minimum
maintenance and water requirements, and soften the development edge as viewed from outside the
southern and western edges. This zone shall consist of a combination of native and adapted drought-
tolerant trees, shrubs and groundcovers.
6.5	     Walls and Fences
The need for walls or fences within The Boulevards at South Bay is a function of the location and building
orientation of commercial and residential uses. A primary goal of this project is to achieve an aesthetically and
functionally integrated mix of uses. Convenient access (pedestrian and auto) and visual access from residential
to commercial uses on the site are main components of integration. This can be accomplished through
creative site planning techniques without compromising privacy and the quality of living environments.
Another objective is to ensure the visual compatibility of on-site commercial uses with existing surrounding
residential areas. Rather than a traditional, complete separation of residential from commercial uses by
walls, barriers within the Specific Plan area will be incorporated only as needed to provide for privacy or
noise control.
The Boulevards at South Bay incorporates two types of walls and fences, each with its own purpose and
function. Perimeter walls are primarily intended to screen the Project from surrounding land uses while
also providing a secondary level of security. As such, these walls should be designed to be opaque and
consist of slump or split-faced block, or solid panel at heights of six to eight feet. Perimeter walls can also
be used to screen trash enclosures, utilities and other similar functional uses.
View fencing serves to buffer residential uses from surrounding traffic or, when desired, commercial
uses. As the name implies, however, view fencing does not completely shield residential uses from the
remainder of the site. The Boulevards at South Bay is intended to function as an integrated, mixed-use
project, and visual connectivity is an important component of the Project. View fencing, therefore, should
consist of a semiopaque combination of slump or split-faced block, wrought iron and/or landscaping
to provide a secure yet friendly border. View fencing may also consist entirely of landscaping. Materials
other than split face block may also be used with approval of the Planning Manager, so long as the design
is consistent with the design theme and intent outlined in the specific plan.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                      49
April 5, 2011
  6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.5.1	   General Provisions
The conceptual locations of walls and fencing, as they relate to the site perimeter, are shown on Figure
6.5a. The following guidelines are established to guide the location and treatment of walls and fences.
         A.	 Solid walls or screens shall be used to minimize the visual impacts of commercial development
              along the perimeter of the site. A combination of solid and transparent barriers should be used
              to separate the residential component of The Boulevards at South Bay from Del Amo Boulevard
              and Main Street. Fencing shall be designed with variations using accent elements in combination
              of pilasters, landscapes and setbacks to reduce monotonousness of fencing design.
         B. 	 A maximum 6-foot wall or fence may be incorporated for ground-floor screening of private
              outdoor space of residents. Other barrier alternatives such as a landscape screen may be used
              if noise is not a major consideration.
         C.	 Entrances and exits (both auto and pedestrian) for residential projects should be integrated
              with the entries of adjacent commercial sites so that internal access opportunities between
              uses are maximized.
         D.	 Common open space areas for commercial development, such as plaza or outdoor dining,
              should be accessible to adjacent residential uses.
         E.	 A landscape treatment shall be applied to spaces between a wall or fence and the adjacent sidewalk.
         F.	 Commercial loading areas shall be screened and located appropriately, where it is feasible, to
              minimize visual and noise impacts.
6.6	     Signage
Because of their high visibility, signs are prominent elements of the physical environment of The
Boulevards at South Bay. Signs announce the presence of The Boulevards at South Bay, welcome visitors
and residents, and help users navigate the site. The sign development standards set forth below are
intended to maximize the identification of The Boulevards at South Bay as a distinct location in a manner
that complements the overall image of the City of Carson. All signs proposed for The Boulevards at
South Bay Specific Plan will be governed by a comprehensive sign program, provided under separate
cover, that will provide consistency in design style and direction for placement and size of signs, including
a standardized way-finding program. The sign program shall also include provisions that ensure that
lighting from signs shall not intrude or impact adjacent residential uses.
General sign standards are provided in Table 6.6, while a conceptual map of sign locations is shown in
Figure 6.6a. Figure 6.6b provides some conceptual sketches to illustrate the maximum sign dimensions
set forth in Table 6.6. Figure 6.6c presents a conceptual illustration of two freeway icons and ten freeway
monument signs within the context of I-405. Final sign designs may vary and will be provided as part of a
comprehensive sign program that shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Officer. Any Electronic
Message Center sign shall be permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Section
9172.21 of the Carson Municipal Code.
50                                                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                    April 5, 2011
                                                                                                                                                   6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                                                                       Table 6.6	
                                                                                Sign Standards
                                                                       MAXIMUM SIGN
                                               MAXIMUM                    DIMENSIONS
 SIGN TYPE                                                                                                                                     NOTES
                                                 NUMBER
                                                                         Height          Width
 Freeway Icon                                           2                70 feet         25 feet       The base width will be 15–25 feet. If the base is greater than 15 feet, the sign will
                                                                                                       taper up to 15 feet at top. The attached reader board will be a maximum 16 feet
                                                                                                       high x 20 feet wide. The top of the reader board will be located no higher than
                                                                                                       40 feet above the base of the sign. If only one Freeway Icon sign is constructed, it
                                                                                                       will most likely be located in a central location, between the Freeway Monument
                                                                                                       signage. Height is measured from the elevation of I-405.
 Freeway Monument                                      10                35 feet         20 feet       While the overall height is 35 feet, the sign is stepped up the slope along the freeway.
                                                                                                       Each sign consists of a sloped base 5 feet high x 20 feet wide, tenant signage up to 15
                                                                                                       feet high x 20 feet wide, and a tower element that extends 15 feet above the tenant
                                                                                                       signage and is 3 feet in width. Height is measured from the midpoint between the
                                                                                                       elevation of I-405 and the top of slope at the eastern edge of the Project.
 Primary Entry Monument                                 4                15 feet         20 feet       While the overall height is 15 feet, the sign consists of tenant signage up to 10
                                                                                                       feet high x 20 feet wide and a tower element that extends 5 feet above the tenant
                                                                                                       signage and is 3 feet in width. Height is measured from the finished pad.
 Main Street Entry Monument                             1                14 feet          8 feet       While the overall height is 14 feet, the sign consists of tenant signage up to 6
                                                                                                       feet high x 8 feet wide and a tower element that extends 8 feet above the tenant
                                                                                                       signage and is 3 feet in width. Height is measured from the finished pad.
 North Del Amo Entry Monuments                          2                 8 feet         12 feet       If the signage serves residential development, the sign dimensions shall be no
                                                                                                       greater than 6 feet high x 8 feet wide. Height is measured from the finished pad.
 Parking Garage Signage                             Multiple             30 feet        300 feet       The multiple letter and graphic signs shall be provided on parking garage wall
                                                                                                       area facing Freeway with 60 percent maximum wall coverage.
 Note: Signage adjacent to the freeway will comply with Caltrans standards and requirements subject to the approval of the Planning Officer.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                                                                       51
April 5, 2011

 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Source: Nadel Retail Architects, 2010.       Figure 6.5a Walls and Fences
52                                     The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                    April 5, 2011
                                                          6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Source: AD/S, 2010.                       Figure 6.6a Conceptual Sign Locations
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                        53
April 5, 2011
 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                                                             Freeway Monument Sign
                                                                             Primary Entry Monument
                            Freeway Icon
                           North Del Amo
                          Entry Monument
                                                                          Main Street Entry Monument
                                           Figure 6.6b Conceptual Sign Illustratives
                                          Note: Sign designs are purely conceptual and are intended to
                                         illustrate dimensions. Final designs will be provided as part of
                                                                       the comprehensive sign program.
                                                                                     Source: AD/S, 2005.
54                                                   The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                           April 5, 2011
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
April 5, 2011
                                                                  Figure 6.6c Conceptual Freeway Signs Illustrative
                                                                           Note: Sign designs are purely conceptual and are intended to
                                                                          illustrate dimensions. Final designs will be provided as part of
                                                                                                                                             6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                   55                       Source: AD/S, 2005.                                         the comprehensive sign program.
  6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.7	      Lighting
The Boulevards at South Bay lighting standards establish a design framework to guide all future lighting
improvements and meet specific lighting standards for each particular application and type of use anticipated
within the proposed development options. These standards define the scale, brightness, direction, and shielding
for all lighting installations within the Project Site and are intended to restrict light intensity, minimize off-
site impacts, proscribe light control methods, and limit light pole heights. Design of lighting is focused on
providing comfortable spaces for people to walk and ensuring the safety of residents, visitors and employees.
A Lighting Palette, consisting of various lighting styles, is included in Appendix B.
The lighting standards and the resulting lighting improvements establish the basis for evaluation of the
proposed lighting impact of this development on the surrounding community. The information presented
within the lighting standards establish performance criteria based upon standard practices established
by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) for measurement and design of
light sources, illuminated surfaces, and lighting systems. Illuminance data and recommended practice
performance standards utilized in this report refer to standards defined in the 9th edition of the IESNA
Light Handbook, IESNA RP 6-01, IESNA RP-33-99, and IESNA RP-20-98.
Generally, all light sources will be shielded to prevent direct view of high brightness light sources from
adjacent properties. The lighting standards provide for specific control of the direction of light so as to
limit glare and any off-site view of glare. This control limits the light distribution angle so that light is
primarily directed down to the ground or up to a vertical surface (see Figure 6.7c). Special Event Lighting,
Entertainment Lighting, and Construction Lighting are exempt from these angular criteria if the light is
focused to restrict any direct illumination of adjacent residential properties.
To provide for safe illumination for vehicles and pedestrians within The Boulevards at South Bay pole-
mounted lights will be required for roads and sidewalks. To prevent direct view of these pole-mounted
light sources off-site and to reduce the overall brightness of the property, the standards establish maximum
heights for street and pedestrian lighting fixtures, maximum horizontal illuminance (foot-candles) at the
ground plane, and average to minimum uniformity ratios for light at the ground plane. Lighted signs,
landscape, decorative or ornamental structures will be limited to 7 - 50 candelas/square foot per IESNA
recommendation for luminous backgrounds in a shopping center. The lighting standards define special
lighting criteria for parking areas to prevent direct view of lighting fixtures. The performance criteria are
summarized below as a table of measurable numerical criteria based on the various options for commercial,
residential, and mixed-use development within the site.
Lighting conditions are analyzed and prototypical solutions are presented for the following project
components: Perimeter Roadways, Interior Roadways, At-Grade Parking, Parking Structures, Pedestrian
Sidewalks and Walkways, Retail Exterior, Office Exterior, and Residential Exterior. Design performance
standards are established for each of the above-mentioned project components by the following issues
and their listed measurable criteria:
Light Level Requirements: Task Illuminance (foot candles)
Light Control Methods: Glare/Light Distribution (luminaire photometrics)
Visibility: Pole Height Limits (section diagram)
Design Style or Character: Luminaire and pole characteristics, pattern of light, and color of light
56                                                                    The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                      April 5, 2011
                                                                                 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.7.1	   Light Level Requirements
The commercial and social use of The Boulevards at South Bay Project is dependent upon activities at
night, which will require illumination for vehicular and pedestrian access, advertising, and on-site tasks
or functions. Each of these activities has a defined light level requirement (illuminance, measured in fc)
as well as unique color, brightness, pattern, and architectural features. Low-pressure sodium lamps will
not be considered for design purposes within these standards. To provide for more aesthetically pleasing
environmental conditions, the use of low-pressure sodium lamps is not recommended due to their low
correlated color temperature (CCT), particularly less than 2,100K.
Table 6.7-1 summarized light intensity levels (illuminance, foot-candles) recommended by the IESNA
for safe operation of vehicles and pedestrian security. Future lighting improvements should meet these
minimum standards to provide adequate light for the property for public access. These standards are the
recommended maintained horizontal illuminance values for each specified use within the project.
                                                      Table 6.7-1 	
                                      Light Intensity Minimum Requirements
                                                  LOCATION OF       FOOT-CANDLES UNIFORM RATIO
                   SPECIFIC USE/AREA
                                                 FOOT-CANDLES         AVERAGE    (MIN TO MAX fc)
            PERIMETER AND INTERIOR ROADWAYS
            On-Site Circulation Roads                 Pavement           1.0            5:1
            Entrance Roads                            Pavement           1.2            5:1
            RETAIL EXTERIOR
            Entrances                                  Doorway           5.0             -
            Facade Floodlighting                       Building          3.0             -
            OFFICE EXTERIOR
            Entrances                                  Doorway           3.0             -
            Facade Floodlighting                       Building          3.0             -
            RESIDENTIAL ROADWAYS
            Roadway                                   Pavement           0.6            5:1
            ON-GRADE PARKING
            Parking                                 Parking Surface      1.0            15:1
            PARKING STRUCTURES
            Parking                                 Parking Surface      5.0            10:1
            SIDEWALKS
            Residential                               Pavement           0.6             -
            Commercial                                Pavement           1.0             -
         A.	 Perimeter Roadways: The lighting for perimeter roadways shall provide adequate illumination
              for safe and efficient vehicular travel. Roadway lighting fixtures shall either be equipped
              with glare shields or be of a high cutoff type. On-site circulation roads will conform to
              an “Intermediate” classification characterized by medium-sized residential and business
              developments with frequent moderately heavy nighttime pedestrian activity. The entrance
              roads will be designed to conform to a “Commercial” classification characterized by dense
              business developments with heavy nighttime vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                               57
April 5, 2011

 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
        B.	 Interior Roadways: The lighting for interior roadways shall provide adequate illumination
            for safe and efficient vehicular travel. Roadway lighting fixtures shall either be equipped
            with glare shields or be of a high cutoff type. Lighting of roadways categorized as Scenic
            Byways shall be of a minimal level, with fixtures being shielded to prevent glare. Circulation
            roads within the mixed-use/residential sites will be designed to conform to an “Intermediate”
            classification defined by medium-sized residential and business developments with frequent
            moderately heavy nighttime pedestrian activity. The Boulevards at South Bay entrance roads
            will be designed to conform to a “Commercial” classification defined by dense business
            developments with heavy nighttime vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
        C.	 Retail Exterior: The lighting for the exterior of retail buildings and spaces shall be safe
            and attractive to customers. This can be achieved mainly with entrance accent and façade
            floodlighting. “Entrances” and “Façade Floodlighting,” as listed in Table 6.7-1, refer to
            entrances of dense retail developments with heavy nighttime vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
        D.	 Office Exterior: The lighting for the exterior of office buildings and spaces shall be to a
            level that provides security and egress. If the office use is part of a mixed-use building, then
            the retail criteria can override the values shown in Table 6.7-1. “Entrances,” as shown in
            Table 6.7-1, refer to entrances that are unoccupied at nighttime, requiring lighting for entrance
            identification. “Egress lighting” applies to areas that will be unoccupied at nighttime, requiring
            lighting for the safe path of travel.
        E.	 Residential Exterior: The lighting for the exterior of residential buildings and spaces shall be
            to a level that provides security and safe egress. If part of a mixed-use building, then the retail
            criteria can override the lower values. “Entrances” refers to entrance areas where lighting is
            required for entrance identification and “Egress Lighting” applies to areas where lighting is
            required for safe path of travel.
        F.	 At-Grade Parking: The lighting for at-grade parking lots shall be to a level that provides
            safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians, and the security and safety of customers and
            employees, as approved by the Sheriff ’s Department. Lighting fixtures for parking lots shall
            either be equipped with glare shields and/or with cutoff capability. Lighting fixture standard
            height shall not be in excess of what is necessary to meet with recommended minimum
            illuminance levels identified in Table 6.7-1.
        G.	 Parking Structures: The lighting for parking structures shall be provided at a level that
            enhances pedestrian safety and visibility. These recommended values should apply to those
            parking structures used by apartment building and/or commercial developments.
        H.	 Pedestrian Sidewalks and Walkways: The lighting for pedestrian sidewalks and bikeways
            shall be to a level that increases pathway visibility and safety of pedestrians. For the purposes
            of these standards and guidelines, “Intermediate” refers to medium-sized residential and
            business developments with frequent moderately heavy nighttime pedestrian activity, and
            “Commercial” refers to dense business developments with heavy nighttime vehicular and
            pedestrian traffic.
58                                                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                  April 5, 2011

                                                                                                                                6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.7.2	       Light Control Methods
             A.	 Glare/Light Distribution: Offensive or unattractive lighting results from excessive contrast, or
                  glare. Glare conditions usually result from highly visible lamps (light bulbs) within landscape,
                  streetlights, parking, security, or entertainment lighting. Proper design and selection of light
                  fixtures, mounting heights, and placement will control the visibility of light sources from
                  outside or within the Project Site, and therefore limit the perception of glare. The lighting
                  standards establish criteria to control the light output, mounting height, and placement of
                  fixtures to reduce glare.
             B.	 All Parking and Roadway light poles from 12 ft. high to 50 ft. high shall be in accordance with
                  California 2005 Title 24 Energy Code cutoff distributions (see Table 6.7-2).
             C.	 Pole Height Limits: Light pole height limits are established to prevent light trespass from the
                  site onto adjacent properties. These height restrictions will not eliminate complete visibility
                  of the pole itself. Height restrictions in combination with the shielding and glare control
                  restrictions will decrease visibility of the high brightness lamps within the pole fixtures and
                  will prevent stray light from extending over the property line. Lighting shall be constructed,
                  shielded and directed so that adjacent residences are not impacted by light or glare coming
                  from the project site.
                                                                           Table 6.7-2 	
                                             Luminaire Photometric Classification
            NAME                                                            DESCRIPTION OF DISTRIBUTION
   ILLUMINANCE
   Type I                   Narrow, symmetric illuminance pattern
   Type II                  Slightly wider illuminance pattern than Type I
   Type III                 Wide illuminance pattern
   Type IV                  Widest illuminance pattern
   Type V                   Symmetrical circular illuminance pattern
   Type VS                  Symmetrical, nearly square illuminance pattern
   CUTOFF INTENSITY
   Full cutoff              A luminaire light distribution where zero candela intensity occurs at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and at all greater angles than
                            nadir. Additionally, the candela per 1000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 100 (10%) at a vertical angle of 80 degrees above
                            nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire.
   Cutoff                   A luminaire light distribution where the candela per 1000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 25 (2.5%) at an angle of 90 degrees
                            above nadir, and 100 (10%) at a vertical angel of 80 degrees above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire.
6.7.3	       Site Lighting Exhibits
Lighting design exhibits as shown on Figures 6.7a thru 6.7h demonstrate lighting design for each area with
intended pole locations and heights, and luminaire head orientations.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                                            59
April 5, 2011
 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Source: The Planning Center, 2009. Figure 6.7a Site Lighting Exhibit Key Map
60                                        The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                       April 5, 2011
                                                              6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Figure 6.7b  Section A - Del Amo Entrance
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
Figure 6.7c  Section B - Corridor Road in Entertainment Areas
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                            61
April 5, 2011
 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Figure 6.7d  Section C - Typical Corridor Road
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
Figure 6.7e  Section D - Loop Road (Private)
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
62                                             The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                            April 5, 2011
                                                                6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Figure 6.7f  Section E - Freeway Edge (I-405/Project Interface)
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
Figure 6.7g  Section - F Channel-Adjacent Slope (Residential/Project Interface)
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                              63
April 5, 2011
 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Figure 6.7h  Section G - Del Amo Boulevard
Source: The Planning Center, 2010.
64                                         The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                        April 5, 2011
                                                                                   6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.8	     Service, Trash and Utility Areas
         A.	 Service, maintenance, storage and trash areas shall be located in discreet places to the extent
              feasible while still allowing convenient access for each tenant, and screened with landscaping
              from adjacent public right-of-ways, public plazas, pedestrian corridors and building fronts.
         B.	 All trash and garbage bins shall be stored in an enclosure and designed to architecturally
              integrate within the overall design theme of the development.
         C.	 Trash enclosures located in obscured areas such as behind buildings or adjacent to loading
              areas shall also be screened from view, but the design of the enclosure shall consist of solid
              fencing only—landscape and decorative treatments are not required in these areas.
         D.	 Trash enclosures shall be constructed of substantial building materials used in the design
              of the building(s). Gates shall be constructed of durable building materials that screen a
              minimum of 80 percent of the view of the trash enclosure. Wood or chain link gates are not
              permitted.
         E.	 Trash enclosures shall include provisions for concrete pads or appropriately designed asphalt
              sections in front of the enclosure. The area in front of the trash enclosure shall be a minimum
              of six (6) feet to reduce pavement damage from disposal trucks.
         		
         F.	 When non-residential buildings are adjacent to residential uses, loading and delivery shall be
              planned to occur on the side of the building away from residences. Loading and delivery areas
              shall not be located in a required setback area.
         		
         G.	 Service areas and loading docks shall not be directly visible from a public street. Screening
              shall match the design of the building and the overall landscape design theme of the
              development.
         		
         H.	 Truck maneuvering/circulation areas adjacent to residential properties shall be designated to
              prohibit trucks from parking and idling in these locations, except in approved loading spaces
              or docks.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                   65
April 5, 2011

  6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.9	     Public Art
Public art is an instrumental feature that can be used to create a connection between the public and any
particular project or space. Public art makes spaces more interesting, helps to distinguish one place from
another by creating landmarks that are easily recognizable, and creates a unique shopping, working or
living environment. Art also revitalizes public spaces and makes them more welcoming. By enhancing
the overall quality of a project and giving it a unique character, public art increases a project’s value. The
following are public art requirements and guidelines.
6.9.1	   Public Art Requirements
         A.	 Public art within the Specific Plan project area shall be provided for the following:
             1.	 New residential or commercial development having total project costs of $300,000 or more,
                 as determined by the City’s valuation of building permits issued for the development;
             2.	 Expansion of existing buildings or remodeling of existing buildings when any such work
                 has a building permit valuation of $300,000 or more.
         B.	 Public art provided shall have a value equal to one-half of 1 percent (0.50 percent) of the total
             building costs (as measured by building permit valuations), excluding land, site development,
             off-site requirements and remediation costs. The value of the public art shall include the art
             piece itself and the cost of installation.
         C.	 Public art may be installed concurrently with each building that triggers the public art
             requirement; or the value of the required public art for each building can be consolidated, or
             banked, and applied to the provision of larger installations that serve multiple buildings.
         D.	 The public art requirements shall not apply to reconstruction of structures that have been
             damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity.
6.9.2	   General Provisions
         A.	 Artwork siting and its visibility are important design considerations. The artwork shall be
             easily visible to the general public and be located in an area specifically designated on the
             approved building plans. Appropriate locations may include entryways, greenbelts, pathways
             and building exteriors.
         B.	 Installation of the artwork shall be planned and implemented to enhance the piece and allow
             for unobstructed public viewing from as many angles as possible.
         C.	 The artwork shall be constructed of permanent materials with a high level of durability and
             weather resistance and requiring a low level of maintenance.
         D.	 The continued maintenance of the artwork in the specific plan area shall be the responsibility
             of the property owner. Stolen or vandalized art must be replaced or repaired as close as
             possible to its original form.
66                                                                The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                   April 5, 2011

                                                                                    6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
         E.	 Artwork must be designed by artists with experience and knowledge of monumental-scale
              public art.
         F.	 All forms of original visual art are encouraged, including, but not limited to:
              1. 	 Painting of all media, such as portable and permanently affixed works such as murals;
              2.	 Sculpture, which may be in the round, bas-relief, high relief, mobile, fountain, kinetic,
                   electronic, architectural, etc. in any material or combination of materials; and
              3.	 Other visual media including, but not limited to: prints, drawings, stained glass, artistic
                   lighting, mosaics, photography, clay, wood, metals, paving, plant materials, plastics, or
                   other durable and weather-resistant materials.
         G.	 A wide range of styles, materials and types of artworks is encouraged to assure a balanced and
              interesting collection.
         H.	 Artwork shall be constructed in a size proportional to the scale of the development.
         I.	 Artwork shall be an integral part of the landscaping and/or architecture of the building.
         J.	 Exterior artwork(s) should be adequately lit to be clearly visible from sidewalks during evening
              hours. Interior artworks should be adequately lit during all hours of public access.
         K.	 To provide diversity in artwork and opportunity among artists, generally not more than five
              pieces by the same artist are permitted.
         L.	 All art within the Specific Plan area belongs to the project owner. The artist, project developer
              and architect should be credited for their roles in the art project with a plaque placed near the
              art piece.
         M.	 Artworks shall be a permanent part of any development within the Specific Plan and must
              remain in place for the life of the development. If a portion or all of the Project is rebuilt
              or remodeled, resulting in the movement or removal of art required by the Specific Plan, the
              required art shall be re-created according to this Public Art section of the Specific Plan.
         	    When property within the Specific Plan area is transferred to new owners, they shall be
              informed of their responsibility to maintain the artwork and surrounding landscaping and
              lighting and of their inability to remove any existing artwork without written City approval.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                    67
April 5, 2011

 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.10	 Noise and Vibration
6.10.1	 Noise
        A.	 Where residential uses are potentially exposed to interior or exterior noise levels greater than
            those permitted by Chapter 5 of the Carson Municipal Code, certification from a licensed
            acoustical engineer shall be obtained to document attenuation to those maximum levels. The
            exterior standards shall be measured either at the closer of the property line or the nearest
            noise sensitive use such as a patio, yard or landscaped open space.
        B.	 Commercial uses shall be designed and operated, and hours of operation limited, where
            appropriate, so that neighboring residents are not exposed to offensive noise, especially from
            traffic, trash collection, routine deliveries or late-night activity. No use shall produce continual
            loading or unloading of heavy trucks at the site between the hours of 8 p.m. and 7 a.m.
        C.	 Prior to issuance of building permits, the applicant shall submit a detailed acoustical study
            demonstrating that all project structures will meet applicable City interior noise levels and
            exterior living area noise levels, in accordance with applicable noise standards and zoning
            regulations.
            1.	 The study shall be prepared by a City-approved acoustical expert, to the satisfaction of the
                Planning Manager.
            2.	 The study shall document projected ultimate noise exposure for interior office, retail
                and residential space and shall demonstrate that Project design plans have incorporated
                adequate sound attenuation measures to achieve the applicable noise standards.
        D.	 Noise mitigation and proper design may include, but shall not be limited to, building orientation,
            double or extra-strength windows, wall and ceiling insulation, and orientation and insulation
            of vents. Where it is necessary that windows be closed in order to achieve the required level,
            means shall be provided for ventilation/cooling to provide a habitable environment.
        E.	 A sound wall may be required at the west property line adjacent to the Torrance Lateral
            as deemed necessary to minimize visual and noise impacts subject to the approval of the
            Planning Manager.
6.10.2	 Vibration
        A.	 No use, activity or process shall produce continual vibrations or noxious odors that are
            perceptible without instruments by the average person at the property lines of the site or
            within the interior of residential units on the site.
68                                                                   The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                    April 5, 2011
                                                                                       6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.11	 Energy Conservation
The California Energy Code, Part 6 of Title 24, has codified many ways to reduce energy usage. It
addresses lighting, building construction and heating/cooling systems. Compliance with this Code results
in a reduction of energy usage for any given building or complex. Additional steps can be taken to further
reduce the energy usage and reduce operating costs of a building or complex. The Boulevards at South
Bay Project will meet or exceed the requirements of Title 24 through measures that may include:
         A.	 Use of light-colored roofing materials to reflect heat and reduce cooling requirements in
              residential and retail buildings. Energy Star-labeled roofing materials are encouraged.
         B.	 Installation of Energy Star-labeled appliances (e.g., water heaters) to the greatest feasible
              extent. Solar, electric (efficiency rating of at least 0.92) or lower-nitrogen oxides (as defined by
              the Air Quality Management District) gas-fired water heaters are strongly encouraged.
         C.	 Participation in programs offered by or sponsored by local utilities such as:
              1.	 California Energy Star New Homes Program
              2.	 Residential Property Development Program
              3.	 California Home Energy Efficiency Rating System (CHEERS) Program
              4.	 Savings by Design Program
         D. 	 Development of a recycling program for residential and commercial uses to recycle paper,
              glass, plastic and other by-products of business or residential activities.
         E. Provision of three electric vehicle charging stations in appropriately spaced locations throughout
              the Specific Plan area.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                       69
April 5, 2011
 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.12	 Residential Condominium Requirements
6.12.1	 Private Storage Space
        A.	 Private Storage Space. Units within the Project developed at densities of 25 units per acre
            or less shall have at least two hundred (200) cubic feet of enclosed, weather-proofed and
            lockable storage space for the sole use of the unit owner. Units within the Project developed
            at densities over 25 units per acre shall have at least one hundred (100) cubic feet of private
            storage space as described above.
             1.	Such space may be provided within individual storage lockers, cabinets or closets, and may be
                 split among two (2) locations. Moreover, it is the intention of this standard to require space
                 over and above that normally associated with the day-to-day functioning of the unit, such
                 as guest, linen or clothes closets or food pantries that are customarily within the unit. Thus,
                 while providing such private storage space within the limits of the unit is not precluded, it
                 shall be over and above that which would otherwise be provided within the unit.
             2.	 If such space is located within a common area within the site, the residential association
                 shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of the exterior surface of the space in
                 order to assure that the surface is maintained in a manner compatible with the architectural
                 treatment of the Project. Regardless of the location, the precise architectural treatment of
                 such space shall be approved by the Planning Department to ensure that such areas are
                 safe, convenient and unobtrusive to the functional and aesthetic qualities of the Project.
6.12.2	 Treatment of Utilities
        A.	 Plumbing Shut-Off Valves. Water supply lines to each unit within the Project shall be fitted
            with shut-off valves of either a hand valve or screw-stop type. If there are extenuating
            circumstances which make the installation of such valves impracticable, the Planning
            Commission may approve a system which provides individual shut-off valves ahead of each
            fixture within the unit. A shut-off valve shall also be provided ahead of each water-supplied
            appliance not contained within a unit.
        B.	 Drip Pans. Clothes washers, dish washers, hot water heaters and any other appliance which
            the Building Official determines to be a potential source of water leakage or flooding shall be
            installed with built-in drip pans and appropriate drains subject to the approval of the Building
            and Safety Division of the Community Development Department.
        C.	 Utility Meters. With the exception of water supply and central heating and/or air conditioning,
            each utility that is controlled and consumed within the individual unit shall be separately
            metered in such a way that the unit owner can be separately billed for its use.
        D.	 Circuit Breakers. Each unit shall have its own circuit breaker panel for all electrical circuits
            and outlets which serve the unit. Such panel shall be accessible without leaving the unit.
70                                                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                    April 5, 2011
                                                                                   6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.12.3	 Isolation of Vibration and Sources of Structure-Borne Noise
         A.	 Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. Where units have common walls and/or floors
              and ceilings, all permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps and
              compactors which, because of their rotation, reciprocation, expansion and/or contraction,
              turbulence, oscillation, pulsation, impaction or detonation, are determined by the Building
              Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise, shall be shock mounted
              with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Building
              Official. Domestic appliances which are cabinet installed or built into the individual units,
              such as clothes washers and dryers, or other appliances which are determined by the Building
              Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise, shall be isolated from
              cabinets and the floor or ceiling by resilient gaskets and vibration mounts approved by the
              Building Official. The cabinets in which they are installed should be offset from the back
              wall with strip gasketing of felt, cork or similar material approved by the Building Official.
              Where such appliances utilize water, flexible connectors shall be installed on all water lines.
              If provision is made within the units for the installation of nonpermanent appliances such as
              clothes washers and dryers, then permanent rubber mounting bases and surface plates shall
              be installed in a manner approved by the Building Official.
         B.	 Location of Plumbing Fixtures. No plumbing fixture shall be located on a common wall
              between two (2) separate units where it would back up to a living room, family room, dining
              room, den or bedroom of an adjoining unit.
         C.	 Separation of Vents and Lines. No common water supply lines, vents, or drain lines shall be
              permitted for contiguous units unless there is at least eight and one-half (8-1/2) feet of pipe
              between the closest plumbing fixtures within the separate units. The Building Official may
              approve other methods of isolating sound transmission through plumbing lines where their
              effectiveness can be demonstrated.
         D.	 Isolation and Insulation of Lines. All water supply lines within residential condominium
              projects shall be isolated from wood or metal framing with pipe isolators specifically
              manufactured for that purpose and approved by the Building Official. In multistory
              condominium projects all vertical drainage pipe shall be surrounded by three-quarter (3/4)
              inch thick dense insulation board or full thick fiberglass or wool blanket insulation for its
              entire length, including the sections that pass through wood or metal framing.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                    71
April 5, 2011
 6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.12.4	 Attenuation of Noise
        A.	 General. Wall and floor/ceiling assemblies separating units from each other or from public or
            quasi-public spaces such as interior corridors, laundry rooms, recreation rooms, and garages
            shall provide airborne sound insulation for walls, and both airborne and impact sound
            insulation for floor/ceiling assemblies.
        B.	 Airborne Sound Insulation. All wall assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous
            paragraph shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 58 STC (Sound
            Transmission Class). All floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous
            paragraph shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 50 STC. Wood
            floor joists and subflooring shall not be continuous between separate condominium units.
            Penetrations or openings in the construction for piping, electrical outlets and devices, recess
            cabinets, bathtubs, soffits, heating, and ventilating and/or air conditioning intake and exhaust
            ducts, and the like, shall be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise treated to maintain the required
            rating, and such treatment shall be approved by the Building Official. Entrance doors to the
            unit shall be of solid construction and, together with perimeter seals, shall have a minimum
            rating of 30 STC. Such perimeter seals shall be maintained in effective operating condition.
        C.	 Impact Sound Insulation. All separating floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded
            to above shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 69 IIC (Impact
            Insulation Class). Floor coverings may be included in the assembly to obtain the required
            ratings, but must be retained as a permanent part of the assembly and may only be replaced
            by another floor covering that provides the same or greater impact insulation.
        D.	 Verification of Sound Class. STC and IIC ratings shall be based on the results of laboratory
            measurements and will not be subjected to field testing. The STC rating shall be based on the
            American Society for Testing and Materials system specified in ASTM B90-66t or equivalent.
            The IIC rating shall be based on the system in use at the National Bureau of Standards or
            equivalent. Ratings obtained from other testing procedures will require adjustment to the
            above rating systems.
72                                                                  The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                    April 5, 2011
                                                                            7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
7.0	 DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
This section establishes design standards and guidelines to ensure that The Boulevards at South Bay
will possess an identifiable look and feel. The standards and guidelines in this chapter will shape the
development by providing specific design criteria for building orientation, landscaping, walls and fences, and
other design elements integral to creating development projects that fit into the theme of the community.
Architecture standards and guidelines are also provided to ensure that buildings within The Boulevards at
South Bay are attractive, relate to one another and create a sense of place.
The pictures and illustrations contained in this section are provided to convey the general design intent
of the standards and guidelines and are not intended to require the specific design style depicted. Like
development standards, design standards constitute regulations, requirements and by-laws by which
development must abide, and are indicated by the use of the word “shall.” Design guidelines generally use
the word “should” and identify actions or outcomes that are encouraged but not mandatory.
7.1	     Site Design & Landscape
7.1.1	   Commercial
         A.	 Building Orientation and Site Planning
              1.	 Building placement and orientation shall
                  be organized to create visual interest along
                  public right-of-ways, particularly oriented at
                  intersection nodes, and project entryways.
         		
              2.	 Buildings shall be oriented so that public
                  access or windows face public spaces.
              3.	 Multiple buildings in a single area should
                  be grouped and organized to demonstrate
                  a positive functional relationship to one
                  another. The grouping of multiple buildings
                  should be clustered to create functional plazas
                  and pedestrian corridors. Where clustering is
                  impractical, a visual link should be established
                  between buildings through the integration of
                  an arcade system, trellis, colonnade or other
                  such open structure.
              4.	 Buildings with special architectural elements, such as clock towers, should be positioned
                  on corners of significant intersections or entryways to enhance the sense of arrival and
                  project monumentation. This does not preclude landmark structures, public plazas or
                  project entry monumentation/signage at these locations.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                   73
April 5, 2011

 7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
             5.	 Stacking lanes for drive-through food service
                 windows shall accommodate a stacking for
                 at least eight (8) cars and all other service
                 widows shall accommodate stacking for at
                 least four (4) cars.
             6.	 Drive-through businesses shall be visually
                 screened and shall be situated so as to not
                 block any other drive aisle or parking space.
             7.	 Drive-throughs shall be separated from residential properties by an intervening building or
                 a maximum six (6) foot high wall and a ten (10) foot wide buffering landscape strip.
         B. Public Spaces and Pedestrian Circulation
             1.	 Areas other than those spaces occupied by
                 buildings, the first nine feet surrounding all
                 public (non-service) sides of the buildings,
                 parking, service drives or other surface
                 circulation should be used as plaza areas
                 with amenities such as enhanced landscape/
                 hardscape, outdoor seating areas, trellises,
                 ornamental trees, benches,           planters,
                 open space, water features, public art, and
                 pedestrian-accessible spaces.
             2.	 Public plazas shall be located near building
                 entrances or areas of high pedestrian traffic
                 to ensure their use and highest functionality.
                 Buildings clustered together should
                 coordinate their public plaza space with one
                 another to provide larger plaza spaces that
                 are centrally located and serve multiple uses.
             		
             3.	 Public plazas shall be oriented to maximize
                 the visual and physical link from public right-
                 of-ways and pedestrian corridors.
             		
             4.	 Public plazas should be either contiguous
                 or connected via landscaped pedestrian
                 walkways.
74                                                               The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                April 5, 2011
                                                                              7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
              5. 	Pedestrian circulation shall be located primarily along internal roadways and building
                  frontages to provide safe pedestrian crossing and access through the commercial area.
                  The space between the sides of buildings should incorporate seating areas and enhanced
                  pedestrian connections where appropriate.
              		
              6.	 Pedestrian connections through the parking fields to Loop Road should provide
                  landscaping and amenities to create visual interest, pedestrian access and rest breaks over
                  longer distances of pavement. A minimum five (5) foot wide sidewalk with five (5) feet
                  of landscaping (either on one side or in total on both sides) should be provided through
                  these pedestrian connections.
              		
              7.	 Pedestrian circulation should be enhanced with landscape/hardscape treatments to provide
                  a pedestrian-friendly shopping environment.
              8.	 Bike racks shall be provided at convenient locations throughout The Boulevards at South Bay.
			
         C. Parking Lots
              		
              1.	 Parking lot entryways and primary intersection nodes should be treated with special
                  landscape elements, such as special paving, graphic signage, specialty lighting, ornamental
                  trees, or flowering plants, that will provide an identity to the project.
              2.	 No more than 10 percent of the required parking should be in the rear service area of a
                  project site, with the exception of the Lifestyle & Entertainment Area.
              3.	 Parking structures shall be screened and shall include architectural detailing, façade
                  treatment, artwork, landscaping, or similar visual features to enhance the street façade.
              		
         D. Landscape
              1.	 Landscape treatments shall be used to
                  enhance intersection nodes, public right-of-
                  ways, building fronts, pedestrian corridors,
                  and public plazas.
              2.	 All areas not utilized for parking, buildings,
                  plazas or access/circulation should be
                  landscaped to the back of curb.
              		
              3.	 Landscape treatments should be used to
                  screen the visual impacts of parking areas,
                  sides of buildings and service, trash and utility
                  areas.
              		
              4.	 Landscaped areas should be irrigated with
                  permanent automatic irrigation systems.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                    75
April 5, 2011

 7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
         E. Walls and Fences
             1.	 Walls and fences shall be utilized to minimize the visual impacts of commercial development
                 along the perimeter of the site.	
             2.	 Solid walls shall be screened with ornamental trees and plant material at a minimum of
                 three (3) feet in height.
             3.	 A landscape treatment should be applied to spaces between a wall or fence and the adjacent
                 sidewalk.
             4.	 Design of all walls and fencing shall be consistent in terms of material, color and detail
                 with the architecture of the project.
             		
             5.	 The application of materials, colors, textures and alignment in the design of walls shall be
                 used to relieve visual monotony. Pilasters should be placed at wall terminus points and as
                 determined to be necessary for improved aesthetics.
         F. Service, Trash and Utility Areas
             	
             1.	 All trash enclosures should be screened with
                 landscape treatment if located adjacent to or
                 within a landscaped area. Potted plants may
                 be used in landfill areas.
             		
             2.	 Exterior on-site utilities, including sewer, gas,
                 water, electric, telephone, and communications
                 equipment should be installed underground,
                 where feasible. Transformers and other
                 utility equipment that must be above ground
                 should be screened and incorporated into
                 the landscape wherever possible.
             3.	 Trash enclosures shall be located on a four-inch concrete pad screened by a six-foot-high
                 decorative concrete block wall that is compatible with the architectural design of the main
                 building. When adjacent to multistory buildings, said enclosure shall incorporate an opaque
                 decorative gate, a screened pedestrian access door and decorative beams or other roofing
                 material to provide visual screening from said multistory buildings. Trash enclosure design
                 is to be approved by the Planning Manager prior to issuance of any building permit(s).
76                                                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                  April 5, 2011
                                                                              7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
7.1.2	   Residential
         A.	 Building Orientation and Site Planning
              1.	 Residential buildings shall emphasize
                  pedestrian access and connections to public
                  sidewalks, paths, recreational facilities and
                  enhanced edges.
              2.	 Structures should be configured and oriented
                  to afford a sense of individuality and privacy
                  and to create small-scale public spaces.
              3.	 Where possible, the housing should be oriented to streets and pedestrian walkways.
              4.	 Windows of interior living spaces should overlook streets and public spaces.
              5.	 Front doors and entrances to buildings shall be clearly defined and articulated and shall be
                  easily recognizable from pedestrian and vehicular vantage points.
              6.	 Residential units shall be designed to ensure the security of residents through the
                  provision of secure entrances and exits that are separate from non-residential uses and
                  are directly accessible to parking areas. Non-residential and residential uses shall not have
                  common entrance hallways or common balconies. These separations shall be shown on
                  the development plan and shall be permanently maintained.
         B.	 Public Spaces and Pedestrian Circulation
              1.	 Recreational facilities shall be conveniently and centrally located for the majority of units.
              2.	 Entrances and exits (both auto and pedestrian) for residential projects should be integrated
                  with the entries of adjacent commercial sites so that internal access opportunities between
                  uses are maximized.
              3.	 Residential uses shall have one off-street loading space or moving plaza for every 150 units.
              4.	 Loading spaces or moving plazas shall be located near the entries and/or elevators.
              5.	 Loading spaces or moving plazas shall be incorporated into the design of vehicular access areas.
              6.	 Decorative paving, removable bollards and potted plants are permitted and encouraged to
                  enhance loading spaces and moving plazas.
              7.	 Loading spaces and moving plazas may be located on a local or connector street with the
                  approval of the Traffic Engineer. The adjacent parkway and setback landscape treatment
                  shall be designed to allow for loading and unloading.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                       77
April 5, 2011
 7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
         C.	 Parking
             1.	 The size and placement of garages should be varied, although garage “rows” in service
                 areas hidden from view are acceptable. Garages shall not dominate the street scene.
             2.	 Parking structures shall be screened and shall include architectural detailing, façade
                 treatment, artwork, landscaping, or similar visual features to enhance the street façade.
         D.	 Landscaping
             1.	 Landscape treatments shall be used to
                 enhance intersection nodes, public right-
                 of-ways, building fronts and pedestrian
                 corridors.
             2.	 Landscaping around the entire foundation
                 base of buildings should be provided to
                 enhance the area between the parking areas,
                 walkways and the structures.
         E.	 Walls and Fences
             1.	 A combination of solid and transparent barriers should be used to separate the residential
                 component of The Boulevards at South Bay from Del Amo Boulevard and Main Street.
                 Fencing should vary in setback, providing landscape recesses and flat expanses of wall no
                 longer than 25 feet in length.
             2.	 View fences shall include landscape sufficient to screen views of private yards from
                 adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
78                                                               The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                 April 5, 2011

                                                                                  7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
              3.	 A maximum six-foot wall or fence may be
                  incorporated for ground-floor screening of
                  private outdoor space of residences. Other
                  barrier alternatives such as a landscape
                  screen 	may be used if noise is not a major
                  consideration. 	
              4.	 A landscape treatment shall be applied to
                  spaces between a wall or fence and the
                  adjacent sidewalk.
              5.	 Design of all walls and fencing shall be
                  consistent in terms of material, color and detail with the architecture of the project.
         F.	 Service Areas and Trash Enclosures
              	
              1.	 Service, maintenance, storage, and trash areas shall be located in discreet places to the extent
                  feasible while still allowing convenient access for each tenant, and screened with landscaping
                  from adjacent public right-of-ways, public plazas, pedestrian corridors and building fronts.
              2.	 Exterior on-site utilities, including sewer, gas, water, electric, telephone and communications
                  equipment should be installed underground, where feasible. Transformers and other utility
                  equipment that must be above ground should be screened and incorporated into the
                  landscape wherever possible.
              3.	 Trash enclosures shall be located on a four inch concrete pad screened by a six foot
                  high decorative concrete block wall that is compatible with the architectural design of the
                  main building. When adjacent to multi-story buildings, said enclosure shall incorporate
                  an opaque decorative gate, a screened pedestrian access door and decorative beams or
                  other roofing material to provide visual screening from said multi-story buildings. Trash
                  enclosure design is to be approved by the Planning Manager prior to issuance of any
                  building permit(s).
7.1.3	   Mixed-Use
The design standards and guidelines described above for individual commercial and residential uses shall
also apply to horizontally and vertically mixed-uses. Additional
standards and guidelines for mixed-uses are provided below.
         A.	 Building Orientation and Site Planning
              	
              1.	 The ground level of buildings shall provide
                  visual and functional interest for the pedestrian
                  and motorist through extensive window space,
                  pedestrian-scale signs, sitting areas, varied
                  entrances and architectural detailing.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                        79
April 5, 2011
 7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
             2.	 The residential units shall be designed to
                 ensure the security of residents through the
                 provision of secured entrances and exits that
                 are separate from the non-residential uses
                 and are directly accessible to parking areas.
                 Non-residential and residential uses shall not
                 have common entrance hallways or common
                 balconies. These separations shall be shown
                 on the development plan and the separations
                 shall be permanently maintained.
         B.	 Public Plazas and Pedestrian Circulation
             1.	 Pedestrian access from residential parking areas to commercial areas is encouraged through
                 the use of restricted access pedestrian gates to facilitate access for residents to adjacent
                 commercial services.
         C.	 Parking
             1.	 In vertically mixed uses, parking spaces designated for non-residential and residential uses
                 shall be marked by the use of posting, pavement markings or physical separation.
7.2	     Architecture
7.2.1	   Commercial
         	
         A. Building Massing, Scale and Form
             		
             1.	 Buildings and structures shall be designed at
                 a human scale that is inviting and attractive.
                 The scale of buildings shall relate to adjacent
                 public plazas, pedestrian corridors and other
                 surrounding buildings. They should typically
                 comply with the heights specified in Table 6.2-2.
                 However, buildings within the centralized, retail
                 “entertainment” component of Development
                 District 2, heights for secondary and major
                 feactures may deviate from the Table where it can
                 be demonstrated that such deviation enhances
                 the visual attractiveness of the immediate
                 public space, and is appropriate in scale to the
                 surrounding buildings and outdoor pedestrian
                 space subject to Administrative Design Overlay
                 Review.
80                                                                The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                 April 5, 2011

                                                                                7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
              2.	 Building facades and footprints shall be articulated to reduce the large scale and often
                  uniform, impersonal appearance of many large retail buildings and to provide visual
                  interest. Building facades shall vary in height or vary the planes of exterior walls in depth
                  and direction. There shall be no long flat expanses of walls that exceed 50 feet (150 feet
                  for buildings larger than 50,000 square feet) without incorporating at least two of the
                  following: color change, material change, texture change, plane projections of recesses,
                  trellises, balconies or windows.
              3.	 Articulated facades should be integrated on all sides of the building visible to the interior of the
                  site or to uses or roadways off-site. The intent is to continue attractive surface detailing which
                  strengthens community design themes and the character and quality of the development.
              		
              4.	 Ground floor facades that face public right-
                  of-ways should integrate arcades, display
                  windows, entry areas, awnings, or other
                  pedestrian-friendly design elements.
              		
              5.	 Building heights shall relate to the adjacent
                  non-building area to address sunlight
                  penetration, ventilation, protection from
                  prevailing winds, public view enhancement,
                  and view preservation.
              		
              6.	 The presence of smaller retail stores gives a commercial center a “friendlier” appearance
                  by creating variety, breaking up large expanses and expanding the range of activities.
                  Windows and window displays of such stores should be used to contribute visual interest
                  of exterior facades.
              		
              7.	 Larger buildings may employ a multiple-unit facade to give the appearance of many smaller
                  stores, similar to that of a downtown.
              	
         B. Style and Design Details
              		
              1.	 Wall treatments shall contain panelized
                  accents in replace of faux windows.
              		
              2.	 Both regular and irregular fenestration should
                  be used to add visual interest.
              		
              3.	 Attention to detail and design shall be placed on the Lifestyle & Entertainment Area more
                  than any other commercial type use. Dynamic, playful storefronts with extensive use of
                  planter walls and seating, enhanced trellises with flowering vines, accent or festive lighting,
                  integration of focal objects such as water, murals, sculpture, or topiary, should be used to
                  enhance the quality of this environment.
              		
              4.	 Storefronts shall integrate awnings, bays, openings and entryways to express individuality.
         	
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                           81
April 5, 2011

 7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
         C. Material and Color
             		
             1.	 Buildings and structures within the development shall be aesthetically pleasing and
                 compatible with materials and colors used in adjoining buildings to enhance the overall
                 theme and identity.
             2.	 Facades shall utilize low reflecting, subtle, neutral or earth tone colors, with the exception
                 of the Lifestyle & Entertainment Area where a more vibrant use of color is encouraged in
                 combination with the earth tones. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black
                 or fluorescent colors is prohibited.
7.2.2	   Residential
         A.	 Massing, Scale and Form
             	
             1.	 Building facades and footprints shall be
                 articulated to vary the streetscape and provide
                 visual interest. Building facades shall vary in
                 height or vary the planes of exterior walls in
                 depth and direction to break up the box-like
                 mass and scale of buildings.
             2.	 Rooflines shall employ varied articulation on vertical and horizontal planes for visual relief
                 to the tops of buildings. Other elements such as towers and piers may also be used to
                 break up the horizontal massing.
             3.	 There shall be no long flat expanses of walls that exceed 75 feet without incorporating at
                 least two of the following: color change, material change, texture change, plane projections
                 of recesses, trellises, balconies or windows.
             4.	 The architecture facing a pedestrian area shall exhibit a human scale of detail, such as
                 awnings, moldings, pilasters and other architectural details.
             5.	 Stairs, balconies, porches and patios shall be integrated into the overall building design.
             	
             6.	 Upper stories should be set back to diminish building mass consistent with the specific
                 architectural style.
         B.	 Style and Design Details
             	
             1.	 Building architecture shall vary and yet be of a consistent design theme. Avoid diverse
                 elements of different styles.
             	
             2.	 Carports and garages shall be designed as an integral part of the architecture of the
                 development. They shall be the same in materials, color and detail to the principal buildings
                 of the development.
82                                                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                    April 5, 2011
                                                                            7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
              3.	 Exterior elevations shall receive architectural treatments, with an emphasis on the front
                  façades.
              4.	 Each unit should be designed to be
                  individually recognizable through the use of
                  balconies, setbacks, projections and patterns
                  of windows and doors.
              5.	 Architectural elements and accessories shall
                  be provided on the building mass, which
                  may include arcades, balconies, towers and
                  decorative lighting. Details such as lower
                  wainscoting or built-up/recessed features
                  can add interest to the building elevations.
              6.	 Individual television and radio antennae shall be prohibited outside any unit. The applicant
                  shall provide either central antennae with connections to each unit via underground or
                  internal wall wiring, or each unit shall be served by a cable antenna service provided by
                  a company licensed to provide such service within the City. Any satellite dishes shall be
                  screened from public view.
         C.	 Materials and Color
              1.	 Buildings and structures within the development shall be aesthetically pleasing and
                  compatible with materials and colors used in adjoining buildings to enhance the overall
                  theme and identity. A variation in colors, materials and textures is encouraged however,
                  unusual colors and patterns should be avoided.
              2.	 Coordinate color and finishes on building exteriors of all elevations of a building to
                  provide continuity of design.
              3.	 Compatible colors should be blended in a single façade or composition to add character
                  and variety.
              	
              4.	 Building façades shall be constructed of durable, high-quality building materials exhibiting
                  rich texture and conveying as sense of permanence. Materials may include manufactured
                  or natural brick, stone, precast concrete decorative block and stucco.
              5.	 Exterior materials of metals or unfinished concrete block shall not be permitted.
7.2.3	   Mixed-Use
The design standards and guidelines described above for individual commercial and residential uses shall
also apply to horizontally and vertically mixed-uses.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                   83
April 5, 2011

 7. DESIGN STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
This page intentionally left blank.
84                                  The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                 April 5, 2011
                                                                                            8. IMPLEMENTATION
8.0	 IMPLEMENTATION
8.1	     Review and Approval Process
Approval of development within The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan shall be subject to the review
process set forth in this section. Chapter 1 of Article IX of the Carson Municipal Code (CMC) shall apply
to matters not covered in this Specific Plan. If there is any conflict between the provisions of this Specific
Plan and Chapter 1 of Article IX of the CMC, the provisions of this Specific Plan shall control.
8.1.1	   Subdivisions
Unless specifically provided for in The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan, the regulations set forth
in Chapter 2 of Article IX of the CMC, entitled “Subdivision Regulations,” shall apply to all divisions of
land hereafter made of property within the Marketplace Specific Plan.
8.1.2	   Residential Condominiums
The regulations set forth in Chapter 3 of Article IX of the CMC, entitled “Standards and Criteria for Residential
Condominiums,” shall not apply to residential condominiums within the Marketplace Specific Plan.
8.1.3	   Amendments to Specific Plan
Amendments to the Marketplace Specific Plan shall be processed in accordance with the applicable
provisions of state law provided in California Government Code sections 65450, et seq. The procedure
in Section 9172.11 of the CMC shall be followed for hearing, notice and decision of a Specific Plan
Amendment by the Planning Commission and City Council.
8.1.4	   Minor Modifications
         A.	 The following minor modifications to the Marketplace Specific Plan do not require an amendment
              to the Specific Plan and are subject to review and approval by the Planning Manager. The
              Planning Manager shall have the discretion to refer a minor modification request to the Planning
              Commission. A request for a minor modification shall not require a public hearing and may be
              approved, conditionally approved or denied. The following are minor modifications:
              1.	 To allow a decrease not exceeding 10 percent in required minimum setbacks.
              2.	 To allow walls or fences to exceed the height limit by a maximum of one foot.
              3.	 To allow expansion or reduction of the net acreage covered by a given Development
                  District within the Specific Plan by no more than 10 percent.
              4.	 To allow a decrease not exceeding 10 percent of the required area for landscape coverage
                  in parking lot areas.
              5.	 Modifications of a similar nature to those listed above, which are deemed minor by the
                  Planning Manager, and which are in keeping with the intent of this Specific Plan.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                     85
April 5, 2011

8. IMPLEMENTATION
8.1.5	   Interpretation
In cases of uncertainty or ambiguity as to the meaning or intent of any provision of this Specific Plan, the
Planning Manager shall prepare a written interpretation which shall be generally applicable to all future
situations of the same type. The interpretation shall be based upon and consistent with the intent of this
Specific Plan. The written interpretation shall be transmitted to the property owners and any pending
applicant of property within The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan. Any property owner or applicant
may appeal the interpretation to the Planning Commission and then to the City Council in accordance
with CMC section 9173.4, except an appeal must be filed within 10 days of the date of the Planning
Manager’s notice or the Commission’s action, and the appellate body shall have 45 days from the filing of
the appeal to make a decision.
8.1.6	   Conditional Use Permit
Applications for permitted uses set forth in Table 6.1 of section 6 of this Specific Plan that require
approval of a conditional use permit shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of section
9172.21 of the CMC.
8.1.7	   Major Modification
A “major modification” shall be defined as a modification to the development standards other than a minor
modification as defined in section 8.1.4 herein. Applications for a major modification shall be subject
to review and approval by the Planning Commission. Notice and hearing for a major modification shall
be as set forth in section 9172.21 (B) and (C) of the CMC. After the hearing, the Planning Commission
shall, by resolution, render its decision. The Planning Commission shall approve a major modification if
it makes the following findings:
         A.	 The modification is consistent with the goals and policies of the Specific Plan.
         B. 	 The modification is not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.
         C. 	 The modification does not create a nuisance or hazard.
         D. 	 The modification does not have a significant effect on adjoining properties or the immediate
              neighbors.
In approving a major modification, the Planning Commission may impose conditions as deemed necessary
to protect the public’s health, safety and welfare, and to assure compliance with the objectives of the
Specific Plan.
8.1.8	   Site Plan and Design Review
         A.	 Applications for proposed construction of structures and site improvements require site plan
              and design review approval as set forth in this subsection. A Development Plan, as defined
              in section 9191.184 of the CMC, shall be submitted to the Planning Division. The Planning
              Division shall determine if the submitted Development Plan is in substantial conformance with
              the Illustrative Plan set forth in Section 4.0 of this Specific Plan (the “Illustrative Plan”).
86                                                                  The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                      April 5, 2011

                                                                                              8. IMPLEMENTATION
         B.	 If the Planning Division determines that the submitted Development Plan is in substantial
              conformance with the Illustrative Plan and Land Use Summary, then the Planning Division
              shall review and take action on the submittal. Review by the Planning Division shall not require
              a public notice hearing. The Planning Division may approve, conditionally approve or deny
              the submitted Development Plan. The Planning Division shall approve the Development
              Plan upon finding the following, as applicable:
              1.	 Substantial conformity with The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan, including the
                  Illustrative Plan and Table 4 Land Use Summary and, if applicable, the Equivalency
                  Program requirements.
              2.	 Substantial conformity with applicable landscape provisions of this Specific Plan, including,
                  as applicable, specially themed landscape treatments at key locations, landscape coverage
                  in parking lots, landscape coverage on parking structures visible to residences, landscaping
                  of trash enclosures and mechanical equipment, and proper plant palette for the project.
                  The landscape plan shall also comply with the City’s Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance,
                  section 9168.1 of the CMC.
              3.	 Substantial conformity with the design guidelines of this Specific Plan, including, as
                  applicable, siting, building mass, fences and walls, color and materials, building detail, land
                  use compatibility, noise attenuation, internal circulation, parking, trash enclosures, loading,
                  delivery, service, storage areas, mechanical equipment, and accessory structures.
              4.	 Substantial conformity with the signage guidelines of this Specific Plan, including, as
                  applicable, the size, height, number, lighting, and location of signs so as to be compatible
                  with the buildings, surrounding uses, and location.
              5.	 That the lighting plan is adequate for on-site coverage, but shall not interfere with off-site
                  activities or intrude on adjacent residential uses.
         C.	 If the Planning Division determines that the submitted Development Plan is not in
              substantial conformance with the Illustrative Plan, Land Use Summary, and Specific Plan,
              then the Development Plan shall be referred to the Planning Commission to review and take
              action on the submittal. Notice and hearing for a Development Plan review shall be as set
              forth in section 9172.21 (B) and (C) of the CMC. The Planning Commission may approve,
              conditionally approve or deny the submitted Development Plan. The Planning Commission
              shall approve the Development Plan upon finding the following, as applicable:
              1.	 Substantial conformity with The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan, including the
                  Illustrative Master Plan and Table 4 Land Use Summary and, if applicable, the Equivalency
                  Program requirements.
              2.	 Substantial conformity with applicable landscape provisions of this Specific Plan, including,
                  as applicable, specially themed landscape treatments at key locations, landscape coverage
                  in parking lots, landscape coverage on parking structures visible to residences, landscaping
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                      87
April 5, 2011

8. IMPLEMENTATION
                of trash enclosures and mechanical equipment, and proper plant palette for the project.
                The landscape plan shall also comply with the City’s Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance,
                section 9168.1 of the CMC.
            3.	 Substantial conformity with the design guidelines of this Specific Plan, including, as
                applicable, siting, building mass, fences and walls, color and materials, building detail, land
                use compatibility, noise attenuation, internal circulation, parking, trash enclosures, loading,
                delivery, service, storage areas, mechanical equipment, and accessory structures.
            4.	 Substantial conformity with the signage guidelines of this Specific Plan, including, as
                applicable, the size, height, number, lighting, and location of signs so as to be compatible
                with the buildings, surrounding uses, and location.
            5.	 That the lighting plan is adequate for on-site coverage, but shall not interfere with off-site
                activities or intrude on adjacent residential uses.
        D.	 In determining whether a Development Plan is in “Substantial conformance with the
            Illustrative Plan, Land Use Summary and Specific Plan,” the Planning Division (or higher
            body, if applicable) shall consider the following:
            1.	 The Illustrative Plan in Section 4.0 provides a conceptual plan of development in
                three Development Districts (“DD”)—DD1, DD2, and DD3. In DD1 and DD3, the
                Illustrative Plan provides for a mixture of residential uses and commercial uses. In DD2,
                the Illustrative Plan provides for a wide mix of different commercial uses, including
                Regional Commercial, Commercial Recreation & Entertainment, Neighborhood-Serving
                Commercial and Restaurants, along with a proposed Hotel.
            	   As shown in the Illustrative Plan, a large portion of the Regional Commercial is located
                in DD2 on the southern and western border along the Torrance Lateral, the Hotel is
                located on the southeast corner along the 405 freeway, additional Regional Commercial is
                facing the 405 freeway on the east, and a major Commercial Recreation & Entertainment
                element, with Restaurants, is located in the northeastern and central portion of DD2. In
                addition, Neighborhood-Serving Commercial is located along the northern portion of
                DD2, and various pads are also located in DD2. The Land Use Summary in Table 4.1
                provides a textual description of the proposed mix of residential and commercial uses in
                the three Development Districts.
            2.	 In DD3, if the submitted Development Plan provides for a mixture of residential uses and
                commercial uses in a substantially similar ratio as shown in the Illustrative Plan and Land
                Use Summary, and the location of the residential buildings and commercial buildings are
                substantially similar as shown on the Illustrative Plan, then the submitted Development
                Plan shall be in substantial conformance with the Illustrative Plan and the Land Use
                Summary.
88                                                                The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                  April 5, 2011

                                                                                              8. IMPLEMENTATION
              3.	 In DD1, if the submitted Development Plan provides for a mixture of residential uses and
                  commercial uses in a substantially similar ratio as shown in the Illustrative Plan and Land
                  Use Summary, and the location of the residential buildings and commercial buildings are
                  substantially similar as shown on the Illustrative Plan, then the submitted Development
                  Plan shall be in substantial conformance with the Illustrative Plan and the Land Use
                  Summary.
              4.	 In DD2, if the submitted Development Plan provides for a mixture of commercial uses
                  in a substantially similar location as shown in the Illustrative Plan and Land Use Summary,
                  then only the portion of the Development Plan not in conformance shall be referred to
                  the Planning Commission for review and approval.
         E.	 Notice of the decision by the Division shall be mailed to the applicant. The Planning
              Commission and City Council may appeal the decision to the Planning Commission and then
              to the City Council in accordance with section 9173.4 of the CMC.
8.1.9	   Other Considerations
         A.	 An Internal Circulation Report shall be submitted to the Traffic Engineer. This report shall
              be approved before any building permits can be issued. The internal roadways, sidewalks and
              bike paths shall be constructed pursuant to the approved Internal Circulation Report.
         B. 	 Due to variations in parking demand and needs of each project, vehicle parking requirements
              and the design of the parking areas, including ingress and egress, shall be determined based
              upon information contained in a parking demand study prepared by an independent traffic
              engineer hired by the City. The parking demand study shall be prepared at the property
              owner’s/developer’s expense and provided at the time of the application for the use.
         C.	 All on-site intersection spacing and access openings shall be subject to approval by the City of
              Carson Traffic Engineer.
         D.	 Prior to approval of any building permit, a construction truck traffic routing plan shall be
              submitted to the City of Carson Traffic Engineer for approval. The truck traffic routing plan
              shall emphasize that truck traffic avoid residential areas.
         E.	 The applicant shall submit two sets of landscaping and irrigation plans drawn, stamped,
              and signed by a licensed landscape architect. Such plans are to be approved by the Planning
              Manager prior to the issuance of any building permit.
         F.	 A Public Safety Plan which addresses on-site security and the level of Sheriff ’s staffing both
              for the on-site security office and patrol cars will be submitted for approval by the City and
              the Los Angeles County Sheriff ’s Department.
         G.	 Issuance of grading or building permits for Development Districts 1 and 2 is contingent upon
              a finding that the issuance of said permits is not in conflict with the requirements established
              by the State Department of Toxic Substances (DTSC) Control.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                     89
April 5, 2011

8. IMPLEMENTATION
         H.	 Prior to issuance of building permits for residential units, unless determined by the Planning
             Manager, the applicant shall submit a detailed acoustical study demonstrating that all project
             structures will meet applicable City interior noise levels and exterior living area noise levels, in
             accordance with applicable noise standards and zoning regulations.
         I.	 Prior to approval of any building permit, a trash enclosure design shall be submitted to the
             Planning Manager for approval.
         J.	 A comprehensive recycling plan consisting of a construction debris recycling program and
             a general recycling program for residential and commercial uses shall be included with plan
             submittals prior to building permit approval.
         K.	 Focused burrowing owl surveys shall be conducted prior to the beginning of any Project-
             related ground disturbance if such work occurs during the owl’s nesting season (March
             through April).
8.2	     Maintenance
Maintenance of private/quasi-public open space and recreation facilities, private roadways, commercial
circulation and common landscape areas, and residential common areas will be the responsibility of the
residential and commercial associations that are formed within the Specific Plan area. Maintenance and
upkeep of common areas and amenities must also comply with the Master Association Codes, Covenants,
and Restrictions (CC&Rs) that govern the Project Site.
The associations shall be responsible for private roads parking, open space areas, signing, landscaping,
irrigation, common areas, on-site sewers, storm drains, retention basins and other responsibilities as
necessary.
To the maximum extent feasible, services for property maintenance and property management shall
include the utilization of alternative fuel vehicles and electric equipment in order to minimize air quality
impacts.
8.3	     Equivalency Program
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan incorporates an Equivalency Program that would allow the
composition of on-site development to respond to the future needs and demands of the southern
California economy and changes in Project requirements. The Equivalency Program will provide flexibility
for modifications to land uses and square footages within the site, so long as the limitations identified in
Section 8.3.1 are not exceeded. The Land Use Equivalency Program provides a framework within which
permitted land uses, pursuant to Section 6.1, can be exchanged for certain other permitted land uses, so
long as the limitations of the Equivalency Program are satisfied.
Table 8.3 provides a sample listing of the equivalency ratios that have been established for the potential
on-site land uses. The equivalency ratios are expressed in terms of thousands of square feet of floor
area for commercial uses, rooms for hotels, and dwelling units for residential uses. An example of an
90                                                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                   April 5, 2011

                                                                                                      8. IMPLEMENTATION
equivalency transfer would be a transfer of 100,000 square feet of shopping center to 38,000 square feet
of supermarket development (e.g., 100,000 x 0.38 = 38,000). A comprehensive matrix of conversion
factors can be found in Appendix F.
                                                         Table 8.3	
                      Equivalency Matrix: Examples of Land Use Conversion Factors
     Land use             Equivalency    Equivalency     Equivalency     Equivalency     Equivalency        Equivalency
                           to 1 KSF of    to 1 KSF of      to 1 KSF      to 1 Room of     to 1 DU of         to 1 DU of
                           Shopping        Regional       of Quality         Hotel       Apartments         Condominiums
                              Center     Supermarket      Restaurant
 Shopping Center                   –          1.96 KSF        1.73 KSF       0.22 KSF        0.2 KSF            0.13 KSF
 Supermarkets                  0.38 KSF           –           0.73 kSF       0.09 KSF        0.09 KSF           0.05 KSF
 Quality Restaurant            0.27 KSF       0.64 KSF            –          0.07 KSF        0.1 KSF            0.07 KSF
 Hotel                       2.61 Rooms     5.11 Rooms      7.94 Rooms           –         0.78 Rooms         0.55 Rooms
 Apartments                       n/a            n/a             n/a            n/a             –               0.62 DU
 Condominiums                     n/a            n/a             n/a            n/a          1.44 DU               –
 Source: PCR, 2005.
8.3.1	        Limitations
The land use on any portion of the site may be exchanged for another land use, so long as the new use
is otherwise permitted by this Specific Plan, and the new use does not cause impacts that are greater
than those identified in the certified EIR for the Specific Plan. Such determination shall be based on
consideration of the following factors:
              A.	 The development shall be in compliance with all provisions of the Specific Plan and implement
                    all applicable mitigation measures as set forth in the Project’s Mitigation Monitoring and
                    Reporting Program.
              B.	 Conversion of the uses shall not cause any of the threshold levels shown in the certified EIR
                    to be exceeded. If the uses proposed as part of this plan, or any newly proposed uses are
                    found to be equivalent using the matrix provided in Table B of Appendix F, the impacts are
                    considered to be below the threshold levels identified in the certified EIR and Table A of
                    Appendix F.
              C.	 Prior to implementing the Equivalency Program, an implementation manual describing the
                    program and the process—including directions on how to classify a proposed use, directions
                    on how to apply traffic generations rates, and a tracking tool to ensure the maximum thresholds
                    for trips, water consumption, wastewater generation and solid waste generation in the certified
                    EIR are not exceeded–shall be submitted to the Planning Division and approved by the
                    Planning Manager. The Implementation Manual will serve as a companion and supplement to
                    the provisions identified in this section.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                91
April 5, 2011

8. IMPLEMENTATION
8.3.2	  Use Classification and Impact Assessment Procedures
        A.	 Accurate classification of the proposed use is necessary to apply the equivalency program
            effectively. Appendix F includes Tables, A through C, that list all of the possible use
            classifications along with impacts and conversion factors. If the proposed land use clearly
            matches one of the designations in Table B, then the conversion factor in the table can be
            applied and the new impact calculated. If the proposed use does not match exactly with one
            of the designations, a use that is equivalent to the use in question can be used. The discussion
            in Section 8.3.2(C) can help to classify the use for impact assessment purposes in the event
            that a proposed use does not match exactly with a use designation and does not have an
            equivalent use that can be applied.
        B.	 After the original and proposed uses have been classified, the impacts for the proposed use
            can be calculated. Tables A, B and C in Appendix F will be used for substitution and impact
            calculation.
            1.	 Table A includes the various project impacts and their corresponding thresholds that have
                been identified in the EIR. Grading, Air Quality, Residential Development, and Utility Use
                are shown with the corresponding maximum threshold levels identified for this Project.
                These thresholds were set as maximums, not to be exceeded.
            2.	 Table B facilitates the conversion of traffic impacts from one use to another. It includes
                traffic impact conversion factors for various uses and square footages. By using this table,
                one can assess whether use or square footage substitutions will result in a yield that exceeds
                the current traffic impact used in the EIR.
            3.	 Table C comprehensively breaks down specific use classifications and shows the current
                plan’s traffic impacts. This table is helpful when classifying various commercial uses or
                comparing proposed use impacts (generated from factors in Table B) to the planned use
                impacts of the existing plan.
        C.	 Classifying Commercial Uses
        	   Potentially, the many variations of commercial uses can be more difficult to define and classify
            than residential uses. For Impact assessment purposes, it will be necessary to classify the
            commercial use as either part of a retail center or as a stand-alone use. If more like a stand-
            alone use, the ITE code should be used to categorize and evaluate impacts. If the use does
            not match with a land use designation category, does not have an applicable equivalent use,
            and is not a stand-alone use, then the use in question should be categorized as “regional
            center.”
        	   To help with this classification, Table C in Appendix F certain land use divisions. Additionally,
            the definition of a “shopping center” use is included below to further aide commercial use
            classification. The “shopping center use,” ITE code 820, is defined as follows:
92                                                                The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                  April 5, 2011

                                                                                               8. IMPLEMENTATION
         	    “A shopping center is an integrated group of commercial establishments that is planned,
              developed, owned and managed as a unit. . . . A shopping center also provides on-site parking
              facilities sufficient to serve its own parking demands. . . . Over 650 shopping centers including
              neighborhood centers, community centers, regional centers, and super regional centers were
              surveyed for this land use. Some of these centers contained non-merchandising facilities, such
              as office buildings, movie theaters, restaurants, post office, banks, health clubs, and recreational
              facilities (e.g. ice skating rinks or indoor miniature golf courses). . . . Many shopping centers,
              in addition to the integrated unit of shops in one building or enclosed around a mall, include
              outparcels (peripheral buildings or pads located on the perimeter of the center adjacent to
              the streets and major access points). These buildings are typically drive-in banks, retail stores,
              restaurants, or small offices.”
         	    The definition does not include large, stand-alone, warehouse type retail facilities (superstores).
              These uses are more intense than traditional shopping centers and generate more trips.
              Therefore, the EIR traffic analysis includes such uses separately for a more conservative
              analysis. (Seven of the twenty land use categories in the trip generation table are types of
              superstore.)
         	    Other retail, entertainment and recreation uses in the trip generation table are uses that might
              also occur under a shopping center context. However, when these uses occur in a stand alone
              context their trip generation rates are higher. Subsequently, if the use in question acts like
              a stand-alone use, it can be classified as such. If not, it must be classified as a “shopping
              center.”
8.3.3	   Submittal and Approval Procedures
Conversion of uses under the Equivalency Program shall occur through the following procedures:
         A.	 Conversion of uses shall occur by the Applicant filing a request for such action with the
              Planning Division of the Department of Development Services. This request shall specifically
              identify the exchange in land uses proposed at that time, accompanied by information which
              provides sufficient data to review the request, pursuant to the limitations of Section 8.3.1.
         B.	 The approval of the conversion of uses under the Equivalency Program shall occur under the
              ministerial review of the Planning Manager.
         C.	 Upon ministerial review, the Planning Manager must determine that the proposed conversion
              of land uses would not result in any environmental impacts that would be greater than those
              identified in the certified EIR. Should the Planning Manager determine that the environmental
              impacts of the proposed conversion of land uses does not exceed the environmental impacts
              addressed in the certified EIR, the requested exchange in land uses shall be granted. However,
              should the Planning Manager conclude that the proposed exchange in land uses would result
              in environmental impacts which are greater than those identified in the certified EIR, then the
              request shall be denied subject to further analyses and findings, pursuant to CEQA.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                       93
April 5, 2011

8. IMPLEMENTATION
8.4	      Financing
The Boulevards at South Bay is two discrete projects: a remediation and infrastructure project financed
through a combination of public and private funds, and a private development project financed exclusively
with private funds. Public financing mechanisms could include, but are not limited to, community facilities
districts, tax increment funds, developer-constructed facilities in lieu of fee payment, and state and federal
funding that may become available.
8.5	      Phasing
Construction of The Boulevards at South Bay is anticipated to begin in April 2008 and be completed by the
end of 2015. The Boulevards at South Bay project will be developed in coordination with implementation
of the approved 1995 Remedial Action Plan (RAP) for the site approved by and subject to the oversight
of the Department of Toxic Substances Control. The principal phases of construction include site
preparation, implementation of the RAP, and site construction. While three construction phases are
identified, it is anticipated that there would be some overlapping of activities since, the current design is
for the piles that support the buildings to be integrated with the remediation cap. As construction of the
building support piles is tied to user demand, this phase of construction could proceed in multiple phases.
Consequently, the buildings above the support piles may also be developed in multiple phases. Subject
to the approval of the Planning Officer, access and mitigation measures must be implemented so the
development in each phase does not produce unforeseen impacts.
Site preparation, including mass grading, dynamic compaction, fill-and-cap foundation, rough grading
and the establishment of building pads, is anticipated to begin April 2008 and last until spring of 2011.
Implementation of the RAP, including the installation of the cap as well as the installation of the requisite
containment, collection and treatment facilities, and also the placement of piles, is anticipated to begin in
summer 2010 and last until fall of 2014. Construction of off-site improvements would begin in the winter
of 2012 and end in the fall of 2013. Site construction, including the establishment of structural slabs,
utility installation, building construction, roads, parking lots and landscaping, is anticipated to begin in the
winter of 2011 and be completed by the end of 2015.
94                                                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                    April 5, 2011
                                                 APPENDICES
                                             Appendix A
                                          PLANT PALETTE
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                95
April 5, 2011
APPENDICES
This page intentionally left blank.
96                                  The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                 April 5, 2011
                                                                                                           APPENDICES
                                                                         Table A-1	
                                                                     Plant Palette
           AL	            Adapted to region	
           L	             Low supplemental water needs	
           LM	            Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
           M	             Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                    Estimated Water Needs
                 Botanical (Latin) Name                               Common Name
                                                                                     in Coastal California
           TREES
           Acacia baileyana                               Bailey Acacia                       AL
           Acacia dealbata                                Silver Wattle                       AL
           Acacia decurrens                               Green Wattle                        AL
           Acacia farnesiana                              Sweet Acacia                         L
           Acacia longifolia                              Sydney Golden Wattle                AL
           Acacia melanoxylon                             Blackwood Acacia                    AL
           Acacia pendula                                 Weeping Myall                        L
           Acacia retinodes                               Water Wattle                         L
           Acacia saligna                                 Willow Acacia                        L
           Acacia smallii                                 NCN                                  L
           Aesculus californica                           California Buckeye                  AL
           Agonis flexuosa                                Peppermint Tree                     M
           Albizia julibrissin                            Silk Tree                            L
           Angophora costata                              Gum Myrtle                           L
           Arbutus menziesii                              Madrone                              L
           Arbutus unedo                                  Strawberry Tree                      L
           Brachychiton populneus                         Kurrajong Bottle Tree                L
           Broussonetia papyrifera                        Paper Mulberry                       L
           Callistemon citrinus                           Lemon Bottlebrush                    L
           Callistemon viminalis & cvs                    Weeping Bottlebrush                  L
           Calocedrus decurrens                           Incense Cedar                       M
           Casuarina cunninghamiana                       River She-oak                        L
           Casuarina equisetifolia                        Horsetail Tree                      AL
           Casuarina stricta                              Drooping She-oak                    AL
           Ceanothus arboreus                             Feltleaf Ceanothus                   L
           Ceanothus ‘Ray Hartman’                        NCN                                 AL
           Ceanothus thyrsiflorus                         Blue Blossom                        AL
           Cedrus atlantica & cvs                         Atlas Cedar                         M
           Cedrus deodara & cvs                           Deodar Cedar                        M
           Ceratonia siliqua                              Carob Tree                          AL
           Cercidium microphyllum                         Foothill Palo Verde                 L
           Cercis canadensis & cvs                        Eastern Redbud                      M
           Cercis occidentalis                            Western Redbud                       L
           Chilopsis linearis                             Desert Willow                        L
           Chitalpa tashkentensis                         Chitalpa                             L
           Cordyline australis                            Giant Dracaena                       L
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                          97
April 5, 2011

APPENDICES
                                                                      Table A-1	
                                                                   Plant Palette
         AL	           Adapted to region	
         L	            Low supplemental water needs	
         LM	           Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
         M	            Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                         Estimated Water Needs
               Botanical (Latin) Name                               Common Name
                                                                                           in Coastal California
         Cupressus arizonica                           Arizona Cypress                               L
         Cupressus forbesii                            Tecate Cypress                                L
         Cupressus glabra                              Smooth Arizona Cypress                        L
         Cupressus macrocarpa                          Monterey Cypress                              L
         Cupressus sempervirens                        Italian Cypress                               L
         Dodonaea viscosa                              Hopseed Bush                                 LM
         Dracaena draco                                Dragon Tree                                   L
         Erythrina caffra                              Kaffirboom Coral Tree                        M
         Feijoa sellowiana                             Pineapple Guava                               L
         Ficus carica & cvs                            Common Fig                                   LM
         Geijera parviflora                            Australian Willow                             L
         Grevillea robusta                             Silky Oak                                     L
         Jacaranda mimosifolia                         Jacaranda                                    M
         Juglans californica                           S. Calif.Black Walnut                        AL
         Juniperus chinensis ‘Torulosa’                Hollywood Juniper                             L
         Juniperus virginiana                          Eastern Redcedar                             LM
         Lagerstroemia indica & cvs                    Crape Myrtle                                  L
         Laurus nobilis                                Sweet Bay                                     L
         Leptospermum laevigatum                       Australian Tea Tree                          AL
         Leptospermum scoparium                        New Zealand Tea Tree                         LM
         Lyonothamnus floribundus & var.               Catalina Ironwood                            AL
         Melaleuca armillaris                          Drooping Melaleuca                            L
         Melaleuca linariifolia                        Flaxleaf Paperbark                            L
         Melaleuca quinquenervia                       Cajeput Tree                                  L
         Melia azedarach & cv                          Chinaberry                                   AL
         Metrosideros excelsus                         New Zealand Christmas Tree                   LM
         Olea europaea `Wilsonii`                      Wilson Olive                                  L
         Pinus canariensis                             Canary Island Pine                            L
         Pinus coulteri                                Coulter Pine                                  L
         Pinus eldarica                                Afghan Pine                                   L
         Pinus halepensis                              Aleppo Pine                                  AL
         Pinus pinea                                   Italian Stone Pine                            L
         Pinus radiata                                 Monterey Pine                                AL
         Pinus sabiniana                               Digger Pine                                   L
         Pinus torreyana                               Torrey Pine                                  AL
         Pittosporum phillyraeoides                    Willow Pittosporum                            L
         Platanus racemosa                             Western Sycamore                             M
98                                                                                The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                 April 5, 2011

                                                                                                         APPENDICES
                                                                       Table A-1	
                                                                    Plant Palette
           AL	           Adapted to region	
           L	            Low supplemental water needs	
           LM	           Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
           M	            Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                  Estimated Water Needs
                 Botanical (Latin) Name                              Common Name
                                                                                   in Coastal California
           Prunus caroliniana                            Carolina Laurel Cherry              L
           Prunus lyonii                                 Catalina Cherry                    AL
           Punica granatum & cvs                         Pomegranate                         L
           Quercus agrifolia                             Coast Live Oak                     AL
           Quercus douglasii                             Blue Oak                           AL
           Quercus engelmannii                           Mesa Oak                           AL
           Quercus ilex                                  Holly Oak                           L
           Quercus lobata                                Valley Oak                          L
           Quercus suber                                 Cork Oak                            L
           Rhus lancea                                   African Sumac                       L
           Robinia ambigua & cvs                         Locust                              L
           Robinia pseudoacacia                          Black Locust                        L
           Sambucus caerulea                             Blue Elderberry                    AL
           Schinus molle                                 Pepper Tree                        AL
           Schinus polygamus                             Peruvian Pepper                     L
           Schinus terebinthifolius                      Brazilian Pepper                   LM
           Tamarix aphylla                               Athel Tree                         AL
           Tipuana tipu                                  Tipu Tree                          M
           Tristania conferta & cv                       Brisbane Box                       M
           Vitex angus-castus                            Chaste Tree                         L
           Xylosma congestum                             Shiny Xylosma                      LM
           Yucca gloriosa                                Spanish Dagger                      L
           PALMS
           Brahea armata                                 Blue Hesper Palm                    L
           Brahea edulis                                 Guadalupe Palm                      L
           Butia capitata                                Pindo Palm                          L
           Chamaerops humilis                            Mediterranean Fan Palm              L
           Phoenix canariensis                           Canary Island Date Palm             L
           Phoenix dactylifera                           Date Palm                           L
           Trachycarpus fortunei                         Windmill Palm                       L
           Washingtonia filifera                         California Fan Palm                 L
           Washingtonia robusta                          Mexican Fan Palm                    L
           SHRUBS AND VINES
           Acacia cultriformis                           Knife Acacia                       AL
           Acacia cyclops                                Western Coastal Wattle             AL
           Acacia farnesiana                             Sweet Acacia                        L
           Acacia longifolia                             Sydney Golden Wattle               AL
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                        99
April 5, 2011
APPENDICES
                                                                       Table A-1	
                                                                   Plant Palette
         AL	            Adapted to region	
         L	             Low supplemental water needs	
         LM	            Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
         M	             Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                         Estimated Water Needs
               Botanical (Latin) Name                               Common Name
                                                                                           in Coastal California
         Acacia retinodes                               Water Wattle                                 L
         Aesculus californica                           California Buckeye                          AL
         Alyogyne huegelii                              Blue Hibiscus                                L
         Anisodontea hypomandarum                       Dwarf Pink Hibiscus                         LM
         Arbutus unedo ‘Compacta’                       Dwarf Strawberry Tree                        L
         Arctostaphylos densiflora & cvs                Sonoma Manzanita                             L
         Arctostaphylos edmundsii                       Little Sur Manzanita                         L
         Arctostaphylos hookeri                         Monterey Manzanita                           L
         Artemisia arborescens                          Shrubby Wormwood                            AL
         Artemisia californica & cvs                    California Sagebrush                        AL
         Artemisia ‘Powis Castle’                       NCN                                         AL
         Atriplex l. var. breweri                       Brewer Saltbush                              L
         Baccharis p. consanguinea                      Chaparral Broom                             AL
         Baccharis sarothroides                         Desert Broom                                 L
         Bougainvillea species & cvs                    Bougainvillea                               LM
         Bougainvillea x `Oo-La-La` TM                  Oo-la-la Bougainvillea                      M
         Caesalpinia species                            Bird-of-paradise Bush                        L
         Callistemon citrinus                           Lemon Bottlebrush                            L
         Callistemon rigidus                            Stiff Bottlebrush                            L
         Calocephalus brownii                           Cushion Bush                                LM
         Carpenteria californica                        Bush Anemone                                 L
         Cassia artemisioides                           Feathery Cassia                              L
         Cassia nemophila                               Desert Cassia                                L
         Cassia odorata                                 Spreading Cassia                             L
         Cassia phyllodinea                             Silvery Cassia                               L
         Ceanothus arboreus                             Feltleaf Ceanothus                           L
         Ceanothus ‘Concha’                             NCN                                          L
         Ceanothus ‘Dark Star’                          NCN                                         AL
         Ceanothus ‘Frosty Blue’                        NCN                                         AL
         Ceanothus gloriosus & cvs                      Point Reyes Ceanothus                       AL
         Ceanothus griseus & cvs                        Carmel Ceanothus                            AL
         Ceanothus impressus                            Santa Barbara Ceanothus                      L
         Ceanothus ‘Joyce Coulter’                      NCN                                         AL
         Ceanothus ‘Julia Phelps’                       NCN                                         AL
         Ceanothus maritimus & cvs                      Maritime Ceanothus                          AL
         Ceanothus ‘Ray Hartman’                        NCN                                         AL
         Ceanothus rigidus & cvs                        Monterey Ceanothus                          AL
100                                                                               The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                 April 5, 2011

                                                                                                            APPENDICES
                                                                        Table A-1	
                                                                    Plant Palette
           AL	           Adapted to region	
           L	            Low supplemental water needs	
           LM	           Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
           M	            Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                     Estimated Water Needs
                 Botanical (Latin) Name                              Common Name
                                                                                      in Coastal California
           Ceanothus thyrsiflorus & cvs                  Blue Blossom Ceanothus                AL
           Ceanothus ‘Wheeler Canyon’                    NCN                                    L
           Cercis occidentalis                           Western Redbud                         L
           Chamelaucium uncinatum                        Geraldton Wax Flower                   L
           Chilopsis linearis                            Desert Willow                          L
           Cistus species & cvs                          Rockrose                               L
           Cleome isomeris                               Bladderpod                            AL
           Comarostaphylis diversifolia                  Summer Holly                          AL
           Correa species & cvs                          Correa                                 L
           Cotoneaster apiculatus                        Cranberry Cotoneaster                 LM
           Cotoneaster buxifolius                        NCN                                    L
           Cotoneaster congestus                         NCN                                    L
           Cotoneaster horizontalis                      Rock Cotoneaster                       L
           Cotoneaster lacteus                           Red Clusterberry                       L
           Cotoneaster salicifolius                      Willowleaf Cotoneaster                 L
           Dalea frutescens                              Black Dalea                           LM
           Dalea pulchra                                 Indigo Bush                           LM
           Dendromecon species                           Bush Poppy                            AL
           Dodonaea viscosa                              Hopseed Bush                          LM
           Echium fastuosum                              Pride of Madeira                       L
           Elaeagnus pungens                             Silverberry                            L
           Encelia californica                           California Encelia                    AL
           Eriogonum arborescens                         Santa Cruz Island Buckwheat           AL
           Eriogonum cinereum                            Asyleaf Buckwheat                     AL
           Eriogonum fasciculatum                        Common Buckwheat                      AL
           Eriogonum giganteum                           St. Catherine’s Lace                  AL
           Eriogonum parvifolium                         Coastal Buckwheat                     AL
           Eucalyptus lehmannii                          Bushy Yate                            AL
           Feijoa sellowiana                             Pineapple Guava                        L
           Fremontodendron species & cvs                 California Flannel Bush               AL
           Galvezia speciosa                             Island Bush-snapdragon                 L
           Garrya elliptica                              Coast Silktassel                      AL
           Grevillea species & cvs                       Grevillea                              L
           Hakea suaveolens                              Sweet-scented Hakea                    L
           Hardenbergia violacea                         False Sarsaparilla                     L
           Heteromeles arbutifolia                       Toyon                                 AL
           Hibiscus syriacus                             Rose of Sharon                         L
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                          101
April 5, 2011

APPENDICES
                                                                       Table A-1	
                                                                    Plant Palette
         AL	            Adapted to region	
         L	             Low supplemental water needs	
         LM	            Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
         M	             Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                          Estimated Water Needs
               Botanical (Latin) Name                               Common Name
                                                                                            in Coastal California
         Iva hayesiana                                  Hayes Iva                                    AL
         Jasminum species                               Jasmine                                      LM
         Juniperus chinensis & cvs                      NCN                                           L
         Juniperus sabina & cvs                         Savin Juniper                                 L
         Juniperus scopulorum & cvs                     Rocky Mountain Juniper                        L
         Justicia californica                           Chuparosa                                     L
         Keckiella species                              Native Penstemon                             AL
         Lagerstroemia indica & cvs                     Compact Crape Myrtle                          L
         Lantana camara                                 Yellow Sage                                  LM
         Lavandula species & cvs                        Lavender                                      L
         Lavatera species                               Mallow                                       AL
         Leonotis leonurus                              Lion’s Tail                                   L
         Leptospermum laevigatum                        Australian Tea Tree                          AL
         Leptospermum scoparium                         New Zealand Tea Tree                         LM
         Leucophyllum species & cvs                     Cenizo                                        L
         Lupinus albifrons                              Silver Lupine                                 L
         Lupinus arboreus                               Coastal Bush Lupine                          AL
         Macfadyena unguis-cati                         Cat’s Claw                                    L
         Mahonia aquifolium                             Oregon Grape                                 M
         Mahonia ‘Golden Abundance’                     NCN                                           L
         Mahonia nevinii                                Nevin Mahonia                                 L
         Mahonia pinnata & cvs                          California Grape                              L
         Malosma laurina                                Laurel Sumac                                 AL
         Melaleuca armillaris                           Drooping Melaleuca                            L
         Melaleuca nesophila                            Pink Melaleuca                               AL
         Metrosideros excelsus                          New Zealand Christmas Tree                   LM
         Myoporum laetum & cvs                          NCN                                           L
         Myrica californica                             Pacific Wax Myrtle                           LM
         Myrtus communis & cvs                          True Myrtle                                   L
         Nerium oleander & cvs                          Oleander                                     AL
         Philodendron xanadu                            Philodendron                                 M
         Phormium tenax `Bronze`                        Bronze New Zealand Flax                       L
         Plecostachys serpyllifolia                     NCN                                           L
         Plumbago auriculata                            Cape Plumbago                                 L
         Polygonum aubertii                             Silver Lace Vine                              L
         Prunus caroliniana cvs                         Carolina Laurel Cherry                        L
         Prunus ilicifolia                              Hollyleaf Cherry                             AL
102                                                                                The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                  April 5, 2011

                                                                                                             APPENDICES
                                                                       Table A-1	
                                                                    Plant Palette
           AL	           Adapted to region	
           L	            Low supplemental water needs	
           LM	           Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
           M	            Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                      Estimated Water Needs
                 Botanical (Latin) Name                              Common Name
                                                                                       in Coastal California
           Prunus lyonii                                 Catalina Cherry                        AL
           Punica granatum & cvs                         Pomegranate                             L
           Pyracantha species & cvs                      Firethorn                               L
           Rhamnus alaternus                             Italian Buckthorn                       L
           Rhamnus californica                           California Coffeeberry                  L
           Rhamnus crocea & var.                         Redberry                               AL
           Rhaphiolepis indica & cvs                     India Hawthorn                          L
           Rhaphiolepis ‘Majestic Beauty’                NCN                                     L
           Rhaphiolepis umbellata & cv                   Yedda Hawthorn                          L
           Rhus integrifolia                             Lemonade Berry                         AL
           Rhus ovata                                    Sugar Bush                             AL
           Ribes aureum                                  Golden Currant                         AL
           Ribes indecorum                               White-flowered Currant                 AL
           Ribes malvaceum                               Chaparral Currant                      AL
           Ribes speciosum                               Fuchsia-flowering Gooseberry           LM
           Rosa banksiae                                 Lady Banks’ Rose                       LM
           Rosa meidiland series ‘Fire’                  Fire Meidiland Rose                    M
           Rosmarinus officinalis & cvs                  Rosemary                                L
           Salvia apiana                                 White Sage                             AL
           Salvia chamaedryoides                         Blue Sage                               L
           Salvia clevelandii & cvs                      Cleveland Sage                         AL
           Salvia greggii                                Autumn Sage                             L
           Salvia leucantha                              Mexican Bush Sage                       L
           Salvia leucophylla                            Purple Sage                            AL
           Salvia mellifera & cvs                        Black Sage                             AL
           Sambucus caerulea                             Blue Elderberry                        AL
           Santolina species                             Lavender Cotton                         L
           Schinus molle                                 Pepper Tree                            AL
           Schinus terebinthefolius                      Brazilian Pepper                       LM
           Simmondsia chinensis                          Jojoba                                  L
           Sollya heterophylla                           Australian Blue-bell Creeper            L
           Trachelospermum jasminoides                   Star Jasmine                           M
           Tecomaria capensis                            Cape Honeysuckle                       LM
           Teucrium chamaedrys                           NCN                                    LM
           Teucrium fruticans                            Bush Germander                          L
           Trichostema lanatum                           Woolly Blue Curls                      AL
           Vitex agnus-castus                            Chaste Tree                             L
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                           103
April 5, 2011

APPENDICES
                                                                       Table A-1	
                                                                   Plant Palette
         AL	            Adapted to region	
         L	             Low supplemental water needs	
         LM	            Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
         M	             Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                              Estimated Water Needs
               Botanical (Latin) Name                               Common Name
                                                                                                in Coastal California
         Westringia species                             NCN                                               L
         Xylosma congestum                              Shiny Xylosma                                    LM
         GROUND COVERS
         Acacia redolens & cvs                          NCN                                               L
         Achillea millefolium                           Common Yarrow                                     L
         Acorus gramineus                               Sweet Flag                                       LM
         Adenostoma fascilulatum ‘Prostrata’            Chamise                                           L
         Aptenia ‘Red Apple’                            NCN                                               L
         Arctostaphylos edmundsii & cvs                 Little Sur Manzanita                              L
         Arctostaphylos ‘Emerald Carpet’                NCN                                               L
         Arctostaphylos hookeri & cvs                   Monterey Manzanita                                L
         Arctostaphylos ‘Pacific Mist’                  NCN                                               L
         Arctotheca calendula                           Cape Weed                                        LM
         Artemisia californica & cvs                    Prostrate California Sagebrush                    AL
         Atriplex glauca                                NCN                                               AL
         Atriplex semibaccata                           Creeping Saltbush                                 AL
         Baccharis ‘Centennial’                         NCN                                               L
         Bougainvillea cultivars                        Bougainvillea                                     L
         Carpobrotus species                            Sea Fig                                           AL
         Ceanothus gloriosus & cvs                      Point Reyes Ceanothus                             L
         Ceanothus g. var. horizontalis                 Carmel Creeper                                    L
         Ceanothus g. var. h. ‘Yankee Point’            NCN                                               L
         Ceanothus ‘Joyce Coulter’                      NCN                                               L
         Ceanothus maritimus & cvs                      Maritime Ceanothus                                L
         Cephalophyllum ‘Red Spike’                     Red Spike Ice Plant                               L
         Cistus salviifolius                            Sageleaf Rockrose                                 L
         Cistus ‘Sunset’                                NCN                                               L
         Coprosma kirkii                                NCN                                               L
         Coprosma ‘Verde Vista’                         NCN                                               L
         Cotoneaster adpressus                          Creeping Cotoneaster                              L
         Cotoneaster dammeri & cvs                      NCN                                               L
         Cotoneaster horizontalis                       Rock Cotoneaster                                  L
         Cotoneaster salicifolius ‘Repens’              NCN                                               L
         Crassula multicava                             NCN                                               L
         Delosperma ‘Alba’                              White Trailing Ice Plant                          L
         Drosanthemum floribundum                       Rosea Ice Plant                                   L
         Dymondia margaretae                            NCN                                               L
104                                                                                    The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                      April 5, 2011

                                                                                                            APPENDICES
                                                                       Table A-1	
                                                                    Plant Palette
           AL	           Adapted to region	
           L	            Low supplemental water needs	
           LM	           Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
           M	            Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                     Estimated Water Needs
                 Botanical (Latin) Name                             Common Name
                                                                                      in Coastal California
           Eriogonum fasciculatum & cvs                  Common Buckwheat                      AL
           Festuca ovina glauca                          Blue Fescue                            L
           Gazania species & cvs                         Gazania                               LM
           Hardenbergia violacea & cvs                   False Sarsaparilla                     L
           Iva hayesiana                                 Hayes Iva                             AL
           Juniperus chinensis & cvs                     NCN                                    L
           Juniperus conferta                            Shore Juniper                          L
           Juniperus horizontalis & cvs                  Creeping Juniper                       L
           Juniperus sabina & cvs                        Tamarix Juniper                        L
           Lampranthus species                           Ice Plant                              L
           Lantana montevidensis & cvs                   Trailing Lantana                       L
           Lonicera japonica ‘Halliana’                  Hall’s Japanese Honeysuckle           LM
           Mahonia aquifolium ‘Compacta’                 Compact Oregon Grape                  LM
           Mahonia repens                                Creeping Mahonia                       L
           Maleophora species                            Ice Plant                              L
           Myoporum hybrids                              NCN                                    L
           Myoporum parvifolium & cvs                    Prostrate Myoporum                     L
           Nassella tenuissima                           Texas Needle Grass                     L
           Pacific Meadow Mix Creeping Fescue Blend                                            M
           Pyracantha species & cvs                      Firethorn                              L
           Ribes viburnifolium                           Evergreen Currant                      L
           Rosmarinus officinalis & cvs                  Prostrate Rosemary                     L
           Salvia mellifera & cvs                        Prostrate Black Sage                  AL
           Scaevola ‘Mauve Clusters’                     NCN                                    L
           Sedum species                                 Stonecrop                              L
           Senecio mandraliscae                          NCN                                    L
           Teucrium cossonii                             NCN                                   LM
           Verbena species & cvs                         Verbena                                L
           PERENNIALS
           Achillea species & cvs                        Yarrow                                 L
           Anigozanthos species & cvs                    Kangaroo Paw                          LM
           Armeria maritima                              Sea Pink                              M
           Artemisia pycnocephala & cvs                  Sandhill Sage                         LM
           Asteriscus species                            NCN                                    L
           Brachycome multifida                          Cut-leaf Daisy                        LM
           Centaurea species                             Dusty Miller                           L
           Centranthus ruber                             Red Valerian                          AL
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                          105
April 5, 2011

APPENDICES
                                                                      Table A-1	
                                                                  Plant Palette
         AL	           Adapted to region	
         L	            Low supplemental water needs	
         LM	           Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
         M	            Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                        Estimated Water Needs
               Botanical (Latin) Name                              Common Name
                                                                                          in Coastal California
         Cheiranthus ‘Bowles Mauve’                    Shrubby Wallflower                          LM
         Convolvulus cneorum                           Bush Morning Glory                           L
         Convolvulus mauritanicus                      Ground Morning Glory                         L
         Coreopsis species & cvs                       Coreopsis                                    L
         Cortaderia selloana                           Pampas Grass                                 L
         Dietes species & cvs                          Fortnight Lily                               L
         Diplacus species & hybrids                    Monkey Flower                               AL
         Elymus species & cvs                          Giant Wild Rye                               L
         Epilobium species & cvs                       California Fuchsia                           L
         Erigeron glaucus & cvs                        Beach Aster                                  L
         Erigeron karvinskianus                        Mexican Daisy                               LM
         Eriogonum crocatum                            Conejo Buckwheat                             L
         Eriogonum grande ssp. rubescens               Red Buckwheat                                L
         Eriogonum umbellatum & cv                     Sulfur Flower                               LM
         Eschscholzia californica                      California Poppy                            AL
         Euphorbia milii                               Crown of Thorns                              L
         Euphorbia rigida                              NCN                                          L
         Euryops pectinatus & cv                       Euryops                                      L
         Gaillardia grandiflora                        Blanket Flower                               L
         Gaura lindheimeri                             Gaura                                       LM
         Helianthemum nummularium & cvs                Sunrose                                     LM
         Helictotrichon sempervirens                   Blue Oat Grass                               L
         Hemerocallis fulva `Kwanso`                   Daylily                                     M
         Heuchera species & cvs                        Coral Bells                                 M
         Iris douglasiana & cvs                        Pacific Coast Iris                          LM
         Kniphofia uvaria & cvs                        Red-hot Poker                                L
         Limonium perezii                              Sea Lavender                                AL
         Lobelia laxiflora                             Mexican Bush Lobelia                         L
         Muhlenbergia species                          NCN                                          L
         Oenothera species                             Mexican Evening Primrose                     L
         Pennisetum setaceum & cv                      Fountain Grass                               L
         Penstemon species & cvs                       Western Natives                              L
         Perovskia atriplicifolia                      Russian Sage                                 L
         Phlomis species                               NCN                                          L
         Phormium tenax & cvs                          New Zealand Flax                             L
         Romneya coulteri & cvs                        Matilija Poppy                              AL
         Rosmarinus spp                                Rosemary                                     L
106                                                                              The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                April 5, 2011

                                                                                                           APPENDICES
                                                                         Table A-1	
                                                                     Plant Palette
           AL	            Adapted to region	
           L	             Low supplemental water needs	
           LM	            Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
           M	             Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                    Estimated Water Needs
                 Botanical (Latin) Name                              Common Name
                                                                                     in Coastal California
           Salvia species & cvs                           Sage                                AL
           Senecio cineraria                              Dusty Miller                         L
           Sisyrinchium bellum                            Blue-eyed Grass                     AL
           Stachys byzantina                              Lamb’s Ear                          LM
           Strelitzia reginae                             Bird Of Paradise                    AL
           Tagetes lemmonii                               Mountain Marigold                    L
           Thymus species & cvs                           Thyme                               LM
           Tulbaghia violacea & cv                        Society Garlic                      M
           Verbena species & cvs                          Verbena                              L
           Xanthorrhoea species                           Grass Tree                           L
           AGAVE, CACTI, SUCCULENTS, AND YUCCA
           Aeonium species & cvs                          NCN                                  L
           Agave americana                                Century Plant                        L
           Agave attenuata                                Foxtail Agave                        L
           Agave shawii                                   Shaw’s Century Plant                 L
           Agave victoriae-reginae                        NCN                                  L
           Agave vilmoriniana                             Octopus Agave                        L
           Aloe arborescens                               Tree Aloe                           AL
           Aloe bainesii                                  NCN                                 AL
           Aloe candelabrum                               Candelabra Aloe                      L
           Aloe ciliaris                                  NCN                                  L
           Aloe ferox                                     NCN                                  L
           Aloe marlothii                                 NCN                                  L
           Aloe nobilis                                   NCN                                  L
           Aloe plicatilis                                NCN                                  L
           Aloe striata                                   Coral Aloe                           L
           Aloe vera                                      Medicinal Aloe                       L
           Beaucarnea recurvata                           Ponytail Tree                        L
           Cereus peruvianus                              Peruvian Apple                       L
           Cordyline australis                            Dracaena Palm                        L
           Cotyledon species                              NCN                                  L
           Crassula species                               Jade Plant                           L
           Dasylirion species                             Desert Spoon                         L
           Dracaena draco                                 Dragon Tree                          L
           Dudleya species                                Live-forever                        AL
           Echeveria species                              Echeveria                            L
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                         107
April 5, 2011

APPENDICES
                                                                      Table A-1	
                                                                 Plant Palette
         AL	           Adapted to region	
         L	            Low supplemental water needs	
         LM	           Low to moderate supplemental water needs	
         M	            Moderate supplemental water needs	
                                                                                          Estimated Water Needs
              Botanical (Latin) Name                              Common Name
                                                                                            in Coastal California
         Euphorbia ingens                              Candelabra Tree                                L
         Euphorbia tirucalli                           Milkbush                                       L
         Hesperaloe parviflora                         Red Yucca                                      L
         Kalanchoe species                             NCN                                            L
         Nolina species                                Bear Grass                                     L
         Opuntia species                               Prickly Pear, Cholla                           L
         Portulacaria afra                             Elephant’s Food                                L
         Yucca aloifolia                               Spanish Bayonet                                L
         Yucca gloriosa                                Spanish Dagger                                 L
         Yucca whipplei                                Our Lord’s Candle                             AL
         Source: Excerpted from Landscape Plants for Western Regions by Bob Perry.
108                                                                                The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                  April 5, 2011

                                                    APPENDICES
                                                Appendix B	
                                          LIGHTING Palette
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                  109
April 5, 2011
APPENDICES
This page intentionally left blank.
110                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                 April 5, 2011
                                                                                               APPENDICES
The Boulevards at South Bay Lighting Palette 
The proposed palette of lighting fixtures, presented below, demonstrates examples of systems that would
be in compliance with the design guidelines and to provide examples of the architectural scale and quality
of these materials. These fixtures selections should meet the performance criteria of the guidelines while
providing an attractive complement to the building and landscape. For each building-type and roadway
component within the proposed development, examples of fixture types that would be applicable are
illustrated below. These fixtures represent examples of lighting products that will satisfy the guidelines
criteria for task illuminance, light trespass, and glare.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                              111
April 5, 2011
APPENDICES
The following example is applicable to:
Section A - Typical Del Amo Entry
Section C - Typical Loop Road
Section E - Typical Residential/Project Interface
Section F - 405 Freeway Edge/Project Interface
The following example is applicable to:
Section B - Typical Corridor Road
112                                               The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                               April 5, 2011
                                          APPENDICES
The following example is applicable to:
Section D - Typical Parking Lots
The following example is applicable to:
Section G - Entertainment Driveway Accent
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan        113
April 5, 2011
APPENDICES
This page intentionally left blank.
114                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                 April 5, 2011
                                                        APPENDICES
                                                    Appendix C	
                                          CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                      115
April 5, 2011
APPENDICES
This page intentionally left blank.
116                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                 April 5, 2011
                                                                                                                                                          APPENDICES
                                                                         Table C-1
                                                                Consistency Analysis
                              Relevant Policy                                                         Analysis of Project Consistency
 Land Use Element (2004)
 LU 4.1	     Direct Redevelopment Agency investments to those economic activities The proposed Project would convert a non productive site to a useful one through
             and locations with the greatest potential economic return.           site remediation. It would add economic development within the central part of the
                                                                                  City and serve as a gateway project. Also, with the South Bay Pavilion, the proposed
                                                                                  Project would establish a large, clearly identified area of regionally serving economic
                                                                                  activity, and serve the needs of the local Carson Community.
 LU 5.1	     Coordinate Redevelopment and Planning activities and                 The proposed Project is being developed in Redevelopment Project
             resources to maximize commercial opportunities.                      Area No. One, pursuant to the Redevelopment Plan for that area. It is
                                                                                  also being developed pursuant to numerous General Plan policies as
                                                                                  discussed in the remainder of the Table.
 LU 5.2	     Implement and expand strategies to market, attract, and/or           The proposed Project would establish the Project site as a signature
             retain retail commercial areas and encourage businesses to           project along the I 405 Freeway, well located with regard to other
             participate.                                                         freeways. The Project would offer high visibility in a new, planned
                                                                                  development. It would include entertainment uses to attract visitors
                                                                                  and meet the needs of local population Within specific retail sectors,
                                                                                  Project development is forecasted to have a short-term negative effect
                                                                                  upon existing retail uses within the market area served by the proposed
                                                                                  Project. It is further forecasted that this impact would be alleviated in
                                                                                  the mid-term (i.e., by 2020) as the local market grows and matures.
 LU 5.3	     Identify unique economic opportunities, such as niche                The proposed Project would provide a regional facility in a mixed use
             markets, that will allow the City to capitalize on its location,     development, visibly noticeable along a major freeway corridor. The
             its cultural diversity, and the tourism industry in the region.      large scale of the Project and the proposed mix of visitor and local
                                                                                  serving uses would create an opportunity to support a large range of
                                                                                  uses, including specialized markets.
 LU 6.2	     Achieve a sustainable land use balance through provision             The proposed Project would occur pursuant to the Area One
             of incentives for desired uses; coordination of land use and         Redevelopment Plan and its policies and opportunities. The proposed
             circulation patterns; and promotion of a variety of housing          Project would include an internal circulation system that would be linked
             types and affordability.                                             with the regional network and linked to new/improved freeway access
                                                                                  at Avalon Boulevard. The Project’s mitigation measures would include
                                                                                  improvements to reduce impacts on the local road network. (Impacts
                                                                                  would be reduced to less than significant levels, except at one location
                                                                                  where impacts would be reduced, although not to a less than significant
                                                                                  level.) The proposed Project would add up to 1,550 new housing units
                                                                                  including both rental and ownership uses, thus adding to the range and
                                                                                  mix of housing available in the City of Carson. Also, it would include
                                                                                  affordable housing in accordance with the Redevelopment Plan and
                                                                                  applicable law (the Agency would address affordable housing through
                                                                                  an Owner Participation Agreement). Retail uses would serve both local
                                                                                  (City residents) and regional populations. Within specific retail sectors,
                                                                                  Project development is forecasted to have a short-term negative effect
                                                                                  upon existing retail uses within the market area served by the proposed
                                                                                  Project. It is further forecasted that this impact would be alleviated in
                                                                                  the mid-term (i.e., by 2020) as the local market grows and matures.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                                             117
April 5, 2011

APPENDICES
                                                                  Table C-1
                                                       Consistency Analysis
                          Relevant Policy                                                 Analysis of Project Consistency
 LU 6.3	  Consider establishing minimum land use density                The proposed Project would be implemented under a Specific Plan
          requirements in certain areas such as mixed-use zones         that allows for mixed use development in an efficient manner. A
          to provide more efficient, consistent, and compatible         minimum floor area ratio of 1.5 is established for vertically mixed-
          development patterns while also promoting greater potential   use development. Density and height limits would allow for mid rise
          for pedestrian and transit oriented development.              residential development including densities up to 60 units/acre. The
                                                                        Project includes provision for pedestrian and bicycle transit and can be
                                                                        linked to nearby public transit routes.
 LU 6.4	  Coordinate redevelopment and planning activities and          The proposed Project is being developed in Redevelopment Zone No.
          resources to balance land uses, amenities, and civic          One, pursuant to the Redevelopment Plan for that area. It is also being
          facilities.                                                   developed pursuant to numerous General Plan policies as discussed
                                                                        in this Table. It is a mixed use development with visitor amenities;
                                                                        e.g., retail entertainment and residential uses. The conceptual Plan
                                                                        identifies numerous plazas to enhance the pedestrian experience.
 LU 6.6	  Attract land uses that generate revenue to the City of        The proposed Project would include up to approximately 1,995,125
          Carson, while maintaining a balance of other community        sq.ft. of commercial use that would be generating revenue to the City,
          needs such as housing, open space, and public facilities.     as well as up to 1,550 housing units intermixed with plazas and open
                                                                        space.
 LU 7.3	  Promote the use of buffers between more intensive industrial The proposed Project would include no industrial uses. New residential
          uses and residential uses.                                    development would not be located adjacent to intensive industrial uses.
 LU 8.1	  Amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide for those Mixed Use The Project site is designated for Mixed Use–Business Park in
          areas identified on the General Plan Land Use Plan.           the 2004 General Plan. The Project would involve a General Plan
                                                                        Amendment and Zone change to integrate the proposed Specific Plan
                                                                        into the City’s principal planning documents. The Specific Plan would
                                                                        extend the General Plan’s mixed use designation to include residential
                                                                        development and allow for the appropriate mix of uses.
 LU 8.3	  Locate higher density residential uses in proximity to        The proposed Project includes high density residential development
          commercial centers in order to encourage pedestrian traffic   within a mixed use project containing up to 1,995,125 sq.ft. of
          and provide a consumer base for commercial uses.              commercial activity. The site design includes a pedestrian circulation
                                                                        system that connects the various components of the site.
 LU 11.1	 Target potential sites or areas for the development of        Project implementation would create a signature project at a location
          signature projects.                                           that has been identified as being conducive to such a project, due to
                                                                        the site’s location along the I 405 Freeway, visual accessibility from the
                                                                        I 405 Freeway and its location within the central area of Carson.
 LU 11.2	 Encourage development of desired uses such as quality         The proposed Project would include up to 1,995,125 sq.ft. of
          retail, restaurant uses, and entertainment in targeted areas. commercial space. Based on the current Conceptual Plan, 81,125
                                                                        sq.ft. is designated for restaurants, and 214,000 sq.ft. is designated for
                                                                        commercial recreation/entertainment.
 LU 15.1	 Encourage the location of housing, jobs, shopping, services   The proposed Project includes mixed uses with up to 1,550 residential
          and other activities within easy walking distance of each     units and up to 1,995,125 sq.ft, within the Project site. The site design
          other.                                                        includes a pedestrian circulation system that connects the various
                                                                        components of the site thereby facilitating one type of pedestrian
                                                                        activity targeted by this policy.
 LU 15.2	 Maintain a diversity of housing types to enable citizens from The proposed housing units, up to 1,550 units in total, would contribute
          a wide range of economic levels and age groups to live in     to the range of housing opportunities within the City of Carson. It would
          Carson.                                                       add rental and for sale units that increase the diversity of available
                                                                        housing Also, it would include affordable housing in accordance with
                                                                        the Redevelopment Plan and applicable law (the Agency would address
                                                                        affordable housing through an Owner Participation Agreement).
 LU 15.3	 Ensure that community transportation facilities are           The proposed Project’s internal circulation system would provide
          connected to a larger transit network.                        access to Main Street and Avalon Boulevard via Del Amo Boulevard,
                                                                        with accessibility to the I 405 Freeway via new ramps at Avalon
                                                                        Boulevard.
118                                                                                    The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                    April 5, 2011

                                                                                                                                          APPENDICES
                                                                    Table C-1
                                                         Consistency Analysis
                           Relevant Policy                                                   Analysis of Project Consistency
 LU 15.4	 Develop a center focus within the community that combines         The Project site is located within the central part of the City. The
            commercial, civic, cultural and recreational uses.              Project’s high-intensity development with commercial and entertainment
                                                                            venues would contribute development at a location amidst the Carson
                                                                            Civic Center, the Home Depot Center, California State University at
                                                                            Dominguez Hills, the South Bay Pavilion, and the Victoria Golf Course
                                                                            and Park, thus adding to the centrality of such community uses.
 LU 15.5	 Ensure that the design of public spaces encourages the            The proposed Project is anticipated to offer entertainment and dining as
            attention and presence of people at all hours of the day and    well as shopping opportunities, oriented around a central Plaza. These
            night.                                                          activities would continue into the evening hours. The Specific Plan
                                                                            includes standards for public art and landscaping to enhance the public
                                                                            spaces.
 LU 15.6	 Ensure development of pedestrian oriented improvements            The proposed Project includes an internal system of pedestrian
            which provide better connections between and within all         sidewalks and pathways that would interconnect all portions of the
            developments while reducing dependence on vehicle travel.       Project site.
 City of Carson General Plan, Land Use Element (1982)–Goals and Objectives
 General
 1.	  Allow each type of land use sufficient area to develop to the fullest This general policy is reflected in the General Plan land use
      extent indicated by the economy and general welfare.                  designations. The Project’s support of the expected land use patterns
                                                                            is discussed below (Subsection 3.C.2.(a).(ii)) on page 136.
 6.	  Encourage the development of stable industrial and commercial         The proposed Project would include up to 1,995,125 sq.ft. of space
      uses which will broaden the economic base to create a more self       for commercial development. Commercial activities are anticipated to
      sufficient local economy.                                             include a broad array of uses to meet the needs of the local community.
 Residential Land Use
 1.	  Residential areas should be organized into distinct districts and     Residential development would occur either as distinct developments,
      located in harmonious relationship with other adjacent or nearby      or in mixed use configurations within Development Districts 1 and/or
      land use activities.                                                  3. While not necessarily occurring in distinct districts, development
                                                                            would occur pursuant to various design and development standards
                                                                            established in the Specific Plan to ensure harmonious relationships
                                                                            between uses; e.g., standards regarding site planning, building
                                                                            massing, color and materials, building detailing, etc.
 2.	  Housing should be provided for a variety of income groups.            The proposed Project would add rental and for sale units that vary
                                                                            in character from much of the existing housing within the City.
                                                                            Development would include affordable housing in accordance with the
                                                                            Redevelopment Plan and applicable law (the Agency would address
                                                                            affordable housing through an Owner Participation Agreement).
 3.	  Residential areas should be served with schools, adequate             The proposed Project would provide proximity between residential
      parking, recreational parks and shopping areas in close proximity.    and commercial uses, and would meet all parking needs on site. The
                                                                            Project residents would have access to twelve nearby parks; e.g.,
                                                                            Victoria Golf Course and Park and schools. A new school (South
                                                                            Region High School # 4) is planned for the Project area. (Section
                                                                            IV.I.3, Schools, indicates that the Project could cause an exceedance
                                                                            of school capacity, but would mitigate Project impacts through the
                                                                            payment of SB 50 fees. Section IV.I.4, Parks and Recreation, indicates
                                                                            that project impacts on parks would be less than significant with the
                                                                            implementation of Project mitigation.)
 5.	  Realistic density standards should be established to ensure           The Specific Plan includes density standards, including a maximum of
      adequate space, light and safety.                                     60 du/acre for residential development. The anticipated design of the
                                                                            Project includes provision for private open space, and safety.
 Commercial Land Use
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                         119
April 5, 2011

APPENDICES
                                                                    Table C-1
                                                          Consistency Analysis
                            Relevant Policy                                                Analysis of Project Consistency
 1.	  The Carson Mall and its peripheral areas should continue to        The Project site lies in an area that is peripheral to the Carson Mall,
      serve as the major retail center in the City offering the widest   now known as the South Bay Pavilion. The proposed Project would
      range of goods and services to the citizens of Carson and nearby   add to the focus of the central portion of the City as a major retail area.
      communities. This regional shopping center, anchored on            It would expand and broaden the intent of this policy by establishing a
      one side by the Civic Center complex and on the other side by      large complimentary commercial center in proximity to the South Bay
      California State University Dominguez Hills, serves as a needed    Pavilion.
      focal point for the City of Carson and links the northern and
      southern areas of the City.
 3.	  Most commercial areas should be served with arterial highway       The proposed Project’s internal circulation system would provide
      access and all commercial businesses should have an adequate       access to Main Street and Avalon Boulevard via Del Amo Boulevard,
      supply of parking.                                                 with accessibility to the I 405 Freeway via new ramps at Avalon
                                                                         Boulevard. The Project site would include on site parking to meet the
                                                                         Project’s parking needs.
 4.	  Commercial activities should be screened or buffered from          The proposed Project includes commercial development along
      adjacent residential uses wherever possible.                       the southern part of the Project site, opposite to the residential
                                                                         neighborhoods beyond the Torrance Lateral to the south. As described
                                                                         more fully in Subsection 3.C.(3).(b) on page 164, existing residential
                                                                         units would be separated from proposed development by a minimum
                                                                         of approximately 185 feet, inclusive of the intervening Torrance Lateral
                                                                         (75 feet wide with service roads) and a landscaped slope that runs
                                                                         along this face of the Project site. The landscaped slope would rise
                                                                         approximately 13 to 16 feet to the Project site’s finished grade level
                                                                         and Project development. This landscaped, horizontal and vertical
                                                                         separation would provide buffering.
                                                                         Within the Project site, residential development and commercial
                                                                         development would likely be placed in proximity to each other, as
                                                                         mixed use development components. Such development would
                                                                         occur pursuant to the development and design guidelines set forth,
                                                                         for example, in The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan, regarding;
                                                                         landscaping, site planning, building massing, color and materials,
                                                                         building detailing, separation between residential and commercial
                                                                         uses, etc. New residents to the Project site would have the opportunity
                                                                         to select residential locations based on their preferences regarding
                                                                         accessibility to the various on-site commercial activities.
 5.	  Commercial activities should be encouraged to have a broader       The large scale of the Project and allowable mix of uses would support
      commercial base to develop a self sufficient economy.              a large range of commercial activity. Within specific retail sectors,
                                                                         Project development is forecasted to have a short-term negative effect
                                                                         upon existing retail uses within the market area served by the proposed
                                                                         Project. It is further forecasted that this impact would be alleviated in
                                                                         the mid-term (i.e., by 2020) as the local market grows and matures.
 City of Carson General Plan, Housing Element (2002/2004)—Policies
 H-1.3	     Promote economic well being of the City by encouraging the   The proposed Project would include up to 1,995,125 sq.ft. of space
            development and diversification of its economic base.        for commercial development. Commercial activities are anticipated to
                                                                         include a broad array of uses; e.g., regional commercial, neighborhood
                                                                         commercial, restaurants, commercial recreation/entertainment, and
                                                                         hotel uses. Within specific retail sectors, Project development is
                                                                         forecasted to have a short-term negative effect upon existing retail uses
                                                                         within the market area served by the proposed Project. It is further
                                                                         forecasted that this impact would be alleviated in the mid-term (i.e., by
                                                                         2020) as the local market grows and matures.
120                                                                                     The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                     April 5, 2011

                                                                                                                                        APPENDICES
                                                                    Table C-1
                                                         Consistency Analysis
                           Relevant Policy                                                Analysis of Project Consistency
 H-1.5	    Establish and maintain development standards that support     The proposed Project would provide up to 1,550 housing units. These
           housing development while protecting the quality of life.     housing units would be developed subject to development and design
                                                                         guidelines established in the Specific Plan, addressing such items as
                                                                         site planning, building massing, color and materials, building detailing,
                                                                         etc.
 H-3.1	    The development of quality affordable housing.                The proposed Project would include affordable housing in accordance
                                                                         with the Redevelopment Plan and applicable law. The Redevelopment
                                                                         Agency would address affordable housing through an Owner
                                                                         Participation Agreement.
 H-3.2	    Work to expand the resource of developable land by making     The proposed Project would put to productive use a contaminated,
           underutilized land available for development.                 former landfill/brownfield site, via site remediation.
 H-3.3	    Promote a variety of housing types, prices and tenure in      The proposed housing units, up to 1,550 units in total, would add rental
           order to satisfy community demand and need.                   and for sale units that increase the variety of housing opportunities
                                                                         within the City. Development would include affordable housing
                                                                         in accordance with the Redevelopment Plan and applicable law
                                                                         (the Agency would address affordable housing through an Owner
                                                                         Participation Agreement).
 H-3.6	    Promote the development of multifamily zoning.                The Project’s Specific Plan would re designate lands that are currently
                                                                         designated for non residential development to a Mixed-Use zone
                                                                         that provides for multifamily residential unit up to 60 units per acre in
                                                                         density.
 H-6.8	    Continue to work toward increasing the number of owner        The proposed Project includes provision for up to 1,150 for sale units.
           occupied units.
 City of Carson General Plan, Economic Development Element (2002)—Policies
 ED-1.2	   Encourage the development of quality housing.                 The proposed Project would include up to 1,550 new housing units.
                                                                         These units would be required to meet Specific Plan standards for
                                                                         design, landscaping, etc.
 ED-1.4	   Strengthen the physical image of Carson through visual        The proposed Project has been designed to take advantage of its
           enhancement along freeway corridors, major traffic routes,    location adjacent to the I-405 Freeway. The proposed Project would:
           and areas adjoining residential neighborhoods. To this end:   (1) present a substantial new development along the freeway edge that
                                                                         would attract public attention; (2) provide identification of the Project’s
           •	 Aggressively pursue code enforcement activities;           visitor-oriented commercial recreation/entertainment activities through
           •	 Develop good design standards; and                         building placement and/or signage; (3) include, through Specific Plan
           •	 Establish a City identity.                                 requirements, a set of sign regulations that would integrate the Project’s
                                                                         proposed signage program with the overall aesthetic concept for the
                                                                         Project; and (4) include, through the Specific Plan, provisions for
                                                                         landscaping/aesthetic treatment along the Project’s freeway edge.
 ED-1.6	   Provide appropriate infrastructure to support economic        The proposed Project would include an internal infrastructure system
           development.                                                  that is designed to meet all on-site uses. As described in Sections J.1,
                                                                         Water Services, J.2., Sewer Services, and J.3, Electrical Service, the
                                                                         Project would not have significant impacts on existing services.
 ED-3.6	   Capitalize on potential physical and market linkages among    The proposed Project is a mixed-use Project that would include up
           land uses.                                                    to 1,550 units. These uses would provide an estimated 6,969 new
                                                                         residents that would support the Project’s commercial components.
                                                                         The Project population would also support other commercial enterprises
                                                                         in the Project vicinity, and the commercial component would serve
                                                                         populations in nearby neighborhoods.
 ED-4.3	   Support public/private efforts and link infrastructure and    The proposed Project is a privately sponsored project that would
           service costs with development projects.                      be developed within the City of Carson Redevelopment Agency’s
                                                                         Redevelopment District 1 and would be developed pursuant to the
                                                                         goals of the Redevelopment Plan as described below.
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                          121
April 5, 2011

APPENDICES
                                                                  Table C-1
                                                       Consistency Analysis
                          Relevant Policy                                                Analysis of Project Consistency
 ED-4.4	  Encourage development opportunities that increase            The proposed Project would include up to 1,995,125 sq.ft. of space for
          economic gains to the City.                                  commercial development. Commercial activities would include a broad
                                                                       array of uses; e.g., regional commercial, neighborhood commercial,
                                                                       restaurants, commercial recreation/entertainment, and hotel uses.
                                                                       Within specific retail sectors, Project development is forecasted to have
                                                                       a short-term negative effect upon existing retail uses within the market
                                                                       area served by the proposed Project. It is further forecasted that this
                                                                       impact would be alleviated in the mid-term (i.e., by 2020) as the local
                                                                       market grows and matures.
 ED-7.1	  Encourage the diversification of land uses, while not        The proposed Project would increase the diversification of land
          alienating existing businesses or industries requiring space uses by: (1) adding substantial amounts of new commercial and
          in Carson.                                                   residential development; (2) including commercial activities that do
                                                                       not presently occur, or are non-present in the City; e.g., commercial
                                                                       recreation/entertainment; (3) including housing that varies in density
                                                                       and relationship to commercial activity from the existing prevalent
                                                                       housing. The City has large amounts of industrial land available,
                                                                       including sites in the vicinity of the proposed Project, most of it located
                                                                       in districts better suited for industrial activity than the proposed Project.
                                                                       The Project’s potential effect on existing businesses is addressed
                                                                       below in Subsection 3.c.(4) on page 165. Within specific retail sectors,
                                                                       Project development is forecasted to have a short-term negative effect
                                                                       upon existing retail uses within the market area served by the proposed
                                                                       Project. It is further forecasted that this impact would be alleviated in
                                                                       the mid-term (i.e., by 2020) as the local market grows and matures.
 ED-7.2	  Improve the actual and perceived image of the City through   Development would occur pursuant to various design and development
          improved design standards, amenities, security, continuing   standards established in the Specific Plan to insure harmonious
          public improvements and positive advertising campaigns.      relationships between uses; e.g., standards regarding site planning,
                                                                       building massing, color and materials, building detailing, etc. These
                                                                       standards are more detailed than those currently included within
                                                                       the City Zoning Ordinance. See Section IV.B, Aesthetics, for more
                                                                       discussion.
 ED-10.2	 To develop signature projects,] encourage development of     The proposed Project uses include commercial recreation/
          desired uses such as quality retail, restaurant uses, and    entertainment and restaurant uses, and an organized in a visitor-
          entertainment in target areas.                               oriented district. The Project is of sufficient size to offer a range of
                                                                       such uses and support the anticipated inclusion of quality retail and
                                                                       restaurant uses. The Project is located within the central City at a
                                                                       highly visible location, one targeted for such development in existing
                                                                       plans.
 ED-11.1	 Encourage the redevelopment and cleanup of underutilized     The proposed Project would put to productive use a contaminated,
          and contaminated land.                                       former landfill/brownfield site, via site remediation.
 ED-11.2	 Maintain proper infrastructure levels and flexible financing The proposed Project is a privately initiated Project that would be
          options to encourage redevelopment.                          implemented in cooperation with the Carson Redevelopment Agency. It
                                                                       would include an internal infrastructure system that is designed to meet
                                                                       all on-site uses. As described in Sections J.1, Water Services; J.2,
                                                                       Sewer Services; and J.3, Electrical Service, the Project would not have
                                                                       significant impacts on existing services.
 ED-11.3	 Understand and promote available land inventory and initiate The proposed Project would put to productive use a contaminated,
          strategies to develop balanced land use planning.            former landfill/brownfield site, via site remediation. It would increase
                                                                       the amounts of housing and commercial activity within the City. Further,
                                                                       it would implement a mixed-use development with a mix/balance of
                                                                       uses that could serve as a model for mixed-use development.
122                                                                                   The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                      April 5, 2011

                                                                                                                                      APPENDICES
                                                                  Table C-1
                                                        Consistency Analysis
                            Relevant Policy                                             Analysis of Project Consistency
 ED-11.4	 Encourage development of compatible uses and phase out       As described further, below, the Project’s Specific Plan would limit uses
           non-conforming uses.                                        on the Project site, and place the Project’s larger commercial buildings
                                                                       and intensities in a non-residential district (District 2). The Specific
                                                                       Plan’s development and design standards reduce potential conflicts
                                                                       between commercial and residential development in District’s 1 and 3.
                                                                       As also discussed further below, the Project’s commercial activity would
                                                                       avoid conflict with residential development to the south and southwest
                                                                       of the Project site due to vertical and horizontal distance, an intervening
                                                                       landscaped slope and design features for that development.
 Carson Redevelopment Plan—Goals
 1.	 The elimination and prevention of the spread of blight and        The proposed Project would put to productive use a contaminated,
     deterioration, and the conservation, rehabilitation, and          former landfill/brownfield site, via site remediation. It would add a
     redevelopment of the Project Area.                                substantial amount of new commercial activity to the City, improve the
                                                                       quality of the Project site, and generally enhance the Project vicinity.
                                                                       Potential secondary impacts on blight, due to lost economic opportunity
                                                                       at other locations within the City, is discussed below in Subsection
                                                                       3.c.(4) on page 165. Within specific retail sectors, Project development
                                                                       is forecasted to have a short-term negative effect upon existing retail
                                                                       uses within the market area served by the proposed Project. It is
                                                                       further forecasted that this impact would be alleviated in the mid-term
                                                                       (i.e., by 2020) as the local market grows and matures.
 2.	 The encouragement, cooperation, and participation of residents,   The proposed Project has been initiated by a private developer and is
     business persons, public agencies, and community organizations    being implemented under a cooperative arrangement with the Carson
     in the revitalization of the Project Area.                        Redevelopment Agency.
 3.	 The provision of financial assistance to encourage private sector The proposed Project has been initiated by a private developer and is
     investment in the development and redevelopment of the Project    being implemented under a cooperative arrangement with the Carson
     Area.                                                             Redevelopment Agency.
 4.	 The promotion of the economic well being of the Project Area by   The proposed Project would include up to 1,995,125 sq.ft. of space
     encouraging the diversification and development of its economic   for commercial development. Commercial activities are anticipated to
     base, and to assist in both short and long term employment        include a broad array of uses that would diversify and further develop
     opportunities for the residents of the Project Area and the City. the City’s economic base; e.g., regional commercial, neighborhood
                                                                       commercial, restaurants, commercial recreation/entertainment, and
                                                                       hotel uses. Within specific retail sectors, Project development is
                                                                       forecasted to have a short-term negative effect upon existing retail uses
                                                                       within the market area served by the proposed Project. It is further
                                                                       forecasted that this impact would be alleviated in the mid-term (i.e., by
                                                                       2020) as the local market grows and matures.
 5.	 The improvement of housing and the assistance of low and          The proposed housing units, up to 1,550 units in total, would contribute
     moderate income persons and families to obtain homeownership.     to the range of housing opportunities within the City of Carson.
                                                                       Also, it would include affordable housing in accordance with the
                                                                       Redevelopment Plan and applicable law (the Agency would address
                                                                       affordable housing through an Owner Participation Agreement).
 6.	 The development of quality affordable housing.                    The proposed Project would include affordable housing in accordance
                                                                       with the Redevelopment Plan and applicable law (the Agency
                                                                       would address affordable housing through an Owner Participation
                                                                       Agreement).
 7.	 The provision of adequate roadways; traffic and circulation       The proposed Project would include an internal circulation system
     improvements to correct street deficiencies, alignment problems,  that would be linked with the regional network, and linked to new/
     and to eliminate road hazards; and to provide adequate street and improved freeway access at Avalon Boulevard. The Project’s mitigation
     freeway access throughout the Project Area.                       measures would include improvements to reduce impacts on the local
                                                                       road network. (Impacts would be reduced to less than significant
                                                                       levels, except at one location where impacts would be reduced,
                                                                       although not to a less than significant level.)
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                                                                                       123
April 5, 2011

APPENDICES
                                                                   Table C-1
                                                         Consistency Analysis
                            Relevant Policy                                                  Analysis of Project Consistency
 8.	  The stimulation of private sector investment in the full              The proposed Project is a privately initiated Project that is being
      development of the Project Area.                                      developed pursuant to goals of the Carson Redevelopment Agency.
 9.	  The expansion of the resource of developable land by making           The proposed Project would put to productive use, via site remediation,
      underutilized land available for development.                         a contaminated, former landfill/brownfield site, adding 157 acres to the
                                                                            bank of developable land in the City.
 10.	 The provision of needed or lacking public improvements and            The proposed Project would provide on-site infrastructure to meet the
      facilities which are sensitive to the environment.                    Project’s needs. As described in Section IV.J, the Project would not
                                                                            have a significant impact on existing infrastructure.
 12.	 The development of safeguards against noise and pollution to          As described in Sections IV.G, Air Quality, and IV.H., Noise, the Project
      enhance the industrial, commercial, and residential community.        would include feasible mitigation measures to address potentially
                                                                            significant impacts regarding Noise and Air Quality.
 14.	 The assembly and disposition of land into parcels suitable for        The proposed Project is an integrated, mixed use development with a
      modern integrated development with improved development               blend of residential and commercial uses, with an internal circulation
      standards, pedestrian, and vehicular circulation in the Project       that supports pedestrian travel. The proposed Project would be
      Area.                                                                 implemented via a Specific Plan that includes development and design
                                                                            standards.
 Carson Redevelopment Plan—Objectives
 6.	  Focus traditional redevelopment activities in those portions of the The proposed Project would establish the Project site as a signature
      Project Area, where appropriate, and provide the greatest visibility. project, large scale development, along the I 405 Freeway, well located
                                                                            with regard to major transportation facilities/freeways. The Project
                                                                            would offer high visibility in a new, planned development.
 7.	  Update zoning designations within the Project Area to improve         The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan would add a new mixed use
      the City’s competitiveness in the marketplace while generating        designation on the Project site that would allow residential development
      desirable new development.                                            as a component of the mixed-use array. This increases the number of
                                                                            uses that can be accommodated on the Project site, and enhances the
                                                                            attractiveness of the Project site for both residential and commercial
                                                                            developers.
 	    Source: PCR Services Corporation, 2005.
124                                                                                       The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                        April 5, 2011

                                                APPENDICES
                                            Appendix D	
                                          EIR SUMMARY
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan              125
April 5, 2011
APPENDICES
This page intentionally left blank.
126                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                 April 5, 2011
                            CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
1.        PURPOSE OF THE EIR
          This EIR has been prepared pursuant the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
to evaluate the impacts of a new development Project that would be constructed in the city of
Carson on a site located just southeast of the I-405 Freeway between Main Street and Avalon
Boulevard. The Project would provide a mixed-use development with some or all of the
following uses: regional commercial, commercial recreation/entertainment, office neighborhood
commercial, restaurant, hotel, and residential.
          This EIR is a Project EIR, as defined by Section 15161 of the State CEQA Guidelines
and, as such, serves as an informational document for the general public and Project decision-
makers. The City of Carson Redevelopment Agency (Redevelopment Agency) has the principal
responsibility for approving the Project and, as the Lead Agency, is responsible for the
preparation and distribution of this Draft EIR pursuant to CEQA Statute Section 21067. The
Governing Board of the Redevelopment Agency is the Carson City Council.
          The intended use of this EIR is to assist the Carson Redevelopment Agency and the City
of Carson in making decisions with regard to the Carson Marketplace Project. This Draft EIR is
also intended to cover all State, regional, and local governmental discretionary approvals that
may be required to construct or implement the proposed Project. Additional agencies using the
document would include, but would not necessarily be limited to, the State Department of Toxic
Substances Control (DTSC), the Regional Water Quality Control Board and the State
Department of Transportation (CALTRANS).
          This Draft EIR evaluates the environmental impacts determined by the Redevelopment
Agency to be potentially significant and discusses the manner in which the Project’s significant
effects can be reduced or avoided through the implementation of mitigation measures. Impacts
that cannot be mitigated to a level below significance are considered significant unavoidable
adverse impacts. In accordance with Section 15130 of the State CEQA Guidelines, this EIR also
includes an examination of the effects of cumulative development in the vicinity of the proposed
Project. Cumulative development includes all anticipated future projects that, in conjunction
with the proposed Project, may result in a cumulative impact. In addition, this Draft EIR
evaluates the extent to which environmental effects could be reduced or avoided through the
implementation of feasible alternatives to the proposed Project.               Furthermore, the
Redevelopment Agency is responsible for certifying the EIR and adopting any mitigation
measures needed to address the Project’s significant environmental impacts. For projects that
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                           Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                               November 2005
                                                 Page 1
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                            CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
result in any unmitigated or under-mitigated significant environmental effects, the
Redevelopment Agency may, after making a series of findings, certify the EIR upon adoption of
a Statement of Overriding Considerations pursuant to CEQA Guidelines Section 15093.
2.        EIR FOCUS AND EFFECTS FOUND NOT TO BE SIGNIFICANT
          In compliance with CEQA Section 21080.4, a Notice of Preparation (NOP) was prepared
by the Redevelopment Agency and distributed for public comment to the State Clearinghouse,
Office of Planning and Research, responsible agencies, and other interested parties on May 12,
2005. During the NOP review period, a public scoping meeting was held at the Carson
Community Center on June 1, 2005. The purpose of the scoping meeting was to obtain input
from the public regarding the scope of the issues and the alternatives that would be analyzed in
the Draft EIR.
          The Project’s Initial Study, provided to the Office and of Planning and Research and
responsible agencies and made available to the general public, identified those environmental
topics for which the proposed Project could have adverse environmental effects and concluded
that an EIR would need to be prepared to document these effects. A copy of the NOP and Initial
Study, the NOP distribution list, written responses to the NOP that were submitted to the
Redevelopment Agency and written comments submitted at the scoping meeting are included in
Appendix A of this Draft EIR.
          In the Initial Study, the Redevelopment Agency determined that implementation of the
proposed Project may, either by itself or in conjunction with past, present, and reasonably
foreseeable future development in the vicinity, have significant effects in the following areas:
          •    Land Use;
          •    Visual Qualities;
          •    Traffic and Circulation;
          •    Hazards and Hazardous Materials;
          •    Geology and Soils;
          •    Surface Water Quality;
          •    Air Quality;
          •    Noise;
          •    Public Services (Police and Fire Protection, Schools, Libraries, and Recreational
               Facilities); and
          •    Utilities (Water Supply, Wastewater Generation, and Solid Waste).
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                              Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                  November 2005
                                                Page 2
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                               CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          The Redevelopment Agency determined that the proposed Project would not have the
potential to cause significant impacts in the following areas: Agricultural Resources, Biological
Resources, Mineral Resources, Cultural Resources, Hydrology (Drainage and Groundwater
Quality), and Population and Housing. Therefore, these areas are not examined in this Draft
EIR. The rationale for the finding that no significant impacts would occur for these areas is
provided in the Project’s Initial Study, included in Appendix A of this Draft EIR.
3.        EIR ORGANIZATION
          This Draft EIR is organized into the following eight chapters:
          I.        Summary. This chapter describes the purpose of the EIR, EIR focus and effects
                    found not to be significant, EIR organization, Project background, areas of
                    controversy and issues to be resolved, public review process, discretionary
                    actions, and a summary of environmental impacts and mitigation measures.
          II.       Project Description. This chapter presents the location, characteristics, and
                    objectives of the proposed Project.
          III.      General Description of the Environmental Setting. This chapter contains a
                    description of the existing setting and a list of known related projects in the
                    Project area that are anticipated for completion by 2010, the expected time for
                    completion and occupancy of the proposed Project.
          IV.       Environmental Impact Analysis. This chapter contains the environmental
                    setting, Project impacts, mitigation measures, cumulative impacts and conclusions
                    regarding the level of impact significance after mitigation for each of the
                    environmental issues addressed in this EIR.
          V.        Alternatives. This chapter provides analyses of each of the alternatives to the
                    proposed Project, and the alternatives considered but rejected from further
                    analysis.
          VI.       Other Environmental Considerations. This chapter presents an analysis of the
                    significant irreversible changes in the environment that would result from the
                    proposed Project, an analysis of the Project’s potential for causing growth-
                    inducing impacts, and an analysis of potential secondary impacts; i.e. impacts
                    that would be caused due to implementation of the Project’s off-site mitigation
                    measures.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                    November 2005
                                                    Page 3
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          VII.      Persons and Organizations Consulted. This chapter lists all of the persons,
                    agencies, and organizations that were consulted or contributed to the preparation
                    of this Draft EIR.
          VIII. Bibliography and References. This chapter lists all of the references and
                    sources used in the preparation of this Draft EIR.
          This Draft EIR includes the environmental analysis prepared for the proposed Project and
the following appendices:
          •    Appendix A—Notice of Preparation (NOP), Initial Study, and NOP Letters;
          •    Appendix B—Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program;
          •    Appendix C—Project Equivalency;
          •    Appendix D—Traffic Analysis;
          •    Appendix E—Hazards;
          •    Appendix F—Air Quality Technical Appendix;
          •    Appendix G—Noise Technical Appendix;
          •    Appendix H—Water Supply Assessment Letter;
          •    Appendix I— Water Consumption, and Wastewater Generation Worksheets; and
          •    Appendix J— The Carson Marketplace, City of Carson, Retail Impact Study.
4.        PROPOSED PROJECT
    a. Project Location
          The Project site is located in the City of Carson in the South Bay area of Los Angeles
County and is currently undeveloped. It is located approximately 17 miles south of downtown
Los Angeles and approximately 6.5 miles east of the Pacific Ocean. The Project site is
comprised of approximately 168 acres located southwest of the San Diego Freeway (I-405) at
and north of the Avalon Boulevard interchange. The Project site consists of two components.
The majority of the Project site, consisting of 157 acres, is located south of Del Amo Boulevard,
while the remaining 11 acres are located north of Del Amo Boulevard.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                    November 2005
                                                   Page 4
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                    CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          The San Diego Freeway (I-405), Harbor Freeway (I-110), Artesia Freeway (SR-91), and
Long Beach Freeway (I-710) provide regional access to the Project site. The I-405 Freeway is
located adjacent to the Project site’s eastern boundary, the I-110 Freeway is located directly west
of the Project site, and the SR-91 Freeway is located approximately 2.5 miles north of the Project
site. The I-710 Freeway, which is located on Carson’s eastern boundary, links the City with the
Long Beach and Harbor areas. Locally, access to the Project site is available via Main Street (a
north-south thoroughfare on the western side of the Project site), Avalon Boulevard (an exit from
the I-405 Freeway and a major north-south arterial, and Del Amo Boulevard (an east-west
arterial which bisects the northern portion of the Project site).
     b. Project Characteristics
          Carson Marketplace, LLC (the “Applicant”) is proposing the Carson Marketplace (the
“Project”), a 168-acre development located southwest of the I-405 Freeway at and north of the
Avalon Boulevard interchange, in the City of Carson. The proposed Project would include some
or all of the following uses: neighborhood commercial, regional commercial, commercial
recreation/entertainment, restaurant, hotel, and residential. Specifically, the Applicant’s proposal
consists of a total of 1,550 residential units (1,150 for-sale units and 400 rental residential units),
a 300-room hotel, and 1,995,125 square feet (sq.ft.) of commercial floor area.1 The Applicant is
proposing a wide range of land uses in order to create a diversity of on-site activity that responds
to the future needs and demands of the southern California economy. In order to fully respond to
these demands, the proposed Project includes an Equivalency Program that would allow the
composition of on-site development to be modified in a manner that does not increase the
Project’s impacts on the environment. For example, office uses might be developed in place of a
portion of the above proposed uses subject to the provisions of the Equivalency Program as set
forth in the Carson Marketplace Specific Plan. Project development would be guided by a
comprehensive set of development standards and regulations which are set forth in detail in the
Carson Marketplace Specific Plan. These regulations identify permitted uses and development
and design standards. These regulations, in combination with the development limits, would
define the extent and nature of future on-site development.
          The Specific Plan divides the Project site into three Development Districts. Each District
has a distinct character and identity, and includes regulations appropriate to the mix of uses
within its boundaries, as well as the role of the District within the overall Specific Plan. The
three Development Districts are as follows:
          •    Development District 1; Located just south of Del Amo Boulevard. It extends
               between Main Street on the west and the I-405 Freeway to the east and to the
               Corridor Road on the south (approximately 480 feet south of Del Amo Boulevard).
               This District consists of 31 acres and is proposed to include commercial and
               residential uses.
1
    The total amount of commercial floor area includes 200,000 sq. ft. for the development of the 300-room hotel.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                           Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                               November 2005
                                                      Page 5
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          •    Development District 2; Located south of District 1 and along the Project site’s
               freeway frontage. It is the largest of the Development Districts, occupying a majority
               of the site, and it includes a total of 126 acres. Land uses proposed in Development
               District 2 include regional and neighborhood retail uses, a commercial
               recreation/entertainment district, restaurants and a hotel.
          •    Development District 3; Located just north of Del Amo Boulevard. This
               Development District is 11 acres in size and is proposed to include commercial and
               residential uses
          In addition, the Specific Plan regulations pertaining to Development District 3 are
proposed to be implemented by an overlay zone to the existing Commercial Regional (CR) zone.
As such, all of the regulations and development standards for the CR zone as set forth in Chapter
1 (Sections 9131.1 through 9138.71) of the Carson Municipal Code also apply to Development
District 3. Thus, the property owner of Development District 3 may choose to process a
development pursuant to either the regulations and development standards for the CR zone or the
regulations and development standards for the Carson Marketplace Specific Plan. If the property
owner of District 3 chooses to pursue a development program different than the one analyzed in
this Draft EIR, additional CEQA review may be required.
    c. Discretionary Actions Requested and Permits Required
     Implementation of the proposed Project would require, but would not necessarily be limited to,
the permits and approvals listed below. Other actions of local, regional and/or federal agencies may
be required.
          Carson Redevelopment Agency
          •    Owner Participation Agreement;
          •    Improvement or other bonds; and
          •    Revenue bonds.
          City of Carson
          •    Adoption of the Carson Marketplace Specific Plan;
          •    General Plan Amendment;
          •    Zone Change;
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                    November 2005
                                                    Page 6
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                              CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          •    Implementation of an Overlay Zone for Development District 3;
          •    Development Agreement;
          •    Building-related permits such as general building, foundation, plumbing, sewer,
               HVAC, electrical, landscaping, fencing, paving, etc.;
          •    Construction-related encroachment permits;
          •    Subdivision Map and/or Tract Map approvals;
          •    Vacations of existing on-site roadways;
          •    On-site public improvements; and
          •    Street improvements as required.
          State of California
               Environmental Protection Agency (Cal-EPA), Department of Toxic Substances
               Control
          •    Approval of refinements to the existing Remedial Action Plan (RAP) in conjunction
               with the Project.
          •    Oversight of RAP implementation.
               Regional Water Quality Control Board
          •    Issuance of a Waste Discharge Permit.
               California Department of Transportation (Caltrans)
          •    Improvements to the Avalon Boulevard interchange to the I-405 Freeway; and
          •    Any required Caltrans approval related to signage.
          Additional Discretionary Actions
          •    Any other discretionary actions or approvals that may be required to implement the
               proposed Project.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                             Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                 November 2005
                                                  Page 7
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                     CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
5.        BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT FOR THE PROPOSED PROJECT
    a. Former On-Site Landfill Operations
          The 157-acre portion of the Project site that is located south of Del Amo Boulevard
(Development Districts 1 and 2) was used as a Class II landfill under an Industrial Waste
Disposal Permit issued to Cal Compact, Inc. by the County of Los Angeles. Landfilling on the
157-acre site began in 1959, shortly after the banning of incinerators in Los Angeles County in
1957. Landfilling occurred from April 1959 to December 1964 with an approximate closing date
of February 1965.
          During the life of the landfill, less than 7 million cubic yards (cy) of solid municipal
waste and 2.6 million barrels of industrial liquid waste were received at the landfill. Waste
received included organic wastes, such as solvents, oils, and sludges, as well as heavy metals,
paint sludges, and inorganic salts.
          As a result of contamination on and adjacent to the landfill, the 157-acre site is listed by
the State of California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) as a hazardous
substances site. On March 18, 1988, Remedial Action Order No.*HSA87/88-040 was issued
requiring investigation of contamination at the landfill site and preparation of remedial action
plans.
          Due to the size and complexity of the former landfill site, DTSC divided its remediation
into two operable units.2 The Upper Operable Unit (Upper OU) consists of the site soils, the
waste zone above and within the Bellflower Aquitard, and the Bellflower Aquitard down to but
not including, the Gage Aquifer. The Lower Operable Unit (Lower OU) is composed of the
Gage, Lynwood, and Silverado Aquifers, and all other areas impacted by the geographic extent
of any hazardous substances which may have migrated or may migrate from the aforementioned
areas or from the Upper OU. The operable units are also established to prioritize the remedial
response to the areas of known impacts (Upper OU) versus potential impacts (Lower OU).
          Investigations of the Upper OU documented the presence of landfill gases (methane and
carbon dioxide) as well as volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and metals in the landfill’s soil
and groundwater. A Remedial Action Plan (RAP) was prepared and approved by DTSC for the
2
   Federal regulations at 40 CFR 300.5 define an operable unit as "…a discrete action that comprises an
   incremental step toward comprehensively addressing site problems. This discrete portion of a remedial
   response manages migration, or eliminates or mitigates a release, threat of release, or pathway of exposure.
   The cleanup of the site can be divided into a number of operable units, depending on the complexity of the
   problems associated with the site. Operable units may address geographical portions of a site, specific site
   problems, or initial phases of an action, or may consist of any set of actions performed over time or any actions
   that are concurrent but located in different parts of a site."
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                            Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                                November 2005
                                                        Page 8
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                            CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
Upper OU in 1995. A RAP for the Lower OU was prepared to address the potential impact of
groundwater contamination in the Upper OU on the Lower OU. The RAP for the Lower OU was
approved by DTSC on January 24, 2005.
          Implementation of the Upper OU is required to make the site safe for the proposed
Project. Implementation of the Lower OU would be protective of groundwater resources.
    b. Previous Development Proposal—Metro 2000
          The Project site was the subject of a previous development proposal in the early 1990s.
Specifically, in 1993, a project known as Metro 2000 was proposed as a multi-phase
development. Phase I of the Metro 2000 project included the development of L.A. MetroMall, a
1.83-million–square feet regional mall consisting exclusively of retail outlet stores. Phase II of
the Metro 2000 project included an additional 687,400 square feet of regional commercial retail
uses and 600,000 square feet of office floor area. Therefore, buildout of the Metro 2000 project
consisted of a total of approximately 3.1 million square feet of gross buildable area. A Draft and
Final EIR for Metro 2000 were prepared and certified by the Carson City Council. In addition,
the City Council approved Phase I of Metro 2000. Following certification of the Metro 2000
EIR by the Carson City Council in 1995, the State Department of Toxic Substances Control
(DTSC) approved the RAP for the remediation of the site. However, the Metro 2000 project
never went forward.
6.        AREAS OF CONTROVERSY/ISSUES TO BE RESOLVED
          Potential areas of controversy and issues to be resolved by the Redevelopment Agency
include issues known to be of concern to the community and issues raised in the response to the
Project’s NOP. Issues known to be of concern to the community include safety of the site for
urban development, given the sites brownfield status, traffic, land use compatibility (in particular
the relationship and potential impacts on neighborhoods south and southwest of the Project site),
visual quality, air quality, noise, vibration, and hazardous materials. Additional issues raised in
response to the NOP include impacts on public services, in particular police, fire and library
service impacts.
7.        PUBLIC REVIEW PROCESS
          As previously discussed, the Redevelopment Agency circulated an NOP for the proposed
project on May 12, 2005. During the following 30-day comment period, 14 letters were
received. Also, a public scoping meeting was held on June 1, 2005. The NOP and letters
received during the NOP comment period, and the three written comment cards provided at the
scoping meeting are included in Appendix A of this Draft EIR
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                             Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                 November 2005
                                                 Page 9
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                            CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          The Draft EIR will be circulated for a 45-day review period, as required under CEQA.3
Following the public review period, written responses will be prepared on all comments
received, and these comments and responses will be incorporated into the Final EIR. No final
actions (e.g., approval or denial) will be taken on the Project until the Final EIR has been
reviewed, certified as complete, and considered by the appropriate decision-makers. Dates of
public hearings will be published and officially noticed in accordance with all legal
requirements.
8.        SUMMARY OF ALTERNATIVES
          The State CEQA Guidelines (Section 15126.6 (a)) require an EIR to describe a range of
reasonable alternatives to a proposed project, or to the location of a project, which would
feasibly attain most of the basic objectives of the project but would avoid or substantially lessen
any of the significant effects of the project. As required by the CEQA Guidelines, four
alternatives to the proposed Project were identified and analyzed. The four alternatives include a
“No Project” alternative (i.e., no change in current site condition), an alternative use, a reduced
density alternative, and the development of the proposed Project at an alternative site. These
alternatives have been developed and analyzed to compare the relative impacts of these
alternatives to the proposed Project. Based on comparative evaluations, forecasts are made as to
the environmental impacts of each alternative in contrast to those of the Project, and whether
each alternative could attain the Applicant’s basic Project objectives. The alternatives that have
been selected were done so with the explicit intent of identifying alternatives that might
potentially avoid or reduce the Project’s significant adverse impacts.
          Alternative 1: No Project
          The No Project alternative assumes that the Project would not be developed and that the
Project site would remain in its existing physical condition. Although some pressure for, and
interest in, reuse of the site exists, no project is anticipated to be brought forward in the
foreseeable future. Under Alternative 1, the parcel north of Del Amo Boulevard would remain
vacant and existing fill and debris would not be removed. Remediation of the existing
brownfield portion of the Project site south of Del Amo Boulevard, including the capping of
existing waste materials at the former landfill site, would not occur, since the current property
owner does not have the funds to implement the RAPs. While the State has pursued other
responsible parties and created a remediation fund from the proceeds of lawsuits against those
parties, the fund is not sufficient to complete the remediation.
          The evaluation of the No Project alternative addresses the requirements of
Section 15126.6 (3)(1) of the CEQA Guidelines. The No Project alternative would avoid the
3
   Public Resources Code Section 21091.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                              Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                  November 2005
                                                Page 10
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
Project’s significant and unavoidable impacts associated with visual resources, traffic, public
transportation, air quality, and construction noise. However, the No Project alternative would
have less environmental benefit than the Project in relation to site remediation and improvement
to groundwater and surface water quality and would, therefore, have a greater impact than the
Project in relation to hazards and surface water quality. The No Project alternative would not
meet the basic objectives of the Project to achieve productive reuse of a large brownfield site, to
promote the economic well being of the Redevelopment Project Area or the City, or to maximize
shopping and entertainment opportunities. In addition, the No Project alternative would not meet
the Project objectives to provide a diversity of employment opportunities for local residents, to
contribute to the City’s housing stock or to provide a signature/gateway development that
contributes to the creation of a vibrant urban core for the City.
          Alternative 2: Reduced Project— Mixed-use Business Park
          Alternative 2 would be developed on the same site as the proposed Project, with uses that
are in keeping with the City of Carson 2004 General Plan update land use designation of
“Mixed-Use - Business Park.” This land use category is envisioned to provide for a variety of
businesses and professional offices, services and associated business as well as retail activities in
an attractive environment. Development under this Alternative would include a mix of light
industrial/business park uses and regional and neighborhood-serving commercial uses, including
restaurants. In lieu of a Specific Plan, development would be subject to the requirements of the
City’s Light Industrial/Manufacturing (ML) zone and the site’s existing Design Overlay and
Organic Refuse Landfill Overlay designations. The total floor area would be equivalent to the
commercial floor area proposed by the Project. It is assumed that the floor area that would occur
under this Alternative would be equally divided between commercial and light
industrial/business park uses. Remediation of the former landfill site, including the capping of
waste materials and coverage of the former landfill site by impervious concrete foundation,
parking lots, and streets would be the same as under the Project.
          Alternative 2 would incrementally reduce unavoidable and significant impacts associated
with visual resources, traffic, public transit, and air quality during Project operation. However,
with the exception of air toxics, Alternative 2 would not reduce these impacts to less than
significant levels. As with the Project, visual resources, construction noise and air quality
impacts would continue to be significant. Alternative 2 could meet the basic objective of the
Project to achieve a productive reuse of a large brownfield site, although a smaller project may
not generate sufficient revenues to implement the RAP, and to promote the economic well being
of the Redevelopment Area. Alternative 2 would provide employment opportunities for local
residents by generating substantial construction work opportunities and long-term jobs. In
providing commercial uses, Alternative 2 would meet the objective to diversify the economic
base of the Redevelopment Area and the City, but not to the same extent as the Project.
Alternative 2 would not maximize shopping opportunities or provide hotel, entertainment or
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                               Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                   November 2005
                                                Page 11
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
recreation uses. Alternative 2 could partially meet the objective of the Project to provide a
signature/gateway development that contributes to the creation of a vibrant urban core for the
City by locating commercial development and signing along the I-405 Freeway. However, since
Alternative 2 would have fewer commercial uses and no hotels or residential uses, it would not
provide the same diversity and synergism among the on-site uses, level of pedestrian traffic, or
vibrancy as the Project. Alternative 2 would also not meet the Project objective to contribute to
the City’s stock of rental and for sale housing units and affordable housing.
          Alternative 3: Reduced Project
          The Reduced Density Alternative, Alternative 3, assumes that the scale of the Project
would be reduced through a 25 percent reduction in residential units and commercial floor area.
The proportionate mix of commercial and residential uses would be the same as under the
Project; however, maximum development would consist of 1,162 residential units and
commercial floor area would consist of 1,496,343 square feet. The reduction in development
under Alternative 3 could be achieved through fewer structures (smaller building footprint) or
reduced building heights. The former landfill site would be capped and completely covered by
impermeable foundation pads, parking lots, and streets, as was the case with the Project.
          Alternative 3 could meet the Project objective to achieve a productive reuse of a large
brownfield site by generating the revenue necessary to pay for and effectuate remediation of the
environmental conditions on the Project Site, although a smaller project may not generate
sufficient revenues.         Alternative 3 would promote the economic well being of the
Redevelopment Project Area by diversifying and increasing the area’s economic base and would
assist in creating both short and long term employment opportunities for the residents of the
Redevelopment Project Area and the City. Alternative 3 would meet the Project’s objective to
maintain a sustainable balance of residential and non-residential uses. Alternative 3 would also
meet the objective to generate substantial construction work opportunities and long-term jobs in
the commercial and hospitality industries. However, since Alternative 3 would have 25 percent
fewer residential units and commercial floor area, it would not meet the objective to maximize
work opportunities and shopping and entertainment opportunities to the same extent as the
Project. In providing a mix of regional and neighborhood commercial uses, hotel, restaurants,
and residential uses, Alternative 3 would meet the objective of the Project to provide a
signature/gateway development that contributes to the creation of a vibrant urban core for the
City. However, since Alternative 3 would reduce all uses by 25 percent, it would not provide the
same level of urban focal point, level of pedestrian traffic, or vibrancy as the Project. Alternative
3 would contribute to the City’s stock of rental housing and for sale units, including affordable
housing, although not to the same extent as the Project. Alternative 3 would incrementally
reduce unavoidable and significant impacts associated with traffic, public transit, and air quality
during Project operation, but would not reduce these impacts to less than significant levels. As
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                               Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                   November 2005
                                               Page 12
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                            CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
with the Project, visual resources, construction noise, and air quality impacts would continue to
be significant.
          Alternative 4: Alternative Location
          Alternative 4 assumes that the Project would be moved to another location and no
development would occur at the Project site. The purpose of the evaluation of an Alternative site
is to ascertain if changing the location of a project to another site would reduce or eliminate any
potentially significant environmental impacts that may be unique to the Project’s location, and
whether relocation could potentially eliminate Project impacts. For the purposes of this analysis
it is assumed that Alternative 4 would be constructed according to the Project’s design and
intensity under a Specific Plan comparable to that prepared for the Project at its proposed site.
Specific criteria in identifying an Alternate Site are location within the same jurisdiction and
adequate size to accommodate the scope of the Project. In accordance with these criteria, the
Shell refinery site located approximately one mile east of the proposed Project site is selected for
the evaluation of an alternative location. The Alternative Site is an approximately 280-acre
parcel, located between Del Amo Boulevard and Dominguez Street, just west of Wilmington
Avenue.
          Alternative 4 would, like the Project, put to productive use a blighted, underutilized site
within Redevelopment Project Area No.One. In so doing it would contribute to the economic
well being of the Redevelopment area and the City. Alternative 4 would contribute to the
creation of a vibrant urban core for the City; however, since this location would not take
advantage of the site’s proximity to the San Diego Freeway, it would not have the same level of
gateway appeal as the Project site. Alternative 4 would also meet the Project objective to
contribute to the City’s housing stock of rental and for sale units, including affordable housing.
In summary, Alternative 4 would not avoid the Project’s significant and unavoidable impacts
associated with visual quality, traffic, public transit, air quality, and construction noise.
Alternative 4 would cause the remediation of soils and groundwater at the Alternate Site, and
would have impacts similar to those of the Project in relation to hazards and surface water
quality.
          Environmentally Superior Alternative
          The State CEQA Guidelines require the identification of an environmentally superior
alternative to the proposed Project and, if the environmentally superior alternative is the “No
Project Alternative,” the identification of an environmentally superior alternative from among
the remaining alternatives. An environmentally superior alternative is an alternative to the
Project that would reduce and/or eliminate the significant, unavoidable environmental impacts
associated with the Project without creating other significant impacts and without substantially
reducing and/or eliminating the environmental benefits attributable to the Project.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                              Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                  November 2005
                                                Page 13
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Selection of an environmentally superior alternative is based on an evaluation of the
extent to which each alternative reduces or eliminates the significant impacts associated with the
Project, and on a comparison of the remaining environmental impacts of each alternative.
Through the comparison of the environmental characteristics and potential impacts of each of the
alternatives, the Reduced Project Alternative, Alternative 3, is concluded to have a lesser degree
of environmental effect than any of the other Project alternatives, exclusive of the No Project
Alternative. As Alternative 3 would have incrementally less impact relative to the Project and
other evaluated alternatives, CEQA requires that this alternative be deemed the Environmentally
Superior Alternative. Although Alternative 3 would not meet all of the basic objectives of the
Project, it would, nonetheless, partially achieve most of the Project’s basic objectives. It should
be noted that, other than the No Project Alternative, no alternative would reduce the Project’s
significant, unavoidable traffic, public transportation, air quality and construction noise impacts
to levels that are less than significant.
9.        SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS AND MITIGATION
          MEASURES
    9.1 Land Use
          a. Environmental Impacts
          The Project would result in the conversion of vacant lands to developed uses with
residential units and a variety of commercial uses (neighborhood commercial, regional
commercial, visitor-serving commercial recreation/entertainment, and restaurants). In so-doing,
it would provide a large amount of in-fill development within an existing urban/built
environment. The development would be implemented via the Carson Marketplace Specific
Plan. The Specific Plan would regulate the amount and types of development, the size and
arrangement of buildings, on-site circulation and open space, as well as the general appearance
of on-site development. The Land Use analysis evaluated the potential impact of the Specific
Plan and the development that is would allow with regard to the following three issues: (a)
Compatibility with Land Use Plans, Policies, and Regulations, (b) Existing Land Use Patterns,
and (c) Sustainability of Existing Uses.
               (1) Project Compatibility with Land Use Plans, Policies, and Regulations
          The proposed Project would be compatible with the City’s General Plan, as well as the
Redevelopment Plan for Project Area No. One Merged and Amended, as these documents
encourage the development of the Project site, with a project that would accomplish the
following: (1) provide for the productive use of a brownfield site; (2) provide a signature project
for the City with freeway visibility; (3) provide a mixed-use development with shopping,
entertainment, restaurant, hotel and residential uses; and (4) increase housing and employment
opportunities within the City. While the Project would require amendments to the General Plan
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                              Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                  November 2005
                                               Page 14
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                            CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
land use designations, the uses allowed under the Specific Plan would be compatible with these
designations as it implements numerous General Plan policies. For example, the Project would
allow commercial uses that are otherwise allowed under the existing designations, the Project
would not preclude the development of light industrial uses that might have occurred at the
Project site to occur at other locations, and the provision of housing would meet numerous City
policies regarding the provision of mixed-use development and additional housing opportunities.
The Project would also be compatible with the City Zoning ordinance as the Specific Plan would
provide regulations for allowed uses, densities, height limits, setbacks and ground coverage, that
are equivalent to or more protective of the environment than existing zoning regulations. It
would do this in the context of a planned development, addressing an overall design for the
Project site. The Project would also be compatible with SCAG policies by accommodating
anticipated regional growth, providing housing and employment opportunities, and by providing
a clustered development at a regionally accessible location. Thus, Impacts regarding
compatibility with land use plans, policies and regulations would be less than significant.
               (2) Impacts on Existing Land Use Patterns
          The Project would be an in-fill development located within an existing urban setting, and
would provide a continuation of existing development patterns within the northwestern portion
of Carson. Furthermore, the Project would not disrupt important linkages between existing
districts surrounding the Project site, since the surrounding uses vary and are located within
distinct areas. The Project uses would not place uses of a nature or proximity that would alter
the character of the existing land uses surrounding the Project site, due to buffering and/or a
range of land use relationships that are typical of the urban environment. Thus, impacts on
existing land use patterns would be less than significant. Potential specific impacts on adjacent
uses, particularly the residential uses south and southwest of the Project site are addressed in
other sections of the Draft EIR, with numerous mitigation measures recommended to reduce
impacts. Sections that particularly focus on these issues include Visual Quality, Noise, and Air
Quality.
               (3) Impacts on the Sustainability of Existing Uses
          The Project proposes to develop 1,995,125 square feet of commercial space with a mix of
retail, entertainment and hotel uses. This development would support commercial economic
activity that would compete with existing retail uses for meeting the needs of the population.
However, any such affect of the Project is forecasted to have only a short-term negative effect
upon existing retail uses within the market area served by the Project. It is further forecasted that
this impact would be alleviated in the mid-term (i.e. by 2020) as the local market continues to
grow. Therefore, it is not anticipated that existing retail uses in the Project’s market area would
fall into large-scale physical disrepair, unable to recover with natural increases in economic
demand in the future. Impacts on the physical environment from Project induced vacancies or
effects on sales would thus be less than significant.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                               Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                   November 2005
                                                Page 15
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          b. Mitigation Measures
          As no significant land use impacts would occur, no mitigation measures would be
necessary.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          The Draft EIR has identified 36 related projects that may be developed in the Project area
in the same time period as the proposed Project. These projects are diverse, varying in type, size,
and location. As such, they would provide further urban in-fill development within the local
area, but would not comprise a major change in the land use patterns within the City or region.
None of the related Projects is located in the immediate vicinity of the Project site; and none
would contribute with the Project to the land use relationships between those at the Project site
and those in immediately adjacent areas. The identified related projects within the City of
Carson are subject to compliance with City regulations and subject to review by the City for
compliance with the General Plan and the Carson Municipal Code. The proposed Project would
be compatible with City policies, land use plans, and regulations; and would not contribute to a
cumulative effect of multiple projects having adverse effects on the environment due to their
incompatibility with regulatory requirements. The cumulative impacts of the Project plus other
growth on the sustainability of surrounding retail uses would not be greater than that reported for
the Project above, as the analysis of potential Project impacts includes the incorporation of such
development. Thus, cumulative impacts would be less than significant with regard to existing
land use patterns; compatibility with plans, policies and regulations; and the sustainability of
existing retail uses.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          Project development would result in less than significant land use impacts.
    9.2 Visual Resources
          a. Environmental Impacts
          The Project would allow the conversion of a long-standing area of vacant land to
developed uses with residential units and commercial development (neighborhood commercial,
regional commercial, visitor-serving commercial recreation/entertainment, and restaurants). In
so-doing, it would change the appearance of the Project site, would add new building mass that
would alter existing view conditions, cause off-site shading, and alter the night-time appearance
of the site with artificial lighting. Each of these potential impacts is addressed separately in the
analysis of the Project’s impacts on visual quality.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                               Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                   November 2005
                                                Page 16
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                              CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
               (1) Aesthetic Character of the Area
          The analysis of the Project’s impact on aesthetic character identifies a potentially
significant impact on the site’s standing as a valued contributor to the aesthetic character of the
area. While the site is fenced and contains no unique natural features or valued visual features, it
offers visual relief from development due to its lack of buildings and a sense of spaciousness to
those surrounding and traveling through the Project area. This open character of the site would
be substantially altered with conversion of the site to a developed appearance. This constitutes a
significant impact of the Project.
          Otherwise, Project impacts on aesthetic character would be limited due to the provisions
of the Carson Marketplace Specific Plan that limit the types and location of site uses, limits
densities and building heights, and provides design guidelines for landscaping, buildings and
ancillary structures, and signs. With these limitations, impacts of development under the
Project’s Conceptual Plan would be less than significant. Furthermore, the Project would portray
a character that is in keeping with similar large-scale developments within the region.
Development along the Project edges would be limited and would not substantially contrast with
the visual character of the surrounding areas. Further, impacts on aesthetic character during
construction would be less than significant since the appearance of the Project site during
construction would be typical of that occurring in urban areas, would not adversely affect unique
aesthetic resources, and viewing conditions of ground level activity would be limited from most
off-site locations (except Del Amo Boulevard) due to the Project’s elevation atop a berm that
faces many off-site locations.
          Impacts of the Project on the aesthetic character of the Project area could vary from that
which would occur the Applicant’s Conceptual Plan. If such an affect were to occur, the impact
of the Project on aesthetic character of the Project area would be substantially the same as with
the Conceptual Plan. However, a varied development program could have significant impacts on
aesthetic character if taller buildings, i.e. the hotel or the movie theaters, were located too close
to existing residential development, or signs along the I-405 Freeway were not placed in an
appropriate manner. Mitigation measures are proposed to address such potential impacts.
               (2) Views
          The proposed Project’s impacts on views addresses what would happen when Project
buildings are located between visual resources and view locations that surround the Project site.
The Project site is not considered a view resource, as it is in a degraded state, and does not
include unique or natural qualities. The existing visual environment in the Project area is limited
to that of an urbanized area with its array of interspersed developments, open spaces, and
infrastructure improvements. The Project area does not contain notable features that would
typically fall under the heading of view resources, e.g. unique geologic features, natural areas,
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                               Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                   November 2005
                                                 Page 17
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
etc. Views of the two notable features that might catch the eye of travelers through the area are
the Goodyear Blimp site located on the north side of the I-405 Freeway, and the large fiberglass
statue of a man holding a golf club located on the south side of the I-405 Freeway. Views of
these two visual resources would not be lost due to Project development. Views over the Project
site are limited due to intervening development, the flat terrain in the areas surrounding the
Project site, and that the Project site sits atop a berm that slopes down to surrounding areas.
Therefore, the proposed Project would not substantially diminish any such views, and impacts on
views of unique, and/or valued scenic resources would be less than significant.
               (3) Shade and Shadow
          The Project would add new buildings to the Project site that would cause shading at off-
site locations. The only shadow sensitive uses that could be affected are the residential units
south and southwest of the Project site. Project shading of these uses would be limited. The
greatest shading on nearby residential development would occur during winter mornings and that
shading on the off-site residential properties closest to the Project site, during the hours analyzed,
would occur for less than one hour. This is less than the 3-hour significance threshold, and thus,
impacts on shading would be less than significant.
               (4) Artificial Lighting
          The proposed Project would add new lighting to the Project area causing very notable
increases to the on-site lighting levels in relation to the existing setting. Project lighting would
be typical of lighting generally found in large-scale commercial development. At the same time,
Project lighting would be provided pursuant to the Project’s lighting guidelines, which include
requirements limiting light intensity, light control methods (e.g. shielding of lighting), and pole
heights. The intention of these guidelines is to limit the lighting to levels within the needed
range of lighting required for the Project uses and site security. In particular, the guidelines
focus lighting on-site, and limit the glow that could occur on the Project site. With these
limitations, Project lighting would not substantially alter the character of off-site areas
surrounding the Project site and would not interfere with off-site activities. Therefore, impacts
of Project lighting would be less than significant.
          b. Mitigation Measures
          The above analysis identified a significant impact regarding the loss of a valued aesthetic
resource; i.e., the openness that is provided by the existing undeveloped Project site. This loss of
openness occurs as a result of placing development at the Project’s location rather than by the
particular type or size of development. Any notable development on the Project site would
change its currently undeveloped character. Therefore, this significant impact cannot be
mitigated.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                 Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                     November 2005
                                                Page 18
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Two other potentially significant impacts were identified that could occur if development
varied from that shown in the proposed Conceptual Plan. Accordingly, the following two
mitigation measures address potentially significant impacts that could occur due to the location
of taller buildings along the Project’s southern and southwestern edges and variations in sign
placement that could occur along the Project’s I-405 edge. A mitigation measure is also
proposed to insure that sign lighting does not adversely affect residential development adjacent
to the Project site.
          Mitigation Measure B-1: The minimum setback for hotel and theater uses along the
                         Torrance Lateral, adjacent to residential uses, shall be 250 feet.
          Mitigation Measure B-2: The distribution, placement and orientation of signs along the
                         I-405 Freeway shall be in substantial compliance with the signage concepts
                         presented in the Conceptual Plan.
          Mitigation Measure B-3             The line of sight between lighted signs on the Project site
                         and existing residential development along the Torrance Lateral, opposite to
                         the Project site shall be minimized.
          Otherwise, the proposed Project would not generate significant visual resource impacts.
This conclusion was based on the assumed implementation of the Specific Plan regulations,
guidelines, and standards. The Specific Plan includes a mechanism for site plan review of all
development to insure that it does in fact meet the requirements of the Specific Plan. As many of
Specific Plan features were relied upon in the above analysis, the following mitigation measure
is proposed:
          Mitigation Measure B-4: All Project development shall undergo site plan review by the
                         Planning Manager to assure that the following design measures have been
                         implemented:
                    –    Landscaping. All Landscaping shall be consistent with a plant palate of
                         native trees, shrubs and groundcovers that shall add uniformity to the Project
                         site. Plants shall be selected to support and complement the themes of the
                         various Project components. Specially themed landscaping treatments shall
                         occur at key locations (e.g. freeway edge, channel slope and lifestyle and
                         entertainment area). Of more detailed note: (1) landscaping themes on Del
                         Amo Boulevard and Main Street shall be coordinated with the landscaping of
                         the Carson Street Conceptual Visualization and the Home Depot Center; (2)
                         continuous shrub and ground cover plantings shall be provided in the medians
                         and edges of internal streets with vertical landscape and/or hardscape elements
                         at a minimum of every 50 feet along the edges; (3) 5% landscape coverage
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                     Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                         November 2005
                                                     Page 19
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                         shall be provided in parking lots, and (4) 50% landscape coverage shall be
                         provided on the sides of parking structures visible to residences.
                    –    Buildings. Buildings shall include the following design features: varied and
                         articulated building façades featuring the use of colorful stucco, with a variety
                         of architectural accent materials for exterior treatment at visually accessible
                         locations.
                    –    Accessory facilities and Walls. Wall facades shall be varied and articulated.
                         Accessory facilities such as trash bins, storage areas, etc., shall be covered and
                         screened.
                    –    Lighting. Lighting shall be limited in intensity, light control methods, and
                         pole heights, so as to be directed on site, and not interfere with off-site
                         activities.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          The Draft EIR has identified 36 related projects that may be developed in the Project
area. These projects are diverse, varying in function, size, and location. As such, they would
provide further urban in-fill development within the local area of each project, but would not
comprise a major change in the land use patterns within the City or region. None of the related
Projects is located in the immediate vicinity of the Project site; and none would contribute with
the Project to the aesthetic conditions occurring along the Project edges. All of the related
projects in the City of Carson would be subject to numerous provisions of the Carson Municipal
Code, which includes development standards, procedures for Site Plan and Design Review, and,
for some sites, design review under the Design Overlay zoning designation. Therefore, other
projects in the City of Carson are anticipated to minimize adverse visual impacts. Cumulative
impacts of related projects would be less than significant. However, since the proposed Project
would have a significant impact, cumulative impacts would also be significant.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          The proposed Project would result in the conversion of a large undeveloped vacant site to
a developed use, causing a loss of openness that contributes to the aesthetic quality of the Project
site and its surroundings. This impact is a significant impact that is inherent in the development
of the site, and thus cannot be mitigated or avoided. Two other potentially significant impacts
were identified that could occur if development varied from that shown in the proposed
Conceptual Plan. Accordingly, mitigation measures were included to address impacts that could
occur if buildings taller than those shown in the Conceptual Plan were located along the Project’s
southern and southwestern edge, or a variation in sign placement were to occur along the
Project’s I-405 edge. These mitigation measures reduce the impacts to a less than significant
level. Otherwise the proposed Project would not have significant impacts on aesthetic character
of the surrounding area, views, shading conditions, or nighttime illumination.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                    Page 20
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                            CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
    9.3 Traffic, Circulation, and Parking
          a. Environmental Impacts
               (1) Construction Impacts
          Project construction would generate traffic from construction worker travel, as well as the
arrival and departure of trucks delivering construction materials to the site and the hauling of
debris and exported soils generated by on-site demolition and excavation activities. The majority
of the trips by construction workers would occur during hours that would avoid the A.M. and P.M.
peak traffic periods. As such, impacts attributable to construction worker travel would be less
than significant. Haul truck trips would be vastly reduced under the proposed RAP design since
the need for the hauling of 2,000,000 cubic yards of clay, requiring approximately 150 truck trips
per 10-hour day over a 1.5-year period would be eliminated. Under the proposed RAP
refinements, the Project is forecasted to generate one to six truck trips per day, depending on the
construction phase. Haul truck traffic on local streets would be limited due to the proximity of
the Project site to the I-405 Freeway, and with the implementation of a City-approved Truck
Haul Route program, which would prohibit trucks traffic on local residential streets, haul truck
activity would have a less than significant traffic impact. Lane and sidewalk closures and utility
line construction may affect emergency vehicle access, travel time, and pedestrian access.
However, traffic management procedures would be implemented to assist in the movement of
traffic that could interfere with emergency vehicles. Furthermore, Project construction activities
would not impede access to nearby businesses or residential uses. As a result, construction
traffic impacts for these issues would be less than significant. However, pedestrian access would
be impeded if closure of both sidewalks on the north and south sides of Del Amo Boulevard
were to occur concurrently. This would constitute a significant impact.
               (2) Operational Impacts
                    (a) Study Intersections
          The Project would generate an estimated 68,950 daily trips, including approximately
2,510 A.M. and 5,770 P.M. peak hour trips. At Project buildout, the Project would result in
significant impacts, prior to mitigation, at 14 of the 27 study intersections. In addition, Project
traffic would result in significant impacts along four segments on the San Diego Freeway (I-405)
and three segments on the Harbor Freeway (I-110).
                    (b) Access
          Access to the Project site would be provided via several new intersections and/or existing
intersections. Intersection access points serving the Project site include Del Amo and Stamps
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                              Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                  November 2005
                                                Page 21
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
Drive, Lenardo Drive and Main Street, and Lenardo Drive and the I-405 interchange. Projected
service levels at these three new access intersections would be less than significant.
                    (c) Public Transportation
          The Project is forecasted to result in approximately 123 new transit trips during the A.M.
peak hour and 282 new transit trips during the P.M. peak hour. It is estimated that the Project
could add approximately five person trips on each of the 23 bus lines serving the Project area in
the A.M. peak hour and 12 person trips on each of the 24 bus lines serving the Project area in the
P.M. peak hour. Twelve persons per bus would represent more than 25 percent of the capacity of
a typical 45-passenger bus. Since existing transit services could not readily absorb the Project’s
forecasted transit riders, the impact of the Project on the regional transit system would be
significant.
                    (d) Parking
          The City’s General Development Standards would require 10,376 parking spaces for the
Project’s commercial component and 3,238 spaces for the Project’s residential component, for a
total of 13,614 parking spaces. In terms of parking demand, the Project’s commercial
component, based on a shared parking analysis, would have a peak parking demand of
approximately 7,578 parking spaces during the weekday peak hour and approximately 8,335
parking spaces during a weekend peak hour; whereas, the residential component would have a
separate parking demand of approximately 2,788 spaces, including 233 guest spaces. Thus, the
provision of parking per the City’s General Development Standards would be more than
sufficient to accommodate the Project’s estimated peak parking demands. The Specific Plan
provides for the implementation of a shared parking program, if it can be demonstrated that the
parking that is actually provided would be adequate to meet the Project’s peak parking demand.
As such, the Applicant may request the approval of a shared parking plan, in lieu of the City’s
General Development Standards. Since the Project would not provide less parking than is
needed to meet the Project’s parking demand, impacts relative to parking demand would be less
than significant.
          b. Mitigation Measures
               (1) Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-1: The Project shall submit a Construction Traffic Management
                         Plan or Worksite Traffic Control Plan (WTCP) to the City and appropriate
                         police and fire services prior to the start of any construction work phase,
                         which includes Project scheduling and the location of any roadway closures,
                         traffic detours, haul routes, protective devices, and warning signs, for the
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                    November 2005
                                                    Page 22
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                         purpose of minimizing pedestrian and vehicular impediment and interference
                         of emergency vehicles from Project construction activities.
          Mitigation Measure C-2: During construction, at least one sidewalk on either the north
                         or south side of Del Amo Boulevard shall remain open and accessible to
                         pedestrian traffic.
               (2) Operation
                    (a) Intersection Mitigation Measures:
          The Project consists of a number of different land uses that may be developed in phases.
Since the Project may be implemented over a period of time, its related traffic growth and, thus,
the intersection impacts would also occur over a period of time (i.e., some impacts would occur
at earlier stages of development, while others would occur at later stages). Thus, an intersection
phasing program has been developed to ensure that the necessary improvements are implemented
when and where they are needed to achieve the requisite mitigation as development occurs.
Table 1 on page 24 lists the impacted study intersections and depicts the point at which
significant impacts would occur. As shown in Table 1, the Project’s intersection improvement
program is organized according to the percentage of P.M. peak hour trip increase at which the
next level of intersection improvements is required. The following is a listing of all of the
improvements that have been identified to reduce Project impacts to the extent feasible.
          Mitigation Measure C-3: Vermont Avenue and Del Amo Boulevard (Intersection
                         No. 5):
                    –    A second left-turn lane shall be added to westbound Del Amo Boulevard. The
                         westbound approach shall be improved to include two left-turn lanes, a
                         through lane, and a right-turn lane. The improvement is feasible within the
                         existing right-of-way.
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 51 to 60 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                  Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                      November 2005
                                                    Page 23
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                      CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                                                       Table 1
                                     Intersection Mitigation Phasing Schedule
      Percentage of Total Trips
        Triggering Significant
                 Impacts a                               Significantly Impacted Intersection
              1 to 10 Percent         Intersection No. 6: Hamilton Avenue & Del Amo Boulevard
                                      Intersection No. 7: Figueroa Street & Del Amo Boulevard
                                      Intersection No. 12: Figueroa Street & I-110 NB Ramps
             11 to 20 Percent         No change
             21 to 30 Percent         Intersection No. 11: Hamilton Avenue & I-110 NB Ramps
                                      Intersection No. 25: Avalon Boulevard & Carson Street
             31 to 40 Percent         Intersection No. 22: Vermont Avenue & Carson Street
             41 to 50 Percent         No change
             51 to 60 Percent         Intersection No. 5: Vermont Avenue & Del Amo Boulevard
                                      Intersection No. 8: Main Street & Del Amo Boulevard
             61 to 70 Percent         Intersection No. 24: Main Street & Carson Street
             71 to 80 Percent         Intersection No. 15: Figueroa Street & Torrance Boulevard
                                      Intersection No. 23: Figueroa Street & Carson Street
             81 to 90 Percent         Intersection No. 16: Main Street & Torrance Boulevard
            91 to 100 Percent         No change
    a
        Mitigation measures are phased in relation to 10 percent increases in Project trips.
    Source: Kaku Associates, October 2005
          Mitigation Measure C-4:             Hamilton Avenue & Del Amo Boulevard                 (Intersection
                         No. 6):
                    –    The Applicant shall install a traffic signal at this location.
                    –    A right-turn lane shall be added to northbound Hamilton Avenue. The
                         northbound approach shall be improved to include a left-turn lane, two
                         through lanes, and a right-turn lane. This improvement is feasible within the
                         existing right-of-way.
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 1 to 10 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                         Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                             November 2005
                                                       Page 24
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Mitigation Measure C-5: Figueroa Street & Del Amo Boulevard (Intersection No. 7):
                    –    A right-turn lane shall be added to southbound Figueroa Street. The
                         southbound approach shall be improved to include one left-turn lane, two
                         through lanes, and a right-turn lane. This improvement is feasible within the
                         existing right-of-way
                    –    A second westbound left-turn lane shall be added to westbound Del Amo
                         Boulevard. The westbound approach shall be improved to include two left-
                         turn lanes, two through lanes, and a right-turn lane. This improvement is
                         feasible within the existing right-of-way.
                    –    An eastbound through lane and a right-turn lane shall be added to eastbound
                         Del Amo Boulevard. The eastbound approach shall be improved to include
                         one left-turn lane, three through lanes, and a right-turn lane. This
                         improvement is feasible within the existing right-of-way.
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 1 to 10 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
          Mitigation Measure C-6: Main Street and Del Amo Boulevard (Intersection No. 8):
                    –    Land shall be dedicated, as required, to add a second left-turn lane and a right-
                         turn lane to southbound Main Street. The southbound approach shall be
                         improved to provide two left-turn lanes, two through lanes and a right-turn
                         lane.
                    –    A second left-turn lane shall be added to westbound Del Amo Boulevard. The
                         westbound approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes, two
                         through lanes and an optional through and a right-turn lane.
                    –    Land shall be dedicated, as required, to add a second left-turn lane and a right-
                         turn lane to northbound Main Street. The northbound approach shall be
                         improved to provide two left-turn lanes, two through lanes, and a right-turn
                         lane.
                    –    A second left-turn lane shall be added to eastbound Del Amo Boulevard. The
                         eastbound approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes, two
                         through lanes, and an optional through and a right-turn lane.
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 51 to 60 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                    Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                        November 2005
                                                     Page 25
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Mitigation Measure C-7: Hamilton Avenue & I-110 Southbound Ramps (Intersection
                         No. 11):
                    –    The Applicant shall install a traffic signal at this location.
                    –    The southbound approach shall be re-striped to provide for one left-turn lane
                         and a shared left-turn/through lane. The improvement is feasible within the
                         existing right-of way.
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 21 to 30 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
          Mitigation Measure C-8: Figueroa Street & I-110 Northbound Ramps (Intersection
                         No. 12):
                    –    A second right-turn lane shall be added to the southbound approach. The
                         southbound approach shall be improved to provide two through lanes and two
                         right-turn lanes.
                    –    A right-turn lane shall be added to the eastbound approach. The eastbound
                         approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes and a right-turn
                         lane. The improvements are feasible within the existing right-of-way.
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 1 to 10 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
          Mitigation Measure C-9: Figueroa Street & Torrance Boulevard (Intersection No. 15):
                    –    A second southbound left-turn lane shall be added to southbound Figueroa
                         Street. The southbound approach shall be improved to include two left-turn
                         lanes, two through lanes, and a right-turn lane. This improvement is feasible
                         within the existing right-of-way.
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 71 to 80 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
          Mitigation Measure C-10: Main Street & Torrance Boulevard (Intersection No. 16):
                    –    The eastbound approach shall be re-striped to provide one left-turn lane and a
                         shared through/right-turn lane.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                  Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                      November 2005
                                                     Page 26
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 81 to 90 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
          Mitigation Measure C-11: Vermont Avenue & Carson Street (Intersection No. 22):
                    –    The westbound right-turn lane shall be re-striped to provide a shared
                         through/right-turn lane. The westbound approach shall be improved to
                         provide one left-turn lane, two through lanes, and a shared through/right-turn
                         lane.
                    –    The eastbound right-turn lane shall be re-striped to provide a shared
                         through/right-turn lane. The eastbound approach shall be improved to provide
                         one left-turn lane, two through lanes, and a shared through/ right-turn lane.
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 31 to 40 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
          Mitigation Measure C-12: Figueroa Street and Carson Street (Intersection No. 23):
                    –    A right-turn lane shall be added to the southbound approach. The southbound
                         approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes, two through lanes,
                         and a right-turn lane.
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 71 to 80 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
          Mitigation Measure C-13: Main Street & Carson Street (Intersection No. 24):
                    –    A second left-turn lane shall be added to the westbound approach. The
                         westbound approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes, two
                         through lanes, and a shared through/right-turn lane
                    –    A second left-turn lane shall be added to the eastbound approach. The
                         eastbound approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes, two
                         through lanes, and a shared through/right-turn lane.
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 61 to 70 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                   Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                       November 2005
                                                     Page 27
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                      CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Mitigation Measure C-14: Avalon Boulevard & Carson Street (Intersection No. 25): 4
                    –    A right-turn lane shall be added to the southbound approach. The southbound
                         approach shall be improved to include one left-turn lane, three through lanes,
                         and a right-turn lane.
                    –    A right-turn lane shall be added to the westbound approach. The westbound
                         approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes, two through lanes,
                         and a right-turn lane.
                    –    A right-turn lane shall be added to the northbound approach. The northbound
                         approach shall be improved to provide one left-turn lane, three through lanes,
                         and a right-turn lane
                    –    A right-turn lane shall be added to the eastbound approach. The eastbound
                         approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes, two through lanes,
                         and a right-turn lane
                    –    This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development in
                         which the Project generates 21 to 30 percent of its total trips, in accordance
                         with Draft EIR Table 24.
          Mitigation Measure C-15: No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for commercial
                         development in District 2, or for commercial development in Districts 1 and 3
                         that is greater than the amount of commercial development shown in the
                         Applicant’s Conceptual Plan (i.e., 150,000 square feet and 50,000 square feet,
                         respectively), prior to the completion of the I-405 ramp improvements at
                         Avalon Boulevard.
4
   Any future street widening improvements for the intersection of Avalon Boulevard and Carson Street are not
   feasible within the existing right-of-way and would require acquisition or dedication of right-of-way from
   adjacent parcels. The adjacent land uses include the Carson City Hall on the northeast corner of the
   intersection and commercial uses on the remaining three corners of the intersection. The necessary width can
   be obtained adjacent to City Hall on the north side of Carson Street through reduction of a portion of the
   existing landscaped area, allowing construction of the right-turn lane on the westbound Carson Street approach.
   Information from the City of Carson indicates that the parcels on the southeast and northwest corners may
   redevelop, at which point it may be possible to obtain the necessary right-of-way on the east side of Avalon
   Boulevard south of Carson Street and on the west side of Avalon Boulevard north of Carson Street, allowing
   construction of the right-turn lanes on the northbound and southbound Avalon Boulevard approaches. If the
   proposed right-turn lanes were provided on these three approaches but not on the eastbound Carson Street
   approach, it is estimated that the projected afternoon peak hour V/C would be reduced from 0.973 to 0.904.
   Although this would partially alleviate the Project impact, it would not fully mitigate the impact to a less than
   significant level.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                           Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                               November 2005
                                                     Page 28
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                    (b) I-405 and I-110 Freeways
          No feasible mitigation measures are available to the Applicant to mitigate the Project’s
significant impacts on the I-110 and I-405 freeways.
                    (c) Site Access Mitigation Measures:
          Site access impacts were determined to be insignificant as long as the main site access
intersections are configured as described in Draft EIR Section IV.C.3.c(1), Project Design
Features. No mitigation measures are required.
                    (d) Public Transportation
          Mitigation Measure C-16: In coordination with the City of Carson Transit Authority
                         and the Metropolitan Transit Authority (Metro), the Applicant shall provide
                         additional transit stops, including benches and shelters, in and adjacent to the
                         Project site.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
               (1) Construction Impacts
          The majority of the related projects’ construction workers are anticipated to arrive and
depart the individual construction sites during off-peak hours. Excavation and grading phases
for the related projects would generate the highest number of haul truck trips. The City’s
established review process would balance haul routes to minimize the impacts of cumulative
hauling on any particular roadway. Although related projects may cause lane closures or
detours, no related projects are sufficiently close to the Project site to create a cumulative access
impact on the street segments near the Project site. Therefore, construction activities would have
a less than significant cumulative effect relative to worker and haul truck traffic as well as
emergency access.
               (2) Operation Impacts
                    (a) Intersection Service Levels
          The cumulative traffic impacts of the related projects and ambient growth have been
considered for the purpose of assessing the Project’s traffic impacts. Under 2010 Cumulative
Base conditions, six of the 29 study intersections are projected to operate at LOS E or worse
during one or both of the A.M. and P.M. peak hours. Since no guarantee exists that mitigation
measures would be implemented with the identified related projects, it is conservatively
concluded that cumulative traffic impact on intersection operations would be significant.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                   Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                       November 2005
                                                     Page 29
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                           CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                    (b) Freeway Service Levels
          Cumulative impacts would occur on CMP segments of the Harbor and San Diego
Freeways. No feasible mitigation measures are available to the any individual project to mitigate
the potentially significant impacts on these freeway segments to less than significant levels.
Therefore, cumulative impacts on freeway service levels would be significant.
                    (c) Access
          No related projects are adjacent to the Project site or share adjacent access points.
Therefore, no significant cumulative impacts relative to access would occur.
                    (d) Public Transit
          The combined Project and related projects would generate a demand for public
transportation that would exceed existing transit capacity. Therefore, a significant cumulative
impact relative to public transit services would occur.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
               (1) Construction
          With the implementation of mitigation measures, no significant, unavoidable construction
impacts would occur.
               (2) Operation
                    (a) Intersection Service Levels
          Potentially significant impacts would be reduced at all 12 intersections to less than
significant levels, with the exception of the intersection of Figueroa Street & I-110 Northbound
Ramps (Intersection No. 12) during the P.M. peak hour. Therefore, the Project would generate a
significant and unavoidable impact at this one intersection.
                    (b) Freeway Service Levels
          The Project’s significant impact on three segments of the Harbor Freeway (I-110) and
four segments of the San Diego Freeway (I-405) cannot be reduced to less than significant levels
as no feasible mitigation measures are available to the Applicant. Therefore, the Project’s impact
on freeway service levels would be significant and unavoidable.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                             Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                 November 2005
                                                Page 30
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
               (3) Access
          Site access impacts were determined to be less than significant as long as the main site
access intersections are configured as described in Draft EIR Section IV.C.3.c(1), Project Design
Features. Therefore, no significant and unavoidable impacts relative to site access would occur.
               (4) Public Transportation
          Mitigation Measure C-16 would partially reduce the impact on transit services; however,
no feasible mitigation exists that would reduce the potentially significant impact to a less than
significant level. Therefore, the impact of the Project on regional transit would be significant
and unavoidable.
               (5) Parking
          Procedures set forth in the Specific Plan provide that shared parking would never be less
than the Project’s peak demand. With the implementation of all applicable Specific Plan
provisions, the Project’s peak parking demand would not exceed provided parking. Therefore,
no significant and unavoidable parking impacts would occur.
    9.4 Hazards and Hazardous Materials
          a. Environmental Impacts
          The remediation of the 157-acre landfill is being implemented as part of the Project in
compliance with the approved Final Remedial Action Plans (RAPs). The RAP for the Upper
Operable Unit (OU) was approved by DTSC in 1995 and the RAP for the Lower OU was
approved by DTSC in 2005. DTSC conducted its own environmental review as part of the
approval process for the RAPs. These analyses concluded that implementation of the RAPs
would result in less than significant impacts with regard to all environmental issues of concern.
Therefore, the implementation of the RAPs does not require further review under CEQA and, as
such, is not subject to analysis in this EIR.
          With regard to the implementation of the Upper OU RAP, the Applicant proposes some
refinements to the cap and the gas control and groundwater treatment methods. DTSC has
conceptually approved the refinements. Changes in the design of the remediation system would
only be allowed if DTSC determines that the proposed design accomplishes the same
performance objectives as the previously approved design and is protective of human health and
the environment. In addition, DTSC provided a letter dated February 9, 2005 indicating the
“DTSC believes the concepts presented for the proposed development are appropriate at a
conceptual level and could be protective of human health and safety, however, as is common for
all projects under DTSC’s authority, more detailed plans are necessary before DTSC can make
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                             Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                 November 2005
                                                Page 31
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
such a final determination.” As a result, no residential development would occur until DTSC
formally concludes that the development would be implemented in a manner that is protective of
human health and the environment.
          With regard to existing oil and water wells located in Districts 1 and 2, the approved RAP
for the Upper OU required additional investigation to locate the three wells and to address issues
such as the risk of downward migration of contaminants into the lower aquifers. As a result,
DTSC would review and approve additional work in compliance with the RAP relative to the
wells.
          Based on the Phase I and preliminary Phase II conducted for Development District 3, no
specific remediation efforts are required. However, additional Phase II activities are
recommended to further evaluate potential vapor intrusion and worker health and safety concerns
by completing deeper soil-vapor sampling. In addition, Development Site 3 would be subject to
the provisions of California Code of Regulations, Title 27, Section 21190 that govern
development activities within 1,000 feet of a closed landfill. These provisions include such
measures as the installation of vapor mitigation and monitoring devices. As the construction and
operation of the proposed land uses within Development Site 3 would be in compliance with all
applicable regulations, potential risks would be reduced to a less than significant level.
          b. Mitigation Measures
          The certified CEQA documentation for the Upper OU RAP includes mitigation measures
to reduce the potential construction impacts associated with the implementation of the clay cap.5
The mitigation measures are in the environmental areas of earth, air quality, surface and
groundwater, natural resources (use of nonrenewable resources), risk of upset, and energy.
Mitigation measures are also discussed in Section 7.4 of the Final RAP for the Upper OU. In
addition to these measures, the following mitigation measures are required to ensure that any
revisions to the RAP are approved by DTSC and that access to the necessary areas for
monitoring programs required in the RAPs would be provided.
          Mitigation Measure D-1: To the extent the Applicant desires to refine or modify
                         requirements in the RAP, the Applicant shall provide documentation to the
                         City indicating DTSC approval of such refinements or modifications.
          Mitigation Measure D-2: The Applicant shall provide documentation to the City
                         indicating DTSC shall permit the proposed residential uses in Development
5
   The Negative Declaration was prepared for the construction, operation and maintenance of the proposed landfill
   gas collection and treatment system and the groundwater treatment system.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                        Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                            November 2005
                                                    Page 32
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                         District 1 prior to issuance of any permits for such residential development in
                         Development District 1.
          Mitigation Measure D-3: The Applicant shall provide documentation to the City
                         indicating both on- and off-site risks associated with RAP construction have
                         been evaluated to the satisfaction of the DTSC, and at a minimum, perimeter
                         air monitoring shall be completed for dust, particulates, and constituents
                         determined to be Constituents of Concern (COCs).
          Mitigation Measure D-4: The Applicant shall provide to the City, documentation
                         indicating that (1) a post remediation risk assessment has been prepared by the
                         Applicant and approved by DTSC; and (2) DTSC has certified that the
                         remedial systems are properly functioning prior to issuance of a Certificate of
                         Occupancy.
          Mitigation Measure D-5: The Applicant shall provide documentation to the City
                         indicating that applicable remedial systems and monitoring plans, including
                         the location of the flare and treatment facility are in accordance with
                         applicable SCAQMD regulations.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          The analysis contained in this section focuses on the implementation of the approved
RAPs for the Upper OU and the Lower OU. The purpose of the RAPs is to provide protection
for human health and the environment. Development within District 3 would occur in
compliance with applicable regulations regarding hazardous materials. All new development
would occur in compliance with applicable regulations relative to hazardous materials.
Therefore, the Project would not result in a significant impact with regard to hazards. All of the
related projects would be required to comply with applicable regulations with regard to
hazardous materials. Therefore, no significant cumulative hazards or hazardous materials
impacts are anticipated.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          While the Project would not result in a significant impact with regard to hazards and
hazardous materials, mitigation measures are provided to ensure that any revisions to the RAP
are approved by DTSC.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                    Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                        November 2005
                                                      Page 33
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
    9.5 Geology and Soils
          a. Environmental Impacts
          Site preparation for Development Districts 1 and 2 would require mass grading, deep
dynamic compaction (DDC), backfill, capping and pile driving. Approximately 125 acres would
be cleared and used for stockpiling during excavation and on-site storage of approximately 1.5
million cubic yards of soil. DDC would be completed on approximately 60 to 75 acres occupied
by parking lots and non-pile supported areas. Grading would result in a nearly level site, taking
into account the need to allow for drainage. Site preparation would be coordinated with
remediation procedures approved by the DTSC. Although Development Districts 1 and 2 are
potentially exposed to differential settlement due to the densification of the underlying refuse
layers, exposure to settlement would be reduced to less than significant levels through the
installation of driven pile foundations. Development in District 3 would require the grading of
11 acres, the removal of unsuitable materials, and the excavation and re-compaction of the
existing 1 to 8 feet of disturbed and undocumented topsoil. All graded soils would be
approximately “balanced” onsite. With the enforcement of City Building Code requirements, the
exposure of people or other structures to settlement or other geologic hazards caused by
construction or occupation of the Project site would be less than significant.
          b. Mitigation Measures
          The proposed Project would not result in a significant geology and soils impact.
However, the following mitigation measures are recommended to assure compliance with City
and State regulations.
          Mitigation Measure E-1: In accordance with City of Carson Municipal Code, the
                         Applicant shall comply with site-specific recommendations set forth in
                         engineering geology and geotechnical reports prepared to the satisfaction of
                         the City of Carson Building Official, as follows:
                    –    The engineering geology report shall be prepared and signed by a California
                         Certified Engineering Geologist and the geotechnical report shall be prepared
                         and signed by a California Registered Civil Engineer experienced in the area
                         of geotechnical engineering. Geology and geotechnical reports shall include
                         site-specific studies and analyses for all potential geologic and/or geotechnical
                         hazards. Geotechnical reports shall address the design of pilings, foundations,
                         walls below grade, retaining walls, shoring, subgrade preparation for floor
                         slab support, paving, earthwork methodologies, and dewatering, where
                         applicable.
                    –    Geology and geotechnical reports may be prepared separately or together.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                     Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                         November 2005
                                                     Page 34
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                    –    Where the studies indicate, compensating siting and design features shall be
                         required.
               –    Laboratory testing of soils shall demonstrate the suitability of underlying native
                    soils to support driven piles to the satisfaction of the City of Carson Building
                    Official.
          Mitigation Measure E-2: Due to the classification of portions of the Project site as a
                         liquefaction zone, the Applicant shall demonstrate that liquefaction either
                         poses a sufficiently low hazard to satisfy the defined acceptable risk criteria,
                         in accordance with CDMG Special Bulletin 117, or (b) implement suitable
                         mitigation measures to effectively reduce the hazard to acceptable levels
                         (CCR Title 14, Section 3721). The analysis of liquefaction risk shall be
                         prepared by a registered civil engineer and shall be submitted to the
                         satisfaction of the City Building Official.
          Mitigation Measure E-3: Any roads realigned from the existing configuration, or
                         otherwise, located in areas underlain by waste soils shall comply with site-
                         specific recommendations as set forth in engineering, geology, and
                         geotechnical reports prepared to the satisfaction of City of Carson building
                         officials.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          Due to the high seismic activity common to the Southern California region, the potential
for ground shaking and other geological hazards would be similar throughout the area that
includes the identified related projects. Building permits for the related projects would involve a
site-specific evaluation of slope stability, ground rupture, liquefaction, and ground movement for
each of the related projects. With the implementation of City Code regulations, cumulative
impacts related to geologic risk would be less than significant.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          The proposed Project would be in compliance with City and State regulations and is not
anticipated to expose people or structures to any unstable geologic conditions or seismically
related geologic hazards that would result in substantial damage to structures or infrastructure or
exposure of people to risk of loss, injury, or death. Therefore, no unavoidable significant
impacts would occur.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                 Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                     November 2005
                                                     Page 35
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                              CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
    9.6 Surface Water Quality
          a. Environmental Impacts
          Construction would expose soils to precipitation and to water used in dust control and
compaction and, as such, would potentially increase mobilization of soils into surface water
runoff. A prior analysis of soils in Development District 3 found soil gas contamination in a
portion of the site. Although recent testing has concluded that no soil gas is currently present,
mitigation is recommended to assure compliance with applicable water quality standards. Prior
testing of storm water runoff in Development Districts 1 and 2 indicated that suspended
particulates exceeded State of California reporting limits. Runoff is currently controlled by a
SWPPP applicable to the former landfill site. Recent testing of retained storm water in
Development Districts 1 and 2, detected organic compounds and conductivity in excess of
reporting limits. Discharge was conducted in accordance with a Regional Water Quality Control
Board (RWQCB) Release of Stormwater Permit.                      During Project construction, the
implementation of a NPDES Construction General Permit, including the preparation of a SWPPP
to monitor and control water runoff, would prevent suspended particulates from entering the off-
site drainage system or adjacent properties. With development, Districts 1 and 2 would be
almost entirely impermeable and Development District 3 would have a combination of
permeable and impermeable areas. No uncontrolled sheet flow from any Project location would
be directed or allowed to flow onto adjacent properties or directly into the Torrance Lateral
Channel. Although new impermeable surfaces would increase water runoff from the site, the
impermeability that would result due to the waste cap would eliminate the exposure of surface
water runoff to any contaminated soils. With the implementation of a site-specific SUSMP
during operation, contaminants in surface water, such as parking lot oil and grease, would
comply with state and federal water quality standards. With the implementation of the proposed
mitigation measure, the Project would have a less than significant surface water quality impact.
          b. Mitigation Measures
          Impacts associated with surface water runoff and water quality in Development Districts
1 and 2 would be less than significant and no mitigation measures are required. However, since
potential, unremediated soil contamination exists in Development District 3, the following
mitigation measure is recommended:
          Mitigation Measure F-1:          Soils in Development District 3 shall be tested prior to the
                         issuance of a grading permit, in accordance with the recommendation of
                         Blasland, Bouck and Lee, Inc.’s (BBL’s) Preliminary Draft Phase I and Initial
                         Phase II Environmental Site Assessment Summary, Del Amo Gardens Site
                         (July 6, 2005). If contaminants are found in excess of State of California
                         maximum contamination levels (MCLs), the soils shall be addressed in
                         accordance with a DTSC-approved program.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                 Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                     November 2005
                                                   Page 36
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          Related projects could potentially contribute point and non-point source pollutants to
surface waters, resulting in a cumulative water quality impact. However, all new development
and redevelopment projects over more than one acre, or meeting the City’s SUSMP land use
criteria, must comply with NPDES requirements during construction and operation, including the
implementation of site-specific SWPPPs and SUSMPs. With the incorporation of these
measures, it is anticipated that the related projects would not exceed acceptable regulatory levels.
Minor projects would not substantially degrade surface water quality. Therefore, cumulative
impacts to surface water quality are concluded to be less than significant based on compliance
with existing regulations.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          Through the implementation of proposed drainage and erosion control plans required
under a SWPPP’s Best Management Practices, including water filtering and flood control
devices, development of the proposed Project would not increase existing pollution and
contamination, create a nuisance as defined in Section 13050 of the California Water Code,
cause regulatory standards to be violated, or result in a permanent, adverse change to the
movement of surface water sufficient to produce a substantial change in the current or direction
of flow. Therefore, impacts associated with surface water quality would be less than significant.
    9.7 Air Quality
          a. Environmental Impacts
          The air quality analysis evaluates air emissions attributable to the Project’s construction
and post-construction (e.g., operational) activities for criteria air pollutants, air toxics, and odors.
In addition, the Project’s compatibility with applicable air quality policies as set forth in the City
of Carson General Plan and regional plans prepared by SCAG and the SCAQMD are also
assessed.
          Construction of the proposed Project would generate fugitive dust and combustion
emissions from the use of heavy-duty construction equipment on-site and from construction
worker trips as well as from delivery and haul truck travel to and from the Project site.
Construction related daily regional emissions from both direct and indirect sources exceed the
significance thresholds for CO, NOX, and ROC. Thus, emissions of these pollutants would result
in a significant regional air quality impact during the Project’s construction phase. An analysis
of local air quality impacts from construction operations and their impact on nearby sensitive
receptors (e.g., residences, schools, etc.) has also been conducted. This analysis indicates that
the Proposed Project would not result in an exceedance of the SCAQMD recommended localized
thresholds for NO2 or CO. However, localized PM10 concentrations would exceed the SCAQMD
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                  Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                      November 2005
                                                Page 37
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
recommended localized threshold at the residential uses immediately south and southwest of the
Project site. Construction of the proposed Project would result in a maximum off-site individual
cancer risk of 1.1 in a million from diesel particulate emissions. As the Project would not exceed
the maximum individual cancer risk of ten in one million, air toxic emissions during construction
would be less than significant. No construction activities are proposed which would create
objectionable odors and, therefore, no significant odor impacts would occur.
          Air pollutant emissions associated with occupancy and operation of the proposed Project
would be generated by the consumption of electricity and natural gas, by the operation of on-
road vehicles and by miscellaneous area sources (among other things, landscaping equipment,
consumer/commercial solvent usage, architectural coatings, restaurant charbroilers, and
emergency generators). The Project would exceed SCAQMD regional significance thresholds
for CO, NOX, PM10, and ROC. Project traffic would not cause an exceedance of the California
1-hour or 8-hour CO standards of 20 or 9.0 ppm, respectively and no significant impacts to local
CO concentrations would occur. Potential sources of air toxic emissions associated with the
Project would be limited to sources typical within the urban environment and would contribute
small amounts of toxic air pollutants to the Project vicinity, and as a result, would be well below
any levels that would result in a significant impact on human health. Development of the
proposed Project would be compatible with the air quality policies set forth in the SCAQMD’s
AQMP, SCAG’s RCPG and the Carson General Plan.
          In addition to the above analyses, a health risk assessment (HRA) was conducted for the
proposed new sensitive receptors for potential sources of toxic emissions within one-quarter mile
of the Project site. Based on the analysis, the Project would result in locating sensitive receptors
within an area of cancer risk in excess of the SCAQMD significance threshold of 10 in one
million and, therefore, the Project would result in a significant impact. This impact is almost
exclusively related to diesel exhaust emissions from I-405 Freeway. In addition, an existing
composting operation is located near the proposed residential uses northwest of the intersection
of Del Amo Boulevard and Main Street. As a result, this source may result in significant odor
impacts that could affect proposed residential uses.
          b. Mitigation Measures
          The following mitigation measures are (1) intended to implement requirements of
SCAQMD Rule 403 (Fugitive Dust) and (2) set forth a program of air pollution control strategies
designed to reduce the proposed Project’s air quality impacts to the extent feasible.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                              Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                  November 2005
                                                Page 38
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
               (1) Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-1: General contractors shall implement a fugitive dust control
                         program pursuant to the provisions of SCAQMD Rule 403.6
          Mitigation Measure G-2: All construction equipment shall be properly tuned and
                         maintained in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications.
          Mitigation Measure G-3: General contractors shall maintain and operate construction
                         equipment so as to minimize exhaust emissions. During construction, trucks
                         and vehicles in loading and unloading queues would turn their engines off,
                         when not in use, to reduce vehicle emissions. Construction emissions should
                         be phased and scheduled to avoid emissions peaks and discontinued during
                         second-stage smog alerts.
          Mitigation Measure G-4: Electricity from power poles rather than temporary diesel- or
                         gasoline-powered generators shall be used to the extent feasible.
          Mitigation Measure G-5: All construction vehicles shall be prohibited from idling in
                         excess of ten minutes, both on- and off-site.
          Mitigation Measure G-6: Project heavy-duty construction equipment shall use
                         alternative clean fuels, such as low sulfur diesel or compressed natural gas
                         with oxidation catalysts or particulate traps, to the extent feasible.
          Mitigation Measure G-7: The Applicant shall utilize coatings and solvents that are
                         consistent with applicable SCAQMD rules and regulations.
          Mitigation Measure G-8: The Applicant shall comply with SCAQMD Rule 402 to
                         reduce potential nuisance impacts due to odors from construction activities.
          Mitigation Measure G-9: All construction vehicle tires shall be washed at the time
                         these vehicles exit the project site.
          Mitigation Measure G-10: All fill material carried by haul trucks shall be covered by a
                         tarp or other means.
          Mitigation Measure G-11: Any intensive dust generating activity such as grinding
                         concrete for existing roads must be controlled to the greatest extent feasible.
6
   SCAQMD Rule 403 requirements are detailed in Appendix F.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                     Page 39
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Mitigation Measure G-12: The Applicant shall provide documentation to the City
                         indicating both on- and off-site air-borne risks associated with RAP
                         construction have been evaluated to the satisfaction of the DTSC, and at a
                         minimum, perimeter air monitoring will be completed for dust, particulates,
                         and constituents determined to be Constituents of Concern (COCs).
               (2) Operation
          During the Project’s operational phase, regional emissions that exceed regional
SCAQMD significance thresholds for CO, PM10, NOX, and ROC would occur. Emission control
measures are specified for the following four sources of operational emissions: (1) service and
support facilities; (2) natural gas consumption and electricity production; (3) building materials,
architectural coatings, and cleaning solvents; and (4) transportation systems management and
demand management.
                    (a) Service and Support Facilities (point sources)
          Mitigation Measure G-13: All point source facilities shall obtain all required permits
                         from the SCAQMD. The issuance of these permits by the SCAQMD shall
                         require the operators of these facilities to implement Best Available Control
                         Technology and other required measures that reduce emissions of criteria air
                         pollutants.
          Mitigation Measure G-14: Land uses on the Project site shall be limited to those that do
                         not emit high levels of potentially toxic contaminants or odors.
                    (b) Natural Gas Consumption and Electricity Production
          Mitigation Measure G-15: All residential and non-residential buildings shall meet the
                         California Title 24 Energy Efficiency standards for water heating, space
                         heating and cooling, to the extent feasible.
          Mitigation Measure G-16: All fixtures used for lighting of exterior common areas
                         shall be regulated by automatic devices to turn off lights when they are not
                         needed, but a minimum level of lighting should be provided for safety.
                    (c) Building Materials, Architectural Coatings and Cleaning Solvents
          Mitigation Measure G-17: Building materials, architectural coatings and cleaning
                         solvents shall comply with all applicable SCAQMD rules and regulations.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                   Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                       November 2005
                                                    Page 40
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                    (d) Transportation System Management and Demand Management
          Mitigation Measure G-18: The Applicant shall, to the extent feasible, schedule
                         deliveries during off-peak traffic periods to encourage the reduction of trips
                         during the most congested periods.
          Mitigation Measure G-19: The Applicant shall coordinate with the MTA and the City
                         of Carson and Los Angeles Department of Transportation to provide
                         information with regard to local bus and rail services.
          Mitigation Measure G-20: During site plan review, consideration shall be given
                         regarding the provision of safe and convenient access to bus stops and public
                         transportation facilities.
          Mitigation Measure G-21: The Applicant shall pay a fair share contribution for a low
                         emission shuttle service between the project site and other major activity
                         centers within the project vicinity (i.e., the MetroRail Blue Line station at Del
                         Amo Boulevard and Santa Fe and the Carson Transfer Station at the South
                         Bay Pavilion).
          Mitigation Measure G-22: The Applicant shall provide bicycle racks located at
                         convenient locations throughout Carson Marketplace.
          Mitigation Measure G-23: The Applicant shall provide bicycle paths along the main
                         routes through Carson Marketplace.
          Mitigation Measure G-24: The Applicant shall provide convenient pedestrian access
                         throughout Carson Marketplace.
          As on-site sensitive receptors could be exposed to off-site air toxic emissions in excess of
the SCAQMD significance threshold and also potential odiferous emissions (nearby composting
operation), the following mitigation measure is recommended.
          Mitigation Measure G-25: The Project shall include air filtration systems for
                         residential dwelling units designed to have a minimum efficiency reporting
                         value (MERV) of 12 as indicated by the American Society of Heating
                         Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) Standard 52.2. The
                         air handling systems shall be maintained on a regular basis per manufacturer’s
                         recommendations by a qualified technician employed or contracted by the
                         Applicant or successor. Operation and maintenance of the system shall ensure
                         that it performs above the minimum reporting value.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                    Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                        November 2005
                                                    Page 41
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                              CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          Buildout of the identified related projects that would occur within a similar time frame as
the Proposed Project would increase short-term emissions for concurrent activities during any
day of the Project’s construction period. Since emissions of criteria pollutants under peak
construction activities are concluded to be significant, any additional construction activities as
part of any related project occurring during this time and in the vicinity of the Proposed Project
site would be adding additional air pollutant emissions to these significant levels. As emission
levels associated with the Proposed Project already are forecasted to have a significant impact, a
significant and unavoidable cumulative impact with respect to construction emissions would
occur.
          The SCAQMD has set forth both a methodological framework as well as significance
thresholds for the assessment of a project’s cumulative air quality impacts. Based on the
SCAQMD’s methodology (presented in Chapter 9 of the CEQA Air Quality Handbook), the
proposed Project would have a significant cumulative impact on air quality. In addition,
implementation of the Project would also result in an increase in emissions which would
contribute to region-wide emissions on a cumulative basis and as such, the Project’s cumulative
air quality impacts are also concluded to be significant. In such cases, the SCAQMD
recommends that all projects, to the extent possible, employ feasible mitigation measures which
has been done with regard to the proposed Project.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
               (1) Construction
          Regional construction activities would still exceed the SCAQMD daily emission
thresholds for regional NOX, CO and ROC after implementation of all feasible mitigation
measures and, as such, the Project would have a significant and unavoidable impact on regional
air quality. With regard to localized emissions, construction activities would still exceed the
SCAQMD daily emission threshold for PM10 after implementation of all feasible mitigation
measures. Therefore, construction of the Project would have a significant and unavoidable
impact with regard to localized emissions of PM10.
               (2) Operation
          Regional operational emissions, after the implementation of all feasible mitigation
measures, would still exceed the SCAQMD daily emission thresholds and, as such, operation of
the Project would have a significant and unavoidable impact on regional air quality. With
respect to potential impacts to on-site residential uses, the recommended air handling systems
would substantially reduce carcinogenic exposure, but impacts would remain significant and
unavoidable. Via compliance with industry standard odor control practices, SCAQMD Rule 402
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                    November 2005
                                                 Page 42
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
(Nuisance), and SCAQMD Best Available Control Technology Guidelines, potential impacts
that could result from any potential odor source would be less than significant.
    9.8 Noise
          a. Environmental Impacts
               (1) Construction Impacts
          As with most construction projects, construction would require the use of a number of
pieces of heavy equipment such as impact soil compactors (for DDC operations), pile drivers,
bulldozers, backhoes, cranes, loaders, and concrete mixers. Construction equipment would
produce maximum noise levels of 74 dBA to 101 dBA at a reference distance of 50 feet from the
noise source. The residences located to the west and south of the Project site immediately across
the Torrance Lateral Channel, would occasionally experience construction noise levels of 76.5
dBA and 75.2 dBA (hourly Leq), respectively, during the heaviest periods of construction. Thus,
construction of the proposed Project would result in a significant impact to off-site sensitive
receptors without the incorporation of mitigation measures.
          Construction can generate varying degrees of ground vibration, depending on the
construction procedures and the construction equipment used. Within the Project site, the
highest vibration from typical construction equipment (i.e., exclusive of DDC activities) would
be generated during pile driving operations. Residential sensitive land uses would be located at a
sufficient distance (greater than 75 feet) from any potential pile driving activity so that vibration
from such activities would be below the peak particle velocity threshold of 0.2 inch/sec.
Construction of the proposed Project also includes DDC within those portions of the property
that were formerly used as a landfill site (i.e., Districts 1 and 2) that would not be supported by
pile foundations. The Applicant is proposing to implement a DDC pilot program, before the start
of site-wide DDC operations, for the purpose of assuring that less than significant vibration
impacts to off-site uses and/or facilities would occur once DDC operations are initiated on a site-
wide basis. The testing procedures established under the Pilot Program would consist of
dropping increasing weights at increasing heights with concurrent checking of monitored levels
so as to assure that off-site vibration levels do not exceed the 0.2 inches per second PPV
significance threshold. Based on this testing program, an optimal set of DDC parameters would
be established. Once the pilot program is completed, the off-site vibration monitors would
remain in place throughout the DDC process, thereby providing ongoing protections for off-site
uses and/or facilities throughout this phase of the Project’s construction process. Thus, impacts
from this particular construction activity would be less than significant.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                               Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                   November 2005
                                               Page 43
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                              CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
               (2) Operational Noise
          The Project’s operational noise analysis addresses potential noise impacts to neighboring
noise-sensitive receiver locations, as well as the proposed on-site residential uses within the
Project site, related to the long-term operations of the proposed Project. Specific noise sources
addressed in the analysis included roadway noise, mechanical equipment/point sources (i.e.,
loading dock and trash pick-up areas), and parking facilities.
          The largest Project-related traffic noise impact is anticipated to occur along the segments
of Del Amo Boulevard, between Stamps Drive and Figueroa Street (2.8 to 3.1 dBA increase in
CNEL). However, no sensitive uses are located along these segments and impacts would be less
than the 5 dBA significance threshold. Furthermore, impacts from Project-related traffic noise
along all other local roadway segments, within proximity of the identified sensitive receptors,
would be lower than the significance threshold of 3 dBA CNEL for sensitive receptors exposed
to or within the “normally unacceptable” or “clearly unacceptable” categories. Thus, the
Project’s roadway noise impacts would be less than significant.
          The proposed on-site residential uses would be located to the south and north of Del Amo
Boulevard, within Development Districts 1 and 3, respectively. Due to the proximity of the
Project site to the I-405 Freeway, measured noise levels within the Project site reach levels of up
to approximately 74 dBA CNEL. As such, I-405 Freeway traffic volumes would result in a
significant noise impact to the proposed on-site residential uses without the incorporation of
mitigation measures.
          Noise levels associated with on-site sources (e.g., loading docks, parking facilities, and
mechanical equipment) would include noise control measures to meet City of Carson Municipal
Code noise standards. Therefore, impacts are anticipated to be less than significant and no
mitigation measures are required. Some of the land uses that are permitted by the Carson
Marketplace Specific Plan have noise characteristics that are potentially problematic (i.e.,
outdoor theater, passenger station (bus station, rail station, taxi stand), or small recycling
facility). If these land uses are developed as part of the proposed Project, while they would be
required to meet the City’s Noise Ordinance standards, there is a potential that they may result in
a significant noise impact if the uses were to be located in proximity of the proposed on-site
residences or off-site residences to the south and west.
          As Project operations would not result in any additional long-term ground-borne
vibration sources, operation of the proposed Project would result in less than significant vibration
impacts and no mitigation measures are required.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                    November 2005
                                                  Page 44
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          b. Mitigation Measures
               (1) Construction
          Mitigation Measure H-1: Prior to the issuance of any grading, excavation, haul route,
                         foundation, or building permits, the Applicant shall provide proof satisfactory
                         to the Building and Safety Division of the Development Services Department
                         that all construction documents require contractors to comply with City of
                         Carson Municipal Code Sections 4101 (i) and (j), which requires all
                         construction and demolition activities including pile driving, to occur between
                         7:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M. Monday through Saturday and that a noise
                         management plan for compliance and verification has been prepared by a
                         monitor retained by the Applicant. At a minimum, the plan shall include the
                         following requirements:
                         1. Noise-generating equipment operated at the Project site shall be equipped
                             with effective noise control devices (i.e., mufflers, intake silencers,
                             lagging, and/or engine enclosures). All equipment shall be properly
                             maintained to assure that no additional noise, due to worn or improperly
                             maintained parts, would be generated.
                         2. Pile drivers used within 1,500 feet of sensitive receptors shall be equipped
                             with noise control techniques (e.g., use of noise attenuation shields or
                             shrouds) having a minimum quieting factor of 10 dBA.
                         3. Effective temporary sound barriers shall be used and relocated, as needed,
                             whenever construction activities occur within 150 feet of residential
                             property, to block line-of-site between the construction equipment and the
                             noise-sensitive receptors (i.e., residential uses located on the west and
                             south of the Project site).
                         4. Loading and staging areas must be located on site and away from the most
                             noise-sensitive uses surrounding the site as determined by the of Building
                             and Safety Division of the Development Services Department.
                         5. An approved haul route authorization that avoids noise-sensitive land uses
                             to the maximum extent feasible.
                         6. A construction relations officer shall be designated to serve as a liaison
                             with residents, and a contact telephone number shall be provided to
                             residents.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                    Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                        November 2005
                                                     Page 45
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Mitigation Measure H-2: The Applicant, prior to initiating DDC activities on a site-
                         wide basis, shall conduct a DDC Pilot Program (Pilot Program). The Pilot
                         Program shall be implemented via the following guidelines:
                    –    Prior to the initiation of the Pilot Program, the Applicant shall locate vibration
                         monitors at the following locations: (1) along the Project’s fenceline opposite
                         the off-site residential uses located to the south and southwest of the Project
                         site (i.e., within the Project site), and (2) along the far side of the Torrance
                         Lateral Channel in line with the monitors placed within the Project site itself.
                    –    Continuous monitoring shall be conducted on an ongoing basis during the
                         Pilot Program. All vibration levels measured by the monitors shall be logged
                         with documentation of the measurements provided to the City.
                    –    Initial DDC drops shall be limited in weight, height and/or location dictated
                         by calculations which demonstrate that the potential vibration levels are below
                         the 0.02 inches per second PPV threshold limit.
                    –    Increases in DDC weight, height and/or location shall incur in small
                         increments, with continuous monitoring to assure compliance with the 0.02
                         inches per second PPV threshold limit.
                    –    If vibration levels at any time during the Pilot Program exceed the 0.02 inches
                         per second PPV threshold level, DDC activity shall immediately stop, until
                         new drop parameters are established that would reduce the vibration levels to
                         less than the 0.02 inches per second PPV threshold level.
                         Mitigation Measure H-3: The monitors located on the far side of the
                                                    Torrance Lateral Channel as part of the Pilot Program
                                                    shall remain in place throughout the DDC phase of
                                                    Project construction. Continuous monitoring shall be
                                                    conducted on an ongoing basis. All vibration levels
                                                    measured by the monitors shall be logged with
                                                    documentation of the measurements provided to the
                                                    City. If DDC vibration levels at any time exceed the
                                                    0.02 inches per second PPV threshold level, DDC
                                                    activity shall immediately stop, until new drop
                                                    parameters are established that would reduce the
                                                    vibration levels to less than the 0.02 inches per
                                                    second PPV threshold level.
          Mitigation Measure H-4: A construction and construction-related monitor satisfactory
                         to the Department of Development Services General Manager shall be
                         retained by the Applicant to document compliance with the mitigation
                         measures. Said Monitor’s qualifications, identification, address and telephone
                         number shall be listed in the contracts and shall be placed in the pertinent files
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                     Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                         November 2005
                                                      Page 46
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                         of the Department of Development Services Department. The Monitor will be
                         required to monitor all construction and construction-related activities on the
                         site on a periodic basis; keep all written records which shall be open for public
                         inspection; and to file monthly reports with City and appropriate permit
                         granting authorities. In addition:
                    1. Information shall be provided on a regular basis regarding construction
                         activities and their duration. A Construction Relations Officer shall be
                         established and funded by the Applicant, and approved by the Department of
                         Development Services General Manager, to act as a liaison with neighbors
                         and residents concerning on-site construction activity. As part of this
                         mitigation measure, the Applicant shall establish a 24-hour telephone
                         construction hotline which will be staffed between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and
                         5:00 P.M. on a daily basis throughout the Project’s entire construction period
                         for the purposes of answering questions and resolving disputes with adjacent
                         property owners. The hotline number shall be posted on site.
                    2. The Applicant shall require in all construction and construction-related
                         contracts and subcontracts, provisions requiring compliance with special
                         environmental conditions included in all relevant entitlement approval actions
                         of the City of Carson. Such provisions shall also include retention of the
                         power to effect prompt corrective action by the applicant, its representative or
                         prime contractor, subcontractor or operator to correct noticed noncompliance.
                    3. During construction loading and staging areas must be located on-site and
                         away from the most noise-sensitive uses surrounding the site as determined by
                         the Planning Manager.
               (b) Operation
          Mitigation Measure H-5: All parking lots near residential areas shall be located a
                         minimum of 150 feet from an off-site residential use unless a minimum eight
                         foot wall is provided along the property boundary to limit noise levels
                         associated with parking lot activities.
          Mitigation Measure H-6: All parking structures near residential areas shall be located a
                         minimum of 150 feet from an off-site residential use unless the exterior wall
                         of the parking structure that faces the off-site residential use is a solid wall or
                         provides acoustical louvers (or equivalent noise reduction measures).
          Mitigation Measure H-7: During operation of a building (following construction), truck
                         delivery should be limited to non-peak traffic periods between 7:00 A.M. and
                         8:00 P.M., if feasible.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                     Page 47
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Mitigation Measure H-8: For the residential uses immediately south and north of Del
                         Amo Boulevard, within Development Districts 1 and 3, all exterior walls and
                         floor-ceiling assemblies (unless within a unit) shall be constructed with
                         double-paned glass or an equivalent and in a manner to provide an airborne
                         sound insulation system achieving a Sound Transmission Class of 50 (45 if
                         field tested) as defined in the UBC Standard No. 35-1, 1982 edition. Sign-off
                         by the Department of Development Services General Manager, or his/her
                         designee, is required prior to the issuance of the first building permit. The
                         Applicant, as an alternative, may retain an engineer registered in the State of
                         California with expertise in acoustical engineering, who would submit a
                         signed report for an alternative means of sound insulation satisfactory to the
                         City of Carson which achieves a maximum interior noise of CNEL 45
                         (residential standard).
          Mitigation Measure H-9: The balconies of the first row of residential units facing Del
                         Amo Boulevard or I-405 Freeway, should any such balconies be constructed,
                         shall have a solid fence/wall with an appropriate height to reduce the noise
                         received from traffic traveled on the adjacent Boulevard.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning and Building and Safety Divisions
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning and Building and Safety Divisions
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure H-10: If any noise intensive uses (i.e., outdoor theater, passenger
                         station (bus station, rail station, taxi stand), small recycling facility, or
                         commercial uses (outdoor activities, amplified music, outdoor patios, etc)) are
                         proposed within 300 feet of an on-site or off-site residential use, then as part
                         of the site plan review process, a community noise study shall be completed
                         and the study shall demonstrate that the use would not exceed the City of
                         Carson Municipal Code noise standards and/or the standards established in
                         this EIR.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                   Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                       November 2005
                                                      Page 48
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                            CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          c. Cumulative Impacts
               (1) Construction
          Noise impacts during construction of the proposed Project and each related project (that
has not already been built) would be short-term, limited to the duration of construction and
would be localized. In addition, it is anticipated that each of the related projects would have to
comply with the applicable provisions of the City’s noise ordinance, as well as mitigation
measures that may be prescribed by the City pursuant to CEQA provisions that require
significant impacts to be reduced to the extent feasible. However, since noise impacts due to
construction of the proposed Project would be significant on its own, noise impacts due to
construction of the proposed Project in combination with any of the related projects would also
be significant without mitigation.
               (2) Operation
          Cumulative traffic volumes would result in a maximum increase of 4.5 dBA CNEL along
Del Amo Boulevard, between Main Street and Figueroa Street. As this noise level increase
would be below the 5 dBA CNEL significance threshold for “normally acceptable” land uses,
roadway noise impacts due to cumulative traffic volumes would be less than significant along
segments of Del Amo Boulevard. Furthermore, impacts from Project-related traffic noise along
all other local roadway segments with sensitive receptors would be lower than the significance
threshold of 3 dBA CNEL for sensitive receptors exposed to or within “normally unacceptable”
or “clearly unacceptable” categories and, thus, less than significant.
          Due to Carson Municipal Code provisions that limit noise from stationary sources such as
roof-top mechanical equipment and emergency generators, noise levels would be less than
significant at the property line for each related project. For this reason on-site noise produced by
any related project would not be additive to Project-related noise levels. As such, stationary-
source noise impacts attributable to cumulative development would be less than significant.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
               (1) Construction
          The mitigation measures recommended above would reduce the noise levels associated
with construction activities to some extent. However, these activities would continue to increase
the daytime noise levels at nearby noise-sensitive uses by more than the 5-dBA significance
threshold. As such, noise impacts during construction would be considered significant and
unavoidable. Furthermore, noise impacts during pile driving are concluded to be significant due
to the frequency with which this impact is going to occur and the circumstance in which this
impact cannot be mitigated given the construction techniques that are required for the Project
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                    November 2005
                                                Page 49
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
site. Vibration impacts associated with DDC operations during Project construction are
concluded to be less than significant with the implementation of Mitigation Measures H-2 and H-
3.
               (2) Operations
          With implementation of Mitigation Measures H-4 through H-10 described above,
operational noise impacts to the off-site existing residential uses located to the south and west of
the Project site, as well as on-site residential development, would be reduced to less than
significant levels. In addition, the Project site would provide some noise-attenuation/shielding
characteristics from I-405 Freeway traffic noise to the area, particularly for residential uses
located south and west of the Project site.
    9.9 Fire Protection
          a. Environmental Impacts
          Construction activities could temporarily increase demand on fire services due to the
occasional exposure of combustible building materials to on-site heat sources or vandalism. The
existing perimeter fence would remain in place throughout construction to reduce the potential
for hazards associated with trespassing and vandalism. The Project would comply with OSHA
and City Fire and Building Codes regarding building site and workplace safety. From the nearest
fire station, the Project’s internal streets would be accessed via the intersections of Main Street
and Del Amo Boulevard and Main Street and Lenardo Drive. The Project’s access plan would
not facilitate optimum response to all areas of the site, since Fire Station 36 is located to the
south of the Project Site. The construction and occupancy of the Project would increase the
demand for LACoFD staffing, equipment, and facilities and, as such, would be potentially
significant. With the incorporation of recommended mitigation measures, impacts on LACoFD
facilities would be reduced to a less than significant level.
          b. Mitigation Measures
          The Project’s potentially significant demand on existing fire service facilities would be
reduced to a less than significant level through the implementation of all applicable fire code
regulations and mandatory fee payments. To ensure that all applicable fire code regulations,
mandatory fee payments and recommended fire safety measures are incorporated into the
Project, the following mitigation measures are recommended:
          Mitigation Measure I.1-1: Prior to construction, the Applicant shall submit buildings
                         plans to the Los Angeles County Fire Department (LACoFD) for review.
                         Based on such plan check, any additional fire safety recommendations shall be
                         implemented to the satisfaction of the LACoFD.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                    November 2005
                                                   Page 50
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Mitigation Measure I.1-2: The Applicant shall provide adequate ingress/egress access
                         points for emergency response to the satisfaction of the LACoFD.
          Mitigation Measure I.1-3: The Applicant shall comply with all applicable fire code and
                         ordinance requirements for construction, access, water mains, fire flows, and
                         fire hydrants as required by the LACoFD.
          Mitigation Measure I.1-4: Every building shall be accessible to Fire Department
                         apparatus by way of access roadways, with an all-weather surface of not less
                         than the width prescribed by the LACoFD. The roadway shall extend to
                         within 150 feet of all portions of exterior building walls when measured by an
                         unobstructed route around the exterior of the building.
          Mitigation Measure I.1-5: Requirements for access, fire flows, and hydrants, shall be
                         addressed during the City’s subdivision tentative map stage.
          Mitigation Measure I.1-6: Fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all residential and
                         commercial occupancies to the satisfaction of the LACoFD.
          Mitigation Measure I.1-7: The Applicant shall assure that adequate water pressure is
                         available to meet Code-required fire flow. Based on the size of the buildings,
                         proximity of other structures, and construction type, a maximum fire flow up
                         to 5,000 gallons per minute (gpm) at 20 pounds per square inch (psi) residual
                         pressure for up to a four-hour duration may be required.
          Mitigation Measure I.1-8: Fire hydrant spacing shall be 300 feet and shall meet the
                         following requirements:
                    –    No portion of a lot’s frontage shall be more than 200 feet via vehicular access
                         from a properly spaced fire hydrant;
                    –    No portion of a building shall exceed 400 feet via vehicular access from a
                         properly spaced fire hydrant;
                    –    Additional hydrants shall be required if spacing exceeds specified distances;
                    –    When a cul-de-sac depth exceeds 200 feet on a commercial street, hydrants
                         shall be required at the corner and mid-block;
                    –    A cul-de-sac shall not be more than 500 feet in length, when serving land
                         zoned for commercial use; and
               –    Turning radii in a commercial zone shall not be less than 32 feet. The
                    measurement shall be determined at the centerline of the road. A turning area
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                   Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                       November 2005
                                                     Page 51
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                    shall be provided for all driveways exceeding 150 feet in length at the end of all
                    cul-ce-sacs, to the satisfaction of the LACoFD.
          Mitigation Measure I.1-9: All onsite driveways and roadways shall provide a minimum
                         unobstructed (clear-to-sky) width of 28 feet. The onsite driveways shall be
                         within 150 feet of all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of any
                         building. The centerline of the access driveway shall be located parallel to,
                         and within 30 feet of an exterior wall on one side of the proposed structure.
          Mitigation Measure I.1-10:               All onsite driveways shall provide a minimum
                         unobstructed, clear-to-sky width of 28 feet. Driveway width shall be
                         increased under the following conditions:
                    –    If parallel parking is allowed on one side of the access roadway/driveway, the
                         roadway width shall be 34 feet; and
               –    If parallel parking is allowed on both sides of the access roadway/driveway, the
                    roadway width shall be 36 feet in a residential area or 42 feet in a commercial
                    area.
          Mitigation Measure I.1-11: The entrance to any street or driveway with parking
                         restrictions shall be posted with LACoFD approved signs stating “NO
                         PARKING – FIRE LANE” in 3-inch-high letters, at intermittent distances of
                         150 feet. Any access way that is less than 34 feet in width shall be labeled
                         “Fire Lane” on the final tract map and final building plans.
          Mitigation Measure I.1-12: The following standards apply to the Project’s residential
                         component only:
                    –    A cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of 34 feet in width and shall not be more
                         than 700 feet in length;
                    –    The length of the cul-de-sac may be increased to 1,000 feet if a minimum 36-
                         foot-wide roadway is provided; and
               –    A LACoFD approved turning radius shall be provided at the terminus of all
                    residential cul-de-sacs.
          Mitigation Measure I.1-13: The Applicant shall pay a fair share contribution for the
                         improvement of fire service facilities that are required to off-set impacts of the
                         Project, subject to approval of the County of Los Angles Fire Department.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                     Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                         November 2005
                                                     Page 52
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                            CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          The Project and related projects would increase demand on fire services. As with the
Project, most of the related projects would be subject to discretionary review, including an
evaluation of the adequacy of fire services and the need for mitigation measures. With the
implementation of Fire Department recommendations and existing Fire Code requirements. The
Project would mitigate its impacts through a fair share contribution for new facilities and
therefore not contribute to a cumulative impact. However, since it is unknown what fees would
be paid by other projects, it is conservatively concluded that the impacts of the related projects
on fire services would be significant.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          The Project’s potentially significant demand on existing fire service facilities would be
reduced to a less than significant level through the implementation of all applicable fire code
regulations and recommended mitigation measures. Thus, no unavoidable significant impacts
relative to fire services would occur.
    9.10 Police
          a. Environmental Impacts
               (1) Construction Impacts
          The Project’s construction activities would constitute a less than significant impact with
regard to emergency access, since blockage or a substantial slowing of emergency vehicles is not
anticipated. Furthermore, implementation of a Construction Management Plan and coordination
between the Project’s construction managers and the Sheriff’s Department, the potential impact
of construction on emergency access would be reduced to a less than significant level. As it is
anticipated that the existing chain-link fence that secures the perimeter of the Project site would
be maintained throughout construction and that an on-site security force would be on duty at the
Project site throughout construction, construction impacts would be less than significant.
               (2) Operational Impacts
          Implementation of the Project would increase the demand for police services provided by
the Sheriff’s Department due to the Project’s permanent on-site residential population and
increased traffic, employees, and patrons. The Project’s increase in demand could be met
through current authorized sworn personnel. Notwithstanding, based upon currently deployed
personnel, Project impacts are concluded to be significant, prior to mitigation. Crimes such as
shoplifting and burglaries to vehicles that are generally associated with shopping and
entertainment areas are anticipated to occur on-site. However, the proposed Project is
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                               Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                   November 2005
                                                Page 53
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
anticipated to provide on-site security personnel in support of the proposed on-site commercial
uses. Emergency access during Project operations would be provided via several new
intersections and/or existing intersections and would not be impeded. Thus, no significant
impacts related to emergency access would occur. As detailed design drawings of the Project are
not currently available, impacts due to the Project’s design are conservatively concluded to be
significant.
          b. Mitigation Measures
          The following mitigation measures are based on the recommendations provided by
Sheriff’s Department regarding the proposed Project as well as a requirement regarding the
provision of private security service within Districts 1 and 2:
          Mitigation Measure I.2-1: The Applicant shall provide private security services within
                         the areas of Districts 1, 2, and 3 that are occupied by commercial
                         development. On-site security services shall maintain an ongoing dialogue
                         with the Sheriff’s Department so as to maximize the value of the security
                         service that are provided.
          Mitigation Measure I.2-2: The Applicant shall incorporate into the Project design a
                         Community Safety Center for use by the Project’s private security force and
                         the Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department. It shall include the following
                         features at a minimum: a front desk/reception area, a community meeting
                         room, work space for law enforcement and public safety personnel, a video
                         monitoring console, and restrooms. The Center shall be staffed by either a
                         Sheriff’s Department Community Services Officer or personnel approved by
                         the Sheriff’s Department.
          Mitigation Measure I.2-3: The Applicant shall install video cameras throughout the
                         commercial development within Districts 1, 2, and 3 with a digitally recorded
                         feed to the Community Safety Center that is also accessible via the internet at
                         the Carson Sheriff’s Station.
          Mitigation Measure I.2-4: The Applicant shall provide the Project’s fair share of a
                         budget for the deployment of a one person patrol unit, which is dedicated to
                         providing preventative patrol on the commercial portions of the Project site.
          Mitigation Measure I.2-5: The Applicant shall fund Deputy Sheriffs on an overtime
                         basis to augment security during peak periods, as jointly determined by the
                         Applicant or its successor, and the Sheriff’s Department.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                  Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                      November 2005
                                                    Page 54
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Mitigation Measure I.2-6: The management of the entertainment venues located within
                         the Project site shall notify the Sheriff’s Station in advance of planned
                         activities (i.e. movie schedules).
          Mitigation Measure I.2-7: The Sheriff’s Department Crime Prevention Unit shall be
                         contacted for advice on crime prevention programs that could be incorporated
                         into the proposed Project, including Neighborhood Watch.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
               (1) Construction Impacts
          Since no related projects are sufficiently close to the Project site to create a cumulative
impact on adjoining street segments, the cumulative effects of construction activities on
emergency access would be less than significant. In addition, the related projects are also
anticipated to maintain secure sites during the respective construction periods, so that cumulative
construction activities would not result in a demand on police services greater than the existing
capability of the Sheriff’s Department.
               (2) Operational Impacts
          As with the Project, most of the related projects would be subject to discretionary review,
including an evaluation of the adequacy of police services and the need for mitigation measures.
As the Project’s impacts would be addressed via the identified migration measures, the Project
would not contribute to a significant cumulative impact. Furthermore, the Sheriff’s Department
would have input regarding mitigation for each of the related projects. Thus, cumulative impacts
are concluded to be less than significant.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          With the implementation of the recommended mitigation measures, impacts to police
services and facilities provided by the Sheriff’s Department would be less than significant.
    9.11 Schools
          a. Environmental Impacts
          The Project would generate approximately 489 students, consisting of 213 elementary
school students, -119 middle school students, and 157 high school students. While Project-
generated middle school students could be accommodated by existing facilities at White Middle
School, increased enrollment attributable to the proposed Project would exceed existing school
capacities at Carson Elementary School and Carson High School. However, the payment of the
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                    November 2005
                                                     Page 55
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                           CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
requisite school facility development fees would offset the Project’s potential impacts to these
schools. As a result, Project development would result in an impact that is less than significant
to the LAUSD schools that serve the Project site.
          b. Mitigation Measures
          The Applicant would be required to pay new school facility development fees at the time
of building permit issuance. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65995, payment
of the developer fees required by State law provides full and complete mitigation of the Project’s
impacts on school facilities. Therefore, no other mitigation measures are required.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          Cumulative impacts related to schools were considered only for projects within the same
attendance boundaries as the schools identified to serve the Project. The related projects
identified would generate approximately 197 students: 15 Elementary, 76 Middle, and 106 High
School. The generation of students from the related projects in combination with students
generated by the proposed Project would result in a potentially significant impact to all of the
identified LAUSD schools as existing school capacities would be exceeded. School capacity can
be increased by the use of portable or modular classrooms and the implementation of year-round
or multi-track school calendar. Portable classrooms are generally used to relieve overcrowded
schools and are designed to accommodate 25 students per portable unit for elementary schools
and 30 students per portable unit for middle and high schools. Implementing year-round and
multi-track calendars also serve to increase school capacity by roughly one-third. However, the
school facility development fees that would be paid by all new development, under the
provisions of Government Code Section 65995, would constitute full mitigation of the impacts of
these new developments, thereby reducing individual and cumulative Project impacts to a level
that is less than significant.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          Potential impacts to LAUSD middle and high schools associated with the proposed
Project, based on available forecasted capacity within existing facilities, would be potentially
significant. While the students generated by the proposed Project would increase the forecasted
over-capacity conditions at Carson Elementary School and Carson Senior High School, pursuant
to the provisions of Government Code Section 65995, the Project’s impact on school facilities is
fully mitigated through the payment of the requisite school facility development fees current at
the time building permits are issued. As the Project applicant is required to pay school facility
development fees, potential Project impacts to schools are concluded to be less than significant.
Therefore, potential impacts to all LAUSD school facilities attributable to the proposed Project
would be less than significant.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                             Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                 November 2005
                                              Page 56
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                              CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
    9.12 Parks and Recreation
          a. Environmental Impacts
          Common and private open space would be provided throughout the residential areas of
the Project site. Per the requirements of the Specific Plan, a minimum of 60 square feet of
private open space would be provided per dwelling unit with a minimum dimension of five feet
in any direction. Also pursuant to the Specific Plan, a minimum of 300 square feet of common
open space would be provided per dwelling unit in District 3; a minimum of 200 square feet per
ownership unit in District 1; and a minimum of 150 square feet minimum per rental unit in
District 1. Common open space for each unit would have a minimum dimension of 10 feet in
any direction. With 1,550 dwelling units, this would equate to 315,000 sq.ft., or 7.23 acres. In
addition, the Project includes approximately 9.0 acres of open space along the southern and
southwestern edges of the Project site. Recreational amenities that would also be available for
use by the Project’s residents would also contribute to the Project’s common open space
provisions. Specifically, to meet the recreational needs of Project residents, health clubs on the
ground floor of the multi-family apartment buildings are proposed as well as bicycle and
pedestrian routes throughout the Project site. The Project would meet the Carson Municipal
Code requirements for the provision of park space through a combination of land dedication, on-
site improvements, and/or, the payment of in-lieu fees, and thus, would have a less than
significant impact with regard to the provision of park space. While the Project provides less
private open space than that required by the Carson Municipal Code, to assure that the intent of
these requirements are met, a mitigation measure is proposed to address this potentially
significant impact. While the Applicant has proposed various features to contribute to meeting
the City’s common open space requirement, the amount of such space has not been determined at
this time. Therefore, it is concluded that a significant impact may occur regarding the provision
of common open space, and a mitigation measure is recommend below, to require that the
common open-space standard be met. Project impacts would be potentially significant.
Mitigation measures are proposed to reduce the impact to a less than significant level
          b. Mitigation Measures
          Two mitigation measures are proposed to address potential impacts on parks and
recreation services. The first measure addresses impacts on public recreation facilities. Even
though a significant impact on such facilities is not anticipated, the related measure ensures that
the Project’s contribution to parks and recreation facilities meets the City’s Quimby
requirements. The second measure addresses a potentially significant impact that could occur
regarding the provision of private open space.
          Mitigation Measure I.4-1: The Project shall provide park and recreation facilities
                         pursuant to Section 9207.19, equivalent to three acres per 1,000 population,
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                    November 2005
                                                  Page 57
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
                         that would be met through the provision of park space, on-site improvements,
                         and/or, the payment of in-lieu fees.
          Mitigation Measure I.4-2: The Project shall meet the intent of Municipal Code Sections
                         9128.54 and 9128.15 through the provision of private open space as defined
                         therein and/or the provision of additional amenities that meet the recreational
                         needs of Project residents, e.g., health clubs.
          Mitigation Measure I.4-3: The Project shall meet the requirements of Municipal Code
                         Section 9126.28 by demonstrating that the Project’s common open space area
                         meets the 40% standard established therein.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          Of the 36 related projects, 17 are residential in nature or contain a residential component.
A total of 609 dwelling units are anticipated to be constructed with implementation of these
projects; 163 single-family and 446 multiple-family units. Land dedication requirements for the
related projects were calculated base on the land dedication factors set forth in the Carson
Municipal Code for each dwelling unit type. As each related project would comply with the
requirements established in the Carson Municipal Code, the potential park and open space
impacts of the related projects would be reduced to levels that are less than significant.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          Potential significant impacts to park and recreational facilities associated with the
proposed Project, based on the maximum requirements established via the Carson Municipal
Code, would be reduced to a less than significant level via compliance with Mitigation Measure
I.4-1. A potentially significant impact with regard to the provision of private open space would
be reduced to a less than significant level via Mitigation Measure I.4-2. A potentially significant
impact with regard to the provision of common open space would be reduced to a less than
significant level via Mitigation Measure I.4-3. Project impacts would result in less than
significant impacts with regard to the adopted General Plan goals, policies and implementation
measures, nor open space requirements established in the Municipal Code. Thus, the Project
would meet the demand for services as addressed through those provisions. Therefore, potential
impacts to park and recreational facilities attributable to the proposed Project would be less than
significant.
    9.13 Libraries
          a. Environmental Impacts
          Project-generated residents would cause an increase in the Carson Regional Library’s
service population and create a significant impact on its services and facilities. The Carson
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                  Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                      November 2005
                                                     Page 58
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
Regional Library is currently underserved in terms of facility size and library material items,
providing approximately 0.34 square feet of facility space and 2.6 library items per capita,
thereby, not meeting the County Library minimum guidelines of 0.5 square feet of facility space
and 2.75 library items per capita. The proposed Project would generate the need for 3,485
square feet of library facility space, 19,165 library collection items, 17 reader seats, 75 meeting
room seats, 7 public access computers, and 14 standard size parking spaces. Thus, a significant
impact would result.
          b. Mitigation Measures
          To address the Project’s significant impact, the following mitigation measure will apply:
          Mitigation Measure I.5-1: The Applicant shall pay a fair share contribution for the
                         improvement of library facilities that are required to off-set impacts of the
                         Project, subject to approval of the County of Los Angles Public Library.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          Approximately half of the 609 dwelling units proposed by related projects are located
both within the City of Carson and in the Carson Library service area. The development of the
related projects would create additional demand on the Carson Library’s facilities and services
and cause the Library to further exceed the County guidelines for the provision of library
facilities. In sum, the combined residential population would create the need for an additional
4,023 square feet of facility space, 22,127 library material items, 20 reader seats, 16 meeting
room seats, 8 computers, and 16 parking spaces. Thus, without mitigation, the development of
the identified related projects would result in a significant impact on library services due to lack
of available capacity to meet the demand for library services. The Project, via the
implementation of the recommended mitigation measure, would not increase the cumulative
impact that would be generated by the identified related projects. Notwithstanding, since it is
unknown what fees would be paid by other projects, it is conservatively concluded that the
impacts of the identified related projects on library services would be significant.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          Through the payment of fees Project impacts would be reduced to a less than significant
level.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                  Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                      November 2005
                                                    Page 59
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
    9.14 Water Supply
          a. Environmental Impacts
          Water would be used for dust suppression and other construction activities. Such demand
would be limited and, as such, would be less than significant. New tie-ins to the existing water
mains in Main Street and Del Amo Boulevard may be required to serve the existing on-site
system. During operation, water demand is estimated to be 795,470 gallons per day, which
represents 42.3 percent of the forecasted growth for the Dominguez District through 2010.
Based on the Project’s Water Supply Assessment (WSA), the City’s water supplier, California
Water Services Company (CWS), has concluded that the needed quantity of water, and its
conveyance to the Project site, are sufficient to meet Project needs. The development of
commercial/high-density residential development may require fire flows up to 5,000 gallons per
minute at 20 pounds per square inch residual pressure for up to a five-hour duration. The
existing water mains are anticipated to be sufficient to meet fire flow requirements, as they were
originally sized to meet future development needs in the Project area. Fire flow would be
determined at the time a specific development application is submitted and any new lines would
be sized to meet the Project’s fire flow requirements. Since the Project’s demand would not
exceed the available water supply or the fire flow capacity of the existing conveyance system,
the Project’s impact on water supply would be less than significant.
          b. Mitigation Measures
          Although development of the proposed Project is not anticipated to result in significant
impacts to water supply services, the following measures would ensure that water resources
would be conserved to the extent feasible:
          Mitigation Measure J.1-1: The Building Department and the Planning Division shall
                         review building plans to ensure that water reducing measures are utilized, as
                         required by Title 20 and Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. These
                         measures include, but are not limited to, water conserving dishwashers, low-
                         volume toilet tanks, and flow control devices for faucets.
          Mitigation Measure J.1-2: The Project shall comply with the City’s landscape ordinance,
                         “A Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance,” as required by the State Water
                         Conservation Landscape Act.
          Mitigation Measure J.1-3: The Applicant shall provide reclaimed water for the
                         Project’s non-potable water needs, if feasible.
          Mitigation Measure J.1-4: Landscaping of the Project site shall utilize xeriscape (low-
                         maintenance, drought-resistant) plantings.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                   Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                       November 2005
                                                     Page 60
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                    CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Mitigation Measure J.1-5: Automatic irrigation systems shall be set to insure irrigation
                         during early morning or evening hours to minimize water loss due to
                         evaporation. Sprinklers must be reset to water less in cooler months and during
                         rainfall season so that water is not wasted on excessive landscape irrigation.
          Mitigation Measure J.1-6: The Project shall be designed to recycle all water used in
                         cooling systems to the maximum extent possible.
          Mitigation Measure J.1-7: To the maximum extent feasible, reclaimed water shall be
                         used during the grading and construction phase of the Project for the following
                         activities: (1) dust control, (2) soil compaction, and (3) concrete mixing.
          Mitigation Measure J.1-8: Water lines and hydrants shall be sized and located so as to
                         meet the fire flow requirements established by the Los Angeles County Fire
                         Department.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          The total consumption of water, inclusive of the Project, and the related projects, would
be approximately 1,808,282 gallons of water per day, constituting approximately 96 percent of
the forecasted Dominguez District growth to year 2010. Without monitoring and planning
pursuant to existing regulations, a significant cumulative impact could occur. The Urban Water
Management Plan (UWMP) prepared by CWS accounts for projected growth, and State
regulations provide the means to ensure that the water needs of notable development projects are
considered relative to the ability of the CWS to adequately meet future demand. The CWS
anticipates that it would be able to supply regional growth, including the Project and related
projects, through the foreseeable future. With implementation of mitigating State regulatory
protections, no significant cumulative impacts related to water demand are anticipated.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          The total estimated water demand for the Project is anticipated to exceed available
supplies and distribution infrastructure capabilities, or exceed the projected demand assumed in
the planning for future water infrastructure needs. No local or regional upgrading of water
conveyance systems is anticipated and, as such, no significant construction impacts from the
development of additional off-site water lines are anticipated. Therefore, no significant
unavoidable impacts relative to water supply would occur.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                       Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                           November 2005
                                                       Page 61
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
    9.15 Wastewater
          a. Environmental Impacts
          Construction activities would generate a negligible amount of wastewater. The Project’s
on-site wastewater system would be developed during the construction of the Project and may
require new tie-ins to the existing sewer lines in Main Street and Del Amo Boulevard. The
Project’s wastewater generation would be approximately 721,113 gallons per day (gpd).
Wastewater would be treated at the Joint Water Pollution Control Plant (JWPCP), which has a
design capacity of 385 million gallons per day (mgd). Since the JWPCP currently processes
an average flow of 324.9 mgd, the Project’s additional waste flow would require the use of
1.2 percent of the remaining 60.1 mgd capacity. The District’s review of sewer lines serving
the Project site indicate that no known limitations exist at this time. However, the District notes
that significant impacts on downstream portions of the District’s sewerage system can occur and
capacities need to be verified. The District reviews sewer connection permits and requires
payment of connection fees to construct any needed incremental expansion of the sewer system.
Such fees would mitigate the impact of the Project on the conveyance system. Wastewater
conveyance and treatment systems are designed to serve SCAG’s regional growth forecasts and,
since the Project is consistent with SCAG forecasts for the South Bay Cities sub-region, no
significant impacts in relation to regional treatment capacity would occur.
          b. Mitigation Measures
          Although development of the proposed Project is not anticipated to produce significant
impacts to sanitary sewers, the following measures would ensure that the increase in sewage
generation attributable to the Project would result in a less than significant impact.
          Mitigation Measure J.2-1: All required sewer improvements shall be designed and
                         constructed according to the standards of the City of Carson and County of Los
                         Angeles.
          Mitigation Measure J.2-2: Fee payment is required prior to the issuance of a permit to
                         connect to district sewer facilities.
          Mitigation Measure J.2-3: The Building and Safety and Planning Divisions of the
                         Development Services Department shall review building plans to ensure that
                         water reducing measures are utilized, as required by Title 24 of the California
                         Administrative Code. These measures include, but are not limited to, water
                         conserving dishwashers, low-volume toilet tanks, and flow control devices for
                         faucets.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                  Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                      November 2005
                                                      Page 62
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          Mitigation Measure J.2-4: The project shall include a dual plumbing system designed
                         to utilize reclaimed water for non-potable uses.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          Wastewater generated by related projects in conjunction with the proposed Project is
estimated to be 1,610,491 gallons of wastewater per day. The additional waste flow would
constitute 2.7 percent of the JWPCP’s remaining 60.1 mgd capacity and, as such, would not
exceed existing capacity. As with the Project, the capacity of downstream mains would be
determined through the review of connection permits, prior to approval of related projects’
building plans. Required connection fees would provide for needed incremental expansion of
sewer lines. Therefore, related projects would not exceed the capacity of the treatment and
conveyance system and cumulative impacts on the wastewater facilities would be less than
significant.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          With the implementation of the recommended mitigation measures, any local deficiencies
in sewer lines would be identified and remedied. No unavoidable significant impacts on
wastewater conveyances or the capacity of the Joint Water Pollution Control Plant would occur.
    9.16 Solid Waste
          a. Environmental Impacts
          Construction and demolition debris would be generated during the construction of the
proposed Project. With the implementation of the City’s Construction and Demolition Debris
Recycling Program, the actual amount of construction debris disposed of at a landfill would be
approximately 6,222 tons.                However, as Project construction debris would represent
approximately .0009 percent of remaining inert landfill capacity, impacts attributable to the
Project’s construction debris are concluded to be less than significant. Municipal solid waste
generated by the residential and commercial uses proposed under the Project would require the
disposal of approximately 10,064 tons of solid waste per year. Through a combination of
compliance with City recycling requirements, the limited proportion of Countywide solid waste
generation attributable to the proposed Project, available capacity within the El Sobrante
Landfill, and the ongoing legally required solid waste planning programs, it is concluded that
Project operations would have a less than significant impact with regard to landfill disposal
capacity. As the Project would comply with City-required recycling programs, Project
operations would be consistent with the applicable provisions of the SRRE. As such, a less than
significant impact would result.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                             Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                 November 2005
                                                     Page 63
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          b. Mitigation Measures
          Mitigation Measure J.3-1: All structures constructed or uses established within any part
                         of the proposed Project site shall be designed to be permanently equipped with
                         clearly marked, durable, source sorted recycling bins at all times to facilitate
                         the separation and deposit of recyclable materials.
          Mitigation Measure J.3-2: Primary collection bins shall be designed to facilitate
                         mechanized collection of such recyclable wastes for transport to on- or off-site
                         recycling facilities.
          Mitigation Measure J.3-3: The Applicant shall coordinate with the City of Carson to
                         continuously maintain in good order for the convenience of patrons,
                         employees, and residents clearly marked, durable and separate recycling bins
                         on the same lot, or parcel to facilitate the deposit of recyclable or commingled
                         waste metal, cardboard, paper, glass, and plastic therein; maintain
                         accessibility to such bins at all times, for collection of such wastes for
                         transport to on- or off-site recycling plants; and require waste haulers to utilize
                         local or regional material recovery facilities as feasible and appropriate.
          Mitigation Measure J.3-4: Any existing on-site roads that are torn up shall be ground
                         on site and recycled into the new road base.
          Mitigation Measure J.3-5: Compaction facilities for non-recyclable materials shall be
                         provided in every occupied building greater than 20,000 square fee in size to
                         reduce both the total volume of solid waste produced and the number of trips
                         required for collection, to the extent feasible.
          Mitigation Measure J.3-6: All construction debris shall be recycled in a practical,
                         available, accessible manner, to the extent feasible, during the construction
                         phase.
          c. Cumulative Impacts
          Development of the identified related projects would generate 23,052 tons of solid waste
during construction. As with the proposed Project, pursuant to the City’s Construction and
Demolition Debris Recycling Program, at least 50 percent of the construction debris generated
by the related projects would be required to be recycled. In comparison to a remaining inert
landfill disposal capacity of 69.94 million tons, cumulative construction debris, incorporating the
conservative assumption that there is no recycling of construction wastes, constitutes 0.03
percent of the remaining inert landfill capacity. Based on this small percentage, cumulative
impacts on inert landfill capacity are concluded to be less than significant.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                     Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                         November 2005
                                                      Page 64
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
          During operations, cumulative solid waste disposal for the related projects is forecasted
to be approximately 36,630 tons on an annual basis. It is anticipated that the proposed Project
and other related projects would not conflict with solid waste policies and objectives in the
City’s SRRE or Construction and Demolition Debris Recycling Program. Impacts to solid waste
policies and objectives intended to help achieve the requirements of AB 939 from
implementation of the proposed Project and related projects would not be cumulatively
significant. Cumulative annual solid waste generation represents 0.15 percent of the total solid
waste generated in Los Angeles County in 2003. Based on this small percentage as well as the
City’s recycling programs and ongoing planning efforts at a Countywide level assuring 15 years
of landfill capacity on an ongoing basis, cumulative impacts on municipal landfill capacity are
concluded to be less than significant.
          d. Level of Significance After Mitigation
          Impacts associated with the Project’s solid waste generation are concluded to be less than
significant. Furthermore, the County via its established planning programs, has concluded that
landfill disposal capacity would be available for the next 15 years, and in the long-term. The
proposed Project would not conflict with the solid waste policies and objectives in the SRRE or
the City’s Construction and Demolition Debris Recycling Program and impacts relative to
adopted solid waste diversion programs and policies would be less than significant.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                              Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                  November 2005
                                                Page 65
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE EIR SUMMARY
This page intentionally left blank.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                               Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                   November 2005
                                          Page 66
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   APPENDICES
                                                               Appendix E	
                                          Mitigation Monitoring Program
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                                 127
April 5, 2011
APPENDICES
This page intentionally left blank.
128                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                 April 5, 2011
                                        CARSON MARKETPLACE
                  MITIGATION MONITORING AND REPORTING PROGRAM
A.        INTRODUCTION
          This Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program (MMRP) has been prepared in
accordance with Section 21081.6 of the Public Resources Code and Section 15097 of the CEQA
Guidelines, which require adoption of a Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program for all
projects for which an Environmental Impact Report or Mitigated Negative Declaration has been
prepared. Specifically, Section 21081.6 of the Public Resources Code states: “…the [lead]
agency shall adopt a reporting or monitoring program for the changes made to the project or
conditions of project approval, adopted in order to mitigate or avoid significant effects on the
environment… [and that program]… shall be designed to ensure compliance during project
implementation.” The City of Carson Community Redevelopment Department is the Lead
Agency for the proposed Project.
          The MMRP describes the procedures for the implementation of all of the mitigation
measures identified in the EIR for the proposed Project. It is the intent of the MMRP to:
(1) verify satisfaction of the required mitigation measures of the EIR; (2) provide a methodology
to document implementation of the required mitigation; (3) provide a record of the Monitoring
Program; (4) identify monitoring responsibility; and (5) establish administrative procedures for
the clearance of mitigation measures.
          The MMRP lists mitigation measures according to the same numbering system contained
in the Draft EIR sections. Each mitigation measure is categorized by topic, with an
accompanying discussion of the following:
          •    The enforcement agency (i.e., the agency with the authority to enforce the mitigation
               measure);
          •    The monitoring agency (i.e., the agency to which mitigation reports involving
               feasibility, compliance, implementation, and development operation are made).
          •    The phase of the Project during which the mitigation measure should be monitored
               (i.e., prior to issuance of a building permit, construction, or occupancy);
          The Applicant shall be obligated to demonstrate that compliance with the required
mitigation measures has been effected. All departments listed below are within the City of
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                  Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                      November 2005
                                                     Page 1
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
Carson unless otherwise noted. The entity responsible for the implementation of all mitigation
measures shall be the Applicant unless otherwise noted.
B.        MITIGATION MEASURES
    1. Land Use
          No land use mitigation measures are identified in the EIR.
          2. Visual Resources
          Mitigation Measure B-1: The minimum setback for hotel and theater uses along the
                         Torrance Lateral, adjacent to residential uses, shall be 250 feet.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure B-2: The distribution, placement and orientation of signs along the
                         I-405 Freeway shall be in substantial compliance with the signage concepts
                         presented in the Conceptual Plan.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure B-3: The line of sight between lighted signs on the Project site and
                         existing residential development along the Torrance Lateral, opposite to the
                         Project site shall be minimized.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                      Page 2
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure B-4: All Project development shall undergo site plan review by the
                         Planning Manager to assure that the following design measures have been
                         implemented:
                             –   Landscaping. All Landscaping shall be consistent with a plant palate
                                 of native trees, shrubs and groundcovers that shall add uniformity to
                                 the Project site. Plants shall be selected to support and complement
                                 the themes of the various Project components. Specially themed
                                 landscaping treatments shall occur at key locations (e.g. freeway edge,
                                 channel slope and lifestyle and entertainment area). Of more detailed
                                 note: (1) landscaping themes on Del Amo Boulevard and Main Street
                                 shall be coordinated with the landscaping of the Carson Street
                                 Conceptual Visualization and the Home Depot Center; (2) continuous
                                 shrub and ground cover plantings shall be provided in the medians and
                                 edges of internal streets with vertical landscape and/or hardscape
                                 elements at a minimum of every 50 feet along the edges; (3) 5%
                                 landscape coverage shall be provided in parking lots, and (4) 50%
                                 landscape coverage shall be provided on the sides of parking structures
                                 visible to residences.
                             –   Buildings. Buildings shall include the following design features:
                                 Varied and articulated building façades featuring the use of colorful
                                 stucco, with a variety of architectural accent materials for exterior
                                 treatment at visually accessible locations.
                             –   Accessory facilities and Walls. Wall facades shall be varied and
                                 articulated. Accessory facilities such as trash bins, storage areas, etc.,
                                 shall be covered and screened.
                             –   Lighting. Lighting shall be limited in intensity, light control methods,
                                 and pole heights, so as to be directed on site, and not interfere with
                                 off-site activities.
    3. Transportation and Circulation
          a. Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-1: The Project shall submit a Construction Traffic Management
                         Plan or Worksite Traffic Control Plan (WTCP) to the City and appropriate
                         police and fire services prior to the start of any construction work phase,
                         which includes Project scheduling and the location of any roadway closures,
                         traffic detours, haul routes, protective devices, and warning signs, for the
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                       Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                           November 2005
                                                      Page 3
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         purpose of minimizing pedestrian and vehicular impediment and interference
                         of emergency vehicles from Project construction activities.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-2: During construction, at least one sidewalk on either the north
                         or south side of Del Amo Boulevard shall remain open and accessible to
                         pedestrian traffic.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          b. Operation
               (1) Intersection Mitigation Measures:
          Mitigation Measure C-3: Vermont Avenue and Del Amo Boulevard (Intersection No.
                         5): A second left-turn lane shall be added to westbound Del Amo Boulevard.
                         –   The westbound approach shall be improved to include two left-turn lanes,
                             a through lane, and a right-turn lane. The improvement is feasible within
                             the existing right-of-way.
                         –   This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of development
                             in which the Project generates 51 to 60 percent of its total trips, in
                             accordance with Draft EIR Table 25, included herein as Table 1 on page 5
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                     Page 4
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                      Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                                                      Table 1
                                    Intersection Mitigation Phasing Schedule
       Percentage of Total Trips
        Triggering Significant
                 Impacts a                              Significantly Impacted Intersection
              1 to 10 Percent        Intersection No. 6: Hamilton Avenue & Del Amo Boulevard
                                     Intersection No. 7: Figueroa Street & Del Amo Boulevard
                                     Intersection No. 12: Figueroa Street & I-110 NB Ramps
             11 to 20 Percent        No change
             21 to 30 Percent        Intersection No. 11: Hamilton Avenue & I-110 NB Ramps
                                     Intersection No. 25: Avalon Boulevard & Carson Street
             31 to 40 Percent        Intersection No. 22: Vermont Avenue & Carson Street
             41 to 50 Percent        No change
             51 to 60 Percent        Intersection No. 5: Vermont Avenue & Del Amo Boulevard
                                     Intersection No. 8: Main Street & Del Amo Boulevard
             61 to 70 Percent        Intersection No. 24: Avalon Boulevard & Carson Street
             71 to 80 Percent        Intersection No. 15: Figueroa Street & Torrance Boulevard
                                     Intersection No. 23: Figueroa Street & Carson Street
             81 to 90 Percent        Intersection No. 16: Main Street & Torrance Boulevard
            91 to 100 Percent        No change
    a
      : Mitigation measures are phased in relation to 10 percent increases in Project trips.
    Source: Kaku Associates, October 2005
          Mitigation Measure C-4: Hamilton Avenue & Del Amo Boulevard (Intersection No.
                         6):
                             − The Applicant shall install a traffic signal at this location.
                             − A right-turn lane shall be added to northbound Hamilton Avenue. The
                               northbound approach shall be improved to include a left-turn lane, two
                               through lanes, and a right-turn lane. This improvement is feasible
                               within the existing right-of-way.
                             − This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of
                               development in which the Project generates 1 to 10 percent of its total
                               trips, in accordance with Table 1 above .
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                          Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                              November 2005
                                                       Page 5
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-5: Figueroa Street & Del Amo Boulevard (Intersection No. 7):
                            − A right-turn lane shall be added to southbound Figueroa Street. The
                               southbound approach shall be improved to include one left-turn lane,
                               two through lanes, and a right-turn lane. This improvement is feasible
                               within the existing right-of-way
                            − A second westbound left-turn lane shall be added to westbound Del
                               Amo Boulevard. The westbound approach shall be improved to
                               include two left-turn lanes, two through lanes, and a right-turn lane.
                               This improvement is feasible within the existing right-of-way.
                            − An eastbound through lane and a right-turn lane shall be added to
                               eastbound Del Amo Boulevard. The eastbound approach shall be
                               improved to include one left-turn lane, three through lanes, and a right-
                               turn lane. This improvement is feasible within the existing right-of-
                               way.
                            − This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of
                               development in which the Project generates 1 to 10 percent of its total
                               trips, in accordance with Table 1 on page 5 .
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-6: Main Street and Del Amo Boulevard (Intersection No. 8):
                            − Land shall be dedicated, as required, to add a second left-turn lane and
                               a right-turn lane to southbound Main Street. The southbound approach
                               shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes, two through lanes and
                               a right-turn lane.
                            − A second left-turn lane shall be added to westbound Del Amo
                               Boulevard. The westbound approach shall be improved to provide two
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                     Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                         November 2005
                                                    Page 6
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                                left-turn lanes, two through lanes and an optional through and a right-
                                turn lane.
                             − Land shall be dedicated, as required, to add a second left-turn lane and
                                a right-turn lane shall be added to northbound Main Street. The
                                northbound approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes,
                                two through lanes, and a right-turn lane.
                             − A second left-turn lane shall be added to eastbound Del Amo
                                Boulevard. The eastbound approach shall be improved to provide two
                                left-turn lanes, two through lanes, and an optional through and a right-
                                turn lane.
                             − This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of
                                development in which the Project generates 51 to 60 percent of its total
                                trips, in accordance with Table 1 on page 5 .
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-7: Hamilton Avenue & I-110 Southbound Ramps (Intersection
                         No. 11):
                             − The Applicant shall install a traffic signal at this location.
                             − The southbound approach shall be re-striped to provide for one left-
                                turn lane and a shared left-turn/through lane. The improvement is
                                feasible within the existing right-of way.
                             − This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of
                                development in which the Project generates 21 to 30 percent of its total
                                trips, in accordance with Table 1 on page 5
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-8: Figueroa Street & I-110 Northbound Ramps (Intersection No.
                         12):
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                     Page 7
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                            − A second right-turn lane shall be added to the southbound approach.
                               The southbound approach shall be improved to provide two through
                               lanes and two right-turn lanes.
                            − A right-turn lane shall be added to the eastbound approach. The
                               eastbound approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes
                               and a right-turn lane. The improvements are feasible within the
                               existing right-of-way.
                            − This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of
                               development in which the Project generates 1 to 10 percent of its total
                               trips, in accordance with Table 1 on page 5.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-9: Figueroa Street & Torrance Boulevard (Intersection No. 15):
                            –  A second southbound left-turn lade shall be added to southbound
                               Figueroa Street. The southbound approach shall be improved to
                               include two left-turn lanes, two through lanes, and a right-turn lane.
                               This improvement is feasible within the existing right-of-way.
                            –  This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of
                               development in which the Project generates 71 to 80 percent of its total
                               trips, in accordance with Table 1 on page 5.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-10: Main Street & Torrance Boulevard (Intersection No. 16):
                            –  The eastbound approach shall be re-striped to provide one left-turn
                               lane and a shared through/right-turn lane.
                            –  This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of
                               development in which the Project generates 81 to 90 percent of its total
                               trips, in accordance with Table 1 on page 5.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                    Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                        November 2005
                                                   Page 8
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-11: Vermont Avenue & Carson Street (Intersection No. 22):
                             − The westbound right-turn lane shall be re-striped to provide a shared
                                  through/right-turn lane. The westbound approach shall be improved to
                                  provide one left-turn lane, two through lanes, and a shared
                                  through/right-turn lane.
                             − The eastbound right-turn lane shall be re-striped to provide a shared
                                  through/right-turn lane. The eastbound approach shall be improved to
                                  provide one left-turn lane, two through lanes, and a shared through/
                                  right-turn lane.
                             − This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of
                                  development in which the Project generates 31 to 40 percent of its total
                                  trips, in accordance with Table 1 on page 5.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-12: Figueroa Street and Carson Street (Intersection No. 23): A
                         right-turn lane shall be added to the southbound approach. The southbound
                         approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes, two through lanes,
                         and a right-turn lane. This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the
                         point of development in which the Project generates 71 to 80 percent of its
                         total trips, in accordance with Table 1 on page 5.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                       Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                           November 2005
                                                      Page 9
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                      Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
          Mitigation Measure C-13: Main Street & Carson Street (Intersection No. 24):1
                            − A second left-turn lane shall be added to the westbound approach. The
                               westbound approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes,
                               two through lanes, and a shared through/right-turn lane
                            − A second left-turn lane shall be added to the eastbound approach. The
                               northbound approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes,
                               two through lanes, and a shared through/right-turn lane.
                            − This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of
                               development in which the Project generates 61 to 70 percent of its total
                               trips, in accordance with Table 1 on page 5.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-14: Avalon Boulevard & Carson Street (Intersection No. 25):
                            − A right-turn lane shall be added to the southbound approach. The
                               southbound approach shall be improved to include one left-turn lane,
                               three through lanes, and a right-turn lane.
                            − A right-turn lane shall be added to the westbound approach. The
                               westbound approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes,
                               two through lanes, and a right-turn lane.
1
   Any future street widening improvements for the intersection of Avalon Boulevard and Carson Street are not
   feasible within the existing right-of-way and would require acquisition or dedication of right-of-way from
   adjacent parcels. The adjacent land uses include the Carson City Hall on the northeast corner of the
   intersection and commercial uses on the remaining three corners of the intersection. The necessary width can
   be obtained adjacent to City Hall on the north side of Carson Street through reduction of a portion of the
   existing landscaped area, allowing construction of the right-turn lane on the westbound Carson Street approach.
   Information from the City of Carson indicates that the parcels on the southeast and northwest corners may
   redevelop, at which point it may be possible to obtain the necessary right-of-way on the east side of Avalon
   Boulevard south of Carson Street and on the west side of Avalon Boulevard north of Carson Street, allowing
   construction of the right-turn lanes on the northbound and southbound Avalon Boulevard approaches. If the
   proposed right-turn lanes were provided on these three approaches but not on the eastbound Carson Street
   approach, it is estimated that the projected afternoon peak hour V/C would be reduced from 0.973 to 0.904.
   Although this would partially alleviate the Project impact, it would not fully mitigate the impact to a less than
   significant level.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                           Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                               November 2005
                                                     Page 10
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                             − A right-turn lane shall be added to the northbound approach. The
                                 northbound approach shall be improved to provide one left-turn lane,
                                 three through lanes, and a right-turn lane.
                             − A right-turn lane shall be added to the eastbound approach. The
                                 eastbound approach shall be improved to provide two left-turn lanes,
                                 two through lanes, and a right-turn lane.
                             − This mitigation measure shall be implemented at the point of
                                 development in which the Project generates 21 to 30 percent of its total
                                 trips, in accordance with Table 1 on page 5
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure C-15: No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for commercial
                         development in District 2, or for commercial development in Districts 1 and 3
                         that is greater than the amount of commercial development shown in the
                         Applicant’s Conceptual Plan (i.e., 150,000 square feet and 50,000 square feet,
                         respectively), prior to the completion of the I-405 ramp improvements at
                         Avalon Boulevard.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
               (2) I-405 and I-110 Freeways
                             No feasible mitigation measures are available to the Applicant to mitigate
                             the Project’s significant impacts on the I-110 and I-405 freeways.
               (3) Site Access Mitigation Measures:
                             Site access impacts were determined to be less than significant as long as
                             the main site intersections are configured as described in Draft EIR
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                       Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                           November 2005
                                                     Page 11
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                             Section IV.C.3.c(1), Project Design Features. No mitigation measures are
                             required.
               (4) Public Transportation
          Mitigation Measure C-16: In coordination with the City of Carson Transit Authority
                         and the Metropolitan Transit Authority (Metro), the Applicant shall provide
                         additional transit stops, including benches and shelters, in and adjacent to the
                         Project site.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning and Traffic Engineering Divisions
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning and Traffic Engineering Divisions
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
    4. Hazards and Hazardous Materials
          Mitigation Measure D-1: To the extent the Applicant desires to refine or modify
                         requirements in the RAP, the Applicant shall provide documentation to the
                         City indicating DTSC approval of such refinements or modifications.
                         Enforcement Agency: Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC),
                                                   City of Carson Department of Development Services
                         Monitoring Agency: Cal-EPA, Department of Toxic Substances Control
                                                   (DTSC), City of Carson Department of Development
                                                   Services
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure D-2: The Applicant shall provide documentation to the City
                         indicating DTSC shall permit the proposed residential uses in Development
                         District 1 prior to issuance of any permits for such residential development in
                         Development District 1.
                         Enforcement Agency: DTSC
                         Monitoring Agency: Cal-EPA, Department of Toxic Substances Control
                                                   (DTSC), City of Carson Department of Development
                                                   Services
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                     Page 12
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
          Mitigation Measure D-3: The Applicant shall provide documentation to the City
                         indicating both on- and off-site risks associated with RAP construction have
                         been evaluated to the satisfaction of the DTSC, and at a minimum, perimeter
                         air monitoring shall be completed for dust, particulates, and constituents
                         determined to be Constituents of Concern (COCs).
                         Enforcement Agency: Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC),
                                                   City of Carson Department of Development Services
                         Monitoring Agency: Cal-EPA, Department of Toxic Substances Control
                                                   (DTSC), City of Carson Department of Development
                                                   Services
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction, Construction
          Mitigation Measure D-4: The Applicant shall provide to the City, documentation
                         indicating that (1) a post remediation risk assessment has been prepared by the
                         Applicant and approved by DTSC; and (2) DTSC has certified that the
                         remedial systems are properly functioning prior to issuance of a Certificate of
                         Occupancy.
                         Enforcement Agency: Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC),
                                                   City of Carson Department of Development Services
                         Monitoring Agency: Cal-EPA, Department of Toxic Substances Control
                                                   (DTSC), City of Carson Department of Development
                                                   Services
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure D-5: The Applicant shall provide documentation to the City
                         indicating that applicable remedial systems and monitoring plans, including
                         the location of the flare and treatment facility are in accordance with
                         applicable SCAQMD regulations.
                         Enforcement Agency: Southern California Air Quality Management District
                                                   (SCAQMD)
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
    5. Geology and Soils
          Mitigation Measure E-1: In accordance with City of Carson Municipal Code, the
                         Applicant shall comply with site-specific recommendations set forth in
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                       Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                           November 2005
                                                      Page 13
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         engineering geology and geotechnical reports prepared to the satisfaction of
                         the City of Carson Building Official, as follows:
                             –   The engineering geology report shall be prepared and signed by a
                                 California Certified Engineering Geologist and the geotechnical report
                                 shall be prepared and signed by a California Registered Civil Engineer
                                 experienced in the area of geotechnical engineering. Geology and
                                 geotechnical reports shall include site-specific studies and analyses for
                                 all potential geologic and/or geotechnical hazards. Geotechnical
                                 reports shall address the design of pilings, foundations, walls below
                                 grade, retaining walls, shoring, subgrade preparation for floor slab
                                 support, paving, earthwork methodologies, and dewatering, where
                                 applicable.
                             –   Geology and geotechnical reports may be prepared separately or
                                 together.
                             –   Where the studies indicate, compensating siting and design features
                                 shall be required.
                             –   Laboratory testing of soils shall demonstrate the suitability of
                                 underlying native soils to support driven piles to the satisfaction of the
                                 City of Carson Building Official.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure E-2: Due to the classification of portions of the Project site as a
                         liquefaction zone, the Applicant shall demonstrate that liquefaction either
                         poses a sufficiently low hazard to satisfy the defined acceptable risk criteria,
                         in accordance with CDMG Special Bulletin 117, or (b) implement suitable
                         mitigation measures to effectively reduce the hazard to acceptable levels
                         (CCR Title 14, Section 3721). The analysis of liquefaction risk shall be
                         prepared by a registered civil engineer and shall be submitted to the
                         satisfaction of the City Building Official.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                     Page 14
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure E-3: Any roads realigned from the existing configuration or,
                         otherwise, located in areas underlain by waste soils shall comply with site-
                         specific recommendations as set forth in engineering geology and
                         geotechnical reports prepared to the satisfaction of City of Carson building
                         officials.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Building and Safety and Engineering Divisions
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Building and Safety and Engineering Divisions
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
    6. Surface Water Quality
          Mitigation Measure F-1: Soils in Development District 3 shall be tested prior to the
                         issuance of a grading permit, in accordance with the recommendation of
                         Blasland, Bouck and Lee, Inc.’s (BBL’s) Preliminary Draft Phase I and Initial
                         Phase II Environmental Site Assessment Summary, Del Amo Gardens Site
                         (July 6, 2005). If contaminants are found in excess of State of California
                         maximum contamination levels (MCLs), the soils shall be addressed in
                         accordance with a DTSC-approved program.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
    7. Air Quality
          a. Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-1: General contractors shall implement a fugitive dust control
                         program pursuant to the provisions of SCAQMD Rule 403.
                         Enforcement Agency: Southern California Air Quality Management District
                                                 (SCAQMD)
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services:
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                    Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                        November 2005
                                                   Page 15
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-2: All construction equipment shall be properly tuned and
                         maintained in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications.
                         Enforcement Agency: Southern California Air Quality Management District
                                                 (SCAQMD)
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 SCAQMD
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-3: General contractors shall maintain and operate construction
                         equipment so as to minimize exhaust emissions. During construction, trucks
                         and vehicles in loading and unloading queues would turn their engines off,
                         when not in use, to reduce vehicle emissions. Construction emissions should
                         be phased and scheduled to avoid emissions peaks and discontinued during
                         second-stage smog alerts.
                         Enforcement Agency: SCAQMD
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-4: Electricity from power poles rather than temporary diesel- or
                         gasoline-powered generators shall be used to the extent feasible.
                         Enforcement Agency:          SCAQMD, City of Carson Department of
                                                 Development Services
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-5: All construction vehicles shall be prohibited from idling in
                         excess of ten minutes, both on- and off-site.
                         Enforcement Agency:          SCAQMD, City of Carson Department of
                                                 Development Services, Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                     Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                         November 2005
                                                    Page 16
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
          Mitigation Measure G-6: Project heavy-duty construction equipment shall use
                         alternative clean fuels, such as low sulfur diesel or compressed natural gas
                         with oxidation catalysts or particulate traps, to the extent feasible.
                         Enforcement Agency:           SCAQMD, City of Carson Department of
                                                   Development Services, Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-7: The Applicant shall utilize coatings and solvents that are
                         consistent with applicable SCAQMD rules and regulations.
                         Enforcement Agency:           SCAQMD, City of Carson Department of
                                                   Development Services, Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-8: The Applicant shall comply with SCAQMD Rule 402 to
                         reduce potential nuisance impacts due to odors from construction activities.
                         Enforcement Agency:           SCAQMD, City of Carson Department of
                                                   Development Services, Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-9: All construction vehicle tires shall be washed at the time
                         these vehicles exit the project site.
                         Enforcement Agency:           SCAQMD, City of Carson Department of
                                                   Development Services, Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-10: All fill material carried by haul trucks shall be covered by a
                         tarp or other means.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                       Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                           November 2005
                                                     Page 17
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Enforcement Agency:          SCAQMD, City of Carson Department of
                                                  Development Services, Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-11: Any intensive dust generating activity such as grinding
                         concrete for existing roads must be controlled to the greatest extent feasible.
                         Enforcement Agency:          SCAQMD, City of Carson Department of
                                                  Development Services, Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-12: The Applicant shall provide documentation to the City
                         indicating both on- and off-site air-borne risks associated with RAP
                         construction have been evaluated to the satisfaction of the DTSC, and at a
                         minimum, perimeter air monitoring will be completed for dust, particulates,
                         and constituents determined to be Constituents of Concern (COCs).
                         Enforcement Agency:          SCAQMD, City of Carson Department of
                                                  Development Services, Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
          b. Operation
               (1) Service and Support Facilities (Point Sources)
          Mitigation Measure G-13: All point source facilities shall obtain all required permits
                         from the SCAQMD. The issuance of these permits by the SCAQMD shall
                         require the operators of these facilities to implement Best Available Control
                         Technology and other required measures that reduce emissions of criteria air
                         pollutants.
                         Enforcement Agency:          SCAQMD, City of Carson Department of
                                                  Development Services, Building and Safety Division
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                    Page 18
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-14: Land uses on the Project site shall be limited to those that do
                         not emit high levels of potentially toxic contaminants or odors.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction, Post-Construction
               (2) Natural Gas Consumption and Electricity Production
          Mitigation Measure G-15: All residential and non-residential buildings shall meet the
                         California Title 24 Energy Efficiency standards for water heating, space
                         heating and cooling, to the extent feasible.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-16: All fixtures used for lighting of exterior common areas shall
                         be regulated by automatic devices to turn off lights when they are not needed,
                         but a minimum level of lighting should be provided for safety.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
               (3) Building Materials, Architectural Coatings and Cleaning Solvents
          Mitigation Measure G-17: Building materials, architectural coatings and cleaning
                         solvents shall comply with all applicable SCAQMD rules and regulations.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                       Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                           November 2005
                                                    Page 19
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                    Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
               (4) Transportation System Management and Demand Management
          Mitigation Measure G-18:               The Applicant shall, to the extent feasible, schedule
                         deliveries during off-peak traffic periods to encourage the reduction of trips
                         during the most congested periods.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-19: The Applicant shall coordinate with the MTA and the City
                         of Carson and Los Angeles Department of Transportation to provide
                         information with regard to local bus and rail services.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Redevelopment Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Redevelopment Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-20: During site plan review, consideration shall be given
                         regarding the provision of safe and convenient access to bus stops and public
                         transportation facilities.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-21: The Applicant shall pay a fair share contribution for a low
                         emission shuttle service between the project site and other major activity
                         centers within the project vicinity (i.e., the MetroRail Blue Line station at Del
                         Amo Boulevard and Santa Fe and the Carson Transfer Station at the South
                         Bay Pavilion).
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                        Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                            November 2005
                                                      Page 20
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-22:             The Applicant shall provide bicycle racks located at
                         convenient locations throughout Carson Marketplace.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post- Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-23: The Applicant shall provide bicycle paths along the main
                         routes through Carson Marketplace.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Planning and Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Planning and Traffic Engineering Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-24: The Applicant shall provide convenient pedestrian access
                         throughout Carson Marketplace.
                         Enforcement Agency:         City of Carson Department of Department of
                                                 Development Services, Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure G-25:              The Project shall include air filtration systems for
                         residential dwelling units designed to have a minimum efficiency reporting
                         value (MERV) of 12 as indicated by the American Society of Heating
                         Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) Standard 52.2. The
                         air handling systems shall be maintained on a regular basis per manufacturer’s
                         recommendations by a qualified technician employed or contracted by the
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                    Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                        November 2005
                                                    Page 21
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Applicant or successor. Operation and maintenance of the system shall ensure
                         that it performs above the minimum reporting value.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction, Post-Construction
    8. Noise
          a. Construction
          Mitigation Measure H-1: Prior to the issuance of any grading, excavation, haul route,
                         foundation, or building permits, the Applicant shall provide proof satisfactory
                         to the Building and Safety Division and Planning Division of the Department
                         of Development Services that all construction documents require contractors
                         to comply with City of Carson Municipal Code Sections 4101 (i) and (j),
                         which requires all construction and demolition activities including pile
                         driving, to occur between 7:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M. Monday through Saturday
                         and that a noise management plan for compliance and verification has been
                         prepared by a monitor retained by the Applicant. At a minimum, the plan
                         shall include the following requirements:
                             –    Noise-generating equipment operated at the Project site shall be
                                  equipped with effective noise control devices (i.e., mufflers, intake
                                  silencers, lagging, and/or engine enclosures). All equipment shall be
                                  properly maintained to assure that no additional noise, due to worn or
                                  improperly maintained parts, would be generated.
                             –    Pile drivers used within 1,500 feet of sensitive receptors shall be
                                  equipped with noise control techniques (e.g., use of noise attenuation
                                  shields or shrouds) having a minimum quieting factor of 10 dBA.
                             –    Effective temporary sound barriers shall be used and relocated, as
                                  needed, whenever construction activities occur within 150 feet of
                                  residential property, to block line-of-site between the construction
                                  equipment and the noise-sensitive receptors (i.e., residential uses
                                  located on the west and south of the Project site).
                             –    Loading and staging areas must be located on site and away from the
                                  most noise-sensitive uses surrounding the site as determined by the
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                      Page 22
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                    Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                                  Building and Safety Division of the Department of Development
                                  Services.
                             –    An approved haul route authorization that avoids noise-sensitive land
                                  uses to the maximum extent feasible.
                             –    A construction relations officer shall be designated to serve as a liaison
                                  with residents, and a contact telephone number shall be provided to
                                  residents.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction, Construction
               (1) Vibration
          Mitigation Measure H-2: The Applicant, prior to initiating DDC activities on a site-
                         wide basis, shall conduct a DDC Pilot Program (Pilot Program). The Pilot
                         Program shall be implemented via the following guidelines:
                    –    Prior to the initiation of the Pilot Program, the Applicant shall locate vibration
                         monitors at the following locations: (1) along the Project’s fenceline opposite
                         the off-site residential uses located to the south and southwest of the Project
                         site (i.e., within the Project site), and (2) along the far side of the Torrance
                         Lateral Channel in line with the monitors placed within the Project site itself.
                    –    Continuous monitoring shall be conducted on an ongoing basis during the
                         Pilot Program. All vibration levels measured by the monitors shall be logged
                         with documentation of the measurements provided to the City.
                    –    Initial DDC drops shall be limited in weight, height and/or location dictated
                         by calculations which demonstrate that the potential vibration levels are below
                         the 0.02 inches per second PPV threshold limit.
                    –    Increases in DDC weight, height and/or location shall incur in small
                         increments, with continuous monitoring to assure compliance with the 0.02
                         inches per second PPV threshold limit.
                    –    If vibration levels at any time during the Pilot Program exceed the 0.02 inches
                         per second PPV threshold level, DDC activity shall immediately stop, until
                         new drop parameters are established that would reduce the vibration levels to
                         less than the 0.02 inches per second PPV threshold level.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                        Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                            November 2005
                                                      Page 23
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure H-3: The monitors located on the far side of the Torrance Lateral
                         Channel as part of the Pilot Program shall remain in place throughout the
                         DDC phase of Project construction. Continuous monitoring shall be
                         conducted on an ongoing basis. All vibration levels measured by the monitors
                         shall be logged with documentation of the measurements provided to the City.
                         If DDC vibration levels at any time exceed the 0.02 inches per second PPV
                         threshold level, DDC activity shall immediately stop, until new drop
                         parameters are established that would reduce the vibration levels to less than
                         the 0.02 inches per second PPV threshold level.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division and Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division and Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Construction
               (2) Construction Management
          Mitigation Measure H-4: A construction and construction-related monitor satisfactory
                         to the Department of Development Services General Manager shall be
                         retained by the Applicant to document compliance with the mitigation
                         measures. Said Monitor’s qualifications, identification, address and telephone
                         number shall be listed in the contracts and shall be placed in the pertinent files
                         of the Department of Development Services Department. The Monitor will be
                         required to monitor all construction and construction-related activities on the
                         site on a periodic basis; keep all written records which shall be open for public
                         inspection; and to file monthly reports with City and appropriate permit
                         granting authorities. In addition:
                             –   Information shall be provided on a regular basis regarding construction
                                 activities and their duration. A Construction Relations Officer shall be
                                 established and funded by the Applicant, and approved by the
                                 Department of Development Services General Manager, to act as a
                                 liaison with neighbors and residents concerning on-site construction
                                 activity. As part of this mitigation measure, the Applicant shall
                                 establish a 24-hour telephone construction hotline which will be
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                       Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                           November 2005
                                                      Page 24
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                                 staffed between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. on a daily basis
                                 throughout the project’s entire construction period for the purposes of
                                 answering questions and resolving disputes with adjacent property
                                 owners. The hotline number shall be posted on site.
                             –   The Applicant shall require in all construction and construction-related
                                 contracts and subcontracts, provisions requiring compliance with
                                 special environmental conditions included in all relevant entitlement
                                 approval actions of the City of Carson. Such provisions shall also
                                 include retention of the power to effect prompt corrective action by the
                                 applicant, its representative or prime contractor, subcontractor or
                                 operator to correct noticed noncompliance.
                             –   During construction loading and staging areas must be located on-site
                                 and away from the most noise-sensitive uses surrounding the site as
                                 determined by the Planning Manager.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction, Construction
          b. Operation
               (1) Noise
          Mitigation Measure H-5: All parking lots near residential areas shall be located a
                         minimum of 150 feet from an off-site residential use unless a minimum eight
                         foot wall is provided along the property boundary to limit noise levels
                         associated with parking lot activities.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure H-6: All parking structures near residential areas shall be located a
                         minimum of 150 feet from an off-site residential use unless the exterior wall
                         of the parking structure that faces the off-site residential use is a solid wall or
                         provides acoustical louvers (or equivalent noise reduction measures).
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                     Page 25
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure H-7: During operation of a building (following construction), truck
                         delivery should be limited to non-peak traffic periods between 7:00 A.M. and
                         8:00 P.M., if feasible.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure H-8: For the residential uses immediately south and north of Del
                         Amo Boulevard, within Development Districts 1 and 3, all exterior walls and
                         floor-ceiling assemblies (unless within a unit) shall be constructed with
                         double-paned glass or an equivalent and in a manner to provide an airborne
                         sound insulation system achieving a Sound Transmission Class of 50 (45 if
                         field tested) as defined in the UBC Standard No. 35-1, 1982 edition. Sign-off
                         by the Department of Development Services General Manager, or his/her
                         designee, is required prior to the issuance of the first building permit. The
                         Applicant, as an alternative, may retain an engineer registered in the State of
                         California with expertise in acoustical engineering, who would submit a
                         signed report for an alternative means of sound insulation satisfactory to the
                         City of Carson which achieves a maximum interior noise of CNEL 45
                         (residential standard).
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure H-9: The balconies of the first row of residential units facing Del
                         Amo Boulevard or I-405 Freeway, should any such balconies be constructed,
                         shall have a solid fence/wall with an appropriate height to reduce the noise
                         received from traffic traveled on the adjacent Boulevard.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                      Page 26
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Planning and Building and Safety Divisions
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Planning and Building and Safety Divisions
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure H-10: If any noise intensive uses (i.e., outdoor theater, passenger
                         station (bus station, rail station, taxi stand), small recycling facility, or
                         commercial uses (outdoor activities, amplified music, outdoor patios, etc)) are
                         proposed within 300 feet of an on-site or off-site residential use, then as part
                         of the site plan review process, a community noise study shall be completed
                         and the study shall demonstrate that the use would not exceed the City of
                         Carson Municipal Code noise standards and/or the standards established in
                         this EIR.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                 Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
    9. Public Services
          9.1 Fire Protection
          Mitigation Measure I.1-1: Prior to construction, the Applicant shall submit buildings
                         plans to the Los Angeles County Fire Department (LACoFD) for review.
                         Based on such plan check, any additional fire safety recommendations shall be
                         implemented to the satisfaction of the LACoFD.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.1-2: The Applicant shall provide adequate ingress/egress access
                         points for emergency response to the satisfaction of the LACoFD.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                     Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                         November 2005
                                                   Page 27
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.1-3: The Applicant shall comply with all applicable fire code and
                         ordinance requirements for construction, access, water mains, fire flows, and
                         fire hydrants as required by the LACoFD.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.1-4: Every building shall be accessible to Fire Department
                         apparatus by way of access roadways, with an all-weather surface of not less
                         than the width prescribed by the LACoFD. The roadway shall extend to
                         within 150 feet of all portions of exterior building walls when measured by an
                         unobstructed route around the exterior of the building.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.1-5: Requirements for access, fire flows, and hydrants, shall be
                         addressed during the City’s subdivision tentative map stage.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.1-6: Fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all residential and
                         commercial occupancies to the satisfaction of the LACoFD.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.1-7: The Applicant shall assure that adequate water pressure is
                         available to meet Code-required fire flow. Based on the size of the buildings,
                         proximity of other structures, and construction type, a maximum fire flow up
                         to 5,000 gallons per minute (gpm) at 20 pounds per square inch (psi) residual
                         pressure for up to a four-hour duration may be required.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                       Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                           November 2005
                                                     Page 28
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.1-8: Fire hydrant spacing shall be 300 feet and shall meet the
                         following requirements:
                             –  No portion of a lot’s frontage shall be more than 200 feet via vehicular
                                access from a properly spaced fire hydrant;
                             –  No portion of a building shall exceed 400 feet via vehicular access
                                from a properly spaced fire hydrant;
                             –  Additional hydrants shall be required if spacing exceeds specified
                                distances;
                             –  When a cul-de-sac depth exceeds 200 feet on a commercial street,
                                hydrants shall be required at the corner and mid-block;
                             –  A cul-de-sac shall not be more than 500 feet in length, when serving
                                land zoned for commercial use; and
                             –  Turning radii in a commercial zone shall not be less than 32 feet. The
                                measurement shall be determined at the centerline of the road. A
                                turning area shall be provided for all driveways exceeding 150 feet in
                                length at the end of all cul-de-sacs, to the satisfaction of the LACoFD.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.1-9: All onsite driveways and roadways shall provide a minimum
                         unobstructed (clear-to-sky) width of 28 feet. The onsite driveways shall be
                         within 150 feet of all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of any
                         building. The centerline of the access driveway shall be located parallel to,
                         and within 30 feet of an exterior wall on one side of the proposed structure.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                    Page 29
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
          Mitigation Measure I.1-10:                 All onsite driveways shall provide a minimum
                         unobstructed, clear-to-sky width of 28 feet. Driveway width shall be
                         increased under the following conditions:
                             –    If parallel parking is allowed on one side of the access
                                  roadway/driveway, the roadway width shall be 34 feet; and
                             –    If parallel parking is allowed on both sides of the access
                                  roadway/driveway, the roadway width shall be 36 feet in a residential
                                  area or 42 feet in a commercial area.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.1-11: The entrance to any street or driveway with parking
                         restrictions shall be posted with LACoFD approved signs stating “NO
                         PARKING – FIRE LANE” in 3-inch-high letters, at intermittent distances of
                         150 feet. Any access way that is less than 34 feet in width shall be labeled
                         “Fire Lane” on the final tract map and final building plans.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.1-12: The following standards apply to the Project’s residential
                         component only;
                             –    A cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of 34 feet in width and shall not be
                                  more than 700 feet in length;
                             –    The length of the cul-de-sac may be increased to 1,000 feet if a
                                  minimum 36-foot-wide roadway is provided; and
                             –    A LACoFD approved turning radius shall be provided at the terminus
                                  of all residential cul-de-sacs.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                       Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                           November 2005
                                                       Page 30
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                    Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
          Mitigation Measure I.1-13: The Applicant shall pay a fair share contribution for the
                         improvement of fire service facilities that are required to off-set impacts of the
                         Project, subject to approval of the County of Los Angles Fire Department.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Redevelopment Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Redevelopment Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          9.2 Police Services
          Mitigation Measure I.2-1: The Applicant shall provide private security services within
                         the areas of Districts 1, 2 and 3 that are occupied by commercial development.
                         On-site security services shall maintain an ongoing dialogue with the Sheriff’s
                         Department so as to maximize the value of the security service that are
                         provided.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Public Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Public Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.2-2: The Applicant shall incorporate into the Project design a
                         Community Safety Center for use by the Project’s private security force and
                         the Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department. It shall include the following
                         features at a minimum: a front desk/reception area, a community meeting
                         room, work space for law enforcement and public safety personnel, a video
                         monitoring console, and restrooms. The Center shall be staffed either by a
                         Sheriff’s Department Community Services officer or personnel approved by
                         the Sheriff’s Department.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Public Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Public Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.2-3: The Applicant shall install video cameras throughout the
                         commercial development within Districts 1 and 2 with a digitally recorded
                         feed to the Community Safety Center that is also accessible via the internet at
                         the Carson Sheriff’s Station.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Public Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson City of Carson Public Safety Division
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                        Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                            November 2005
                                                      Page 31
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                   Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                          Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.2-4: The Applicant shall provide the Project’s fair share of a
                          budget for the deployment of a one-person patrol unit, which is dedicated to
                          providing preventative patrol on the commercial portions of the Project site.
                          Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Redevelopment Division
                          Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Redevelopment Division
                          Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.2-5: The Applicant shall fund Deputy Sheriffs on an overtime
                          basis to augment security during peak periods, as jointly determined by the
                          Applicant or its successor, and the Sheriff’s Department.
                          Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Redevelopment Division
                          Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Redevelopment Division
                          Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.2-6: The management of the entertainment venues located within
                          the Project site shall notify the Sheriff’s Station in advance of planned
                          activities (i.e. movie schedules).
                          Enforcement Agency: City of Carson City of Carson Public Safety Division
                          Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Public Safety Division
                          Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.2-7: The Sheriff’s Department Crime Prevention Unit shall be
                          contacted for advice on crime prevention programs that could be incorporated
                          into the proposed project, including Neighborhood Watch.
                          Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Public Safety Division
                          Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Public Safety Division
                          Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          9.3 Schools
                         The students generated by the proposed Project, based on the preceding
                         analysis could not be accommodated within the existing facilities at Carson
                         Elementary School and Carson Senior High School. Pursuant to California
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                       Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                           November 2005
                                                      Page 32
                           PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                    Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Government Code Section 65995, payment of the developer fees required by
                         State law provides full and complete mitigation of the Project’s impacts on
                         school facilities. Therefore, no other mitigation measures are required.
          9.4 Parks and Recreation
          Mitigation Measure I.4-1: The Project shall provide park and recreation facilities
                          pursuant to Section 9207.19, equivalent to three acres per 1,000 population,
                          that would be met through the provision of park space, on-site improvements,
                          and/or, the payment of in-lieu fees.
                          Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                          Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                          Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.4-2: The Project shall meet the intent of Municipal Code Sections
                          9128.54 and 9128.15 through the provision of private open space as defined
                          therein and/or the provision of additional amenities that meet the recreational
                          needs of Project residents, e.g., health clubs.
                          Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                          Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                          Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure I.4-3: The Project shall meet the requirements of Municipal Code
                          Section 9126.28 by demonstrating that the Project’s common open space area
                          meets the 40% standard established therein.
                          Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                          Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                          Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                        Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                            November 2005
                                                      Page 33
                           PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                 Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
          9.5 Libraries
          Mitigation Measure I.5-1: The Applicant shall pay a fair share contribution for the
                         improvement of library facilities that are required to off-set impacts of the
                         Project, subject to approval of the County of Los Angles Public Library.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Redevelopment Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Redevelopment Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
    10. Utilities
          10.1 Water Supply
          Mitigation Measure J.1-1: The Building Department and the Planning Division shall
                         review building plans to ensure that water reducing measures are utilized, as
                         required by Title 20 and Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.
                         These measures include, but are not limited to, water conserving dishwashers,
                         low-volume toilet tanks, and flow control devices for faucets.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning and Building and Safety Divisions
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning and Building and Safety Divisions
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.1-2: The Project shall comply with the City’s landscape ordinance,
                         “A Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance,” as required by the State Water
                         Conservation Landscape Act.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.1-3: The Applicant shall provide reclaimed water for the Project’s
                         non-potable water needs, if feasible.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                     Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                         November 2005
                                                    Page 34
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                    Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.1-4: Landscaping of the Project site shall utilize xeriscape (low-
                         maintenance, drought-resistant) plantings.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.1-5: Automatic irrigation systems shall be set to insure irrigation
                         during early morning or evening hours to minimize water loss due to
                         evaporation. Sprinklers must be reset to water less in cooler months and during
                         rainfall season so that water is not wasted on excessive landscape irrigation.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.1-6: The Project shall be designed to recycle all water used in
                         cooling systems to the maximum extent possible.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                    Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction, Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.1-7: To the maximum extent feasible, reclaimed water shall be
                         used during the grading and construction phase of the Project for the following
                         activities: (1) dust control, (2) soil compaction, and (3) concrete mixing.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                        Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                            November 2005
                                                       Page 35
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.1-8: Water lines and hydrants shall be sized and located so as to
                         meet the fire flow requirements established by the Los Angeles County Fire
                         Department.
                         Enforcement Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Agency: Los Angeles County Fire Department
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          10.2 Wastewater
          Mitigation Measure J.2-1: All required sewer improvements shall be designed and
                         constructed according to the standards of the City of Carson and County of Los
                         Angeles.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction, Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.2-2: Fee payment is required prior to the issuance of a permit to
                         connect to district sewer facilities.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.2-3: The Building and Safety and Planning Divisions of the
                         Development Services Department shall review building plans to ensure that
                         water-reducing measures are utilized, as required by Title 24 of the California
                         Administrative Code. These measures include, but are not limited to, water
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                      Page 36
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                  Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         conserving dishwashers, low-volume toilet tanks, and flow control devices for
                         faucets.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Building and Safety Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.2-4: The project shall include a dual plumbing system designed
                         to utilize reclaimed water for non-potable uses.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning and Building and Safety Divisions
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning and Building and Safety Divisions
                         Monitoring Phase: Pre-Construction
          10.3 Solid Waste
          Mitigation Measure J.3-1: All structures constructed or uses established within any part
                         of the proposed Project site shall be designed to be permanently equipped with
                         clearly marked, durable, source sorted recycling bins at all times to facilitate
                         the separation and deposit of recyclable materials.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.3-2: Primary collection bins shall be designed to facilitate
                         mechanized collection of such recyclable wastes for transport to on- or off-site
                         recycling facilities.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                  Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                      Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                          November 2005
                                                     Page 37
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                    Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
          Mitigation Measure J.3-3: The Applicant shall coordinate with the City of Carson to
                         continuously maintain in good order for the convenience of patrons,
                         employees, and residents clearly marked, durable and separate recycling bins
                         on the same lot, or parcel to facilitate the deposit of recyclable or commingled
                         waste metal, cardboard, paper, glass, and plastic therein; maintain
                         accessibility to such bins at all times, for collection of such wastes for
                         transport to on- or off-site recycling plants; and require waste haulers to utilize
                         local or regional material recovery facilities as feasible and appropriate.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.3-4: Any existing on-site roads that are torn up shall be ground-
                         up onsite and recycled into the new road base.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.3-5: Compaction facilities for non-recyclable materials shall be
                         provided in every occupied building greater than 20,00 square feet in size to
                         reduce both the total volume of solid waste produced and the number of trips
                         required for collection, to the extent feasible.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
          Mitigation Measure J.3-6: All construction debris shall be recycled in a practical,
                         available, accessible manner, to the extent feasible, during the construction
                         phase.
                         Enforcement Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                                   Planning Division
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                        Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                            November 2005
                                                      Page 38
                          PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                             Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
                         Monitoring Agency: City of Carson Department of Development Services,
                                              Planning Division
                         Monitoring Phase: Post-Construction
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                                 Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                                     November 2005
                                                Page 39
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                      Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
          This page intentionally left blank.
Carson Marketplace, LLC                                                          Carson Marketplace
PCR Services Corporation                                                              November 2005
                                              Page 40
                         PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                        APPENDICES
                                                    Appendix F	
                                          Equivalency Program
The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan                      129
April 5, 2011
APPENDICES
This page intentionally left blank.
130                                 The Boulevards at South Bay Specific Plan
                                                                 April 5, 2011
                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE
                                 EQUIVALENCY PROGRAM
                                   IMPACT THRESHOLDS
        The Carson Marketplace Specific Plan includes an Equivalency Program that would
allow the composition of on-site development to respond to the future needs and demands of the
southern California economy and changes in the project’s requirements. The Equivalency
Program would provide flexibility for modifications to land uses and square footages within the
site. This is achieved via a framework within which permitted land uses can be exchanged for
certain other permitted land uses, so long as the limitations of the Equivalency Program are
satisfied and no additional environmental impacts occur. As such, increases in permitted land
uses can be exchanged for corresponding decreases of other permitted land uses under the
proposed Equivalency Program. The conversion rates at which land uses can be exchanged with
one-another is limited so as no to exceed the level of impacts identified in the EIR. A listing of
the environmental impact thresholds including the trip conversion rates is provided in the
following Tables A and B.

                                                 Table A
                                      Environmental Impact Thresholds
                        Topic                                                 Threshold
Traffic                                               See Table B
Grading                                               Districts 1 and 2: Maximum of 12.5 acres per day,
                                                       22,000 cu. yds.
                                                      District 3: Maximum of 5.5 acre per day.
Air Quality
  Construction                                        Pollutant          Daily
                                                                     (lbs/day)
                                                      CO                 1,272
                                                      ROC                1,665
                                                      NOx                  996
                                                      SOX                   <1
                                                      PM10               1,394
  Operations                                          Pollutant          Daily
                                                                     (lbs/day)
                                                      CO                 4,449
                                                      ROC                  506
                                                      NOx                  719
                                                      SOX                   17
                                                      PM10                 596
Utilities
  Total On-site Water Consumption                     Maximum daily total of 795,470 gallons per day.
                                                      Maximum yearly total of 290.3 million gallons per year.
  Total On-site Wastewater Generation                 Maximum daily total of 721,113 gallons per day.
                                                      Maximum yearly total of 263.3 million gallons per year.
  Total On-site Solid Waste Generation                Construction generation of 12,443 tons total.
                                                      Operations generation of 10,064 tons per year.
Residential Development                               Maximum of 1,550 Units.
Source: PCR Services, Appendix C of DEIR, SCH No. 2005051059
                       PRELIMINARY WORKING DRAFT – Work in Progress

                                                                       TABLE B
                                                            CARSON MARKETPLACE
                        TRIP GENERATION EQUIVALENCIES BASED ON NET TRIP GENERATION RATES a,b
         TO THIS USE            FROM THIS USE
                                                                                                                                          7.
                                                                                                   5. Equivalency                  Equivalency
                              1. Equivalency                     3. Equivalency 4. Equivalency to 1 KSF of 6. Equivalency to 1 KSF of
                                to 1 KSF of 2. Equivalency to 1 KSF of               to 1 KSF of         Home        to 1 KSF of       Home
                                 Shopping         to 1 KSF of        Regional         Electronic    Improvement Office Supply Furnishing
     Land Use                      Center       General Office Supermarket           Superstore      Superstore         Store       Superstore
  1. Shopping Center                  --          0.26 KSF 1         1.96 KSF         1.53 KSF        0.76 KSF
                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                      0.83 KSF      1.21 KSF
                                                                                                                                               1
  2. General Office                         2                                 2                 2               2              2               2
                                0.84 KSF               --           1.99 KSF         1.34 KSF         0.67 KSF       0.82 KSF       1.14 KSF
                                            1
  3. Supermarkets               0.38 KSF           0.1 KSF 1             --          0.62 KSF 1       0.29 KSF 1     0.41 KSF 2     0.45 KSF 1
  4. Electronic Superstore      0.61 KSF 1        0.16 KSF
                                                             1
                                                                     1.28 KSF             --          0.46 KSF
                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                      0.55 KSF      0.73 KSF
                                                                                                                                               1
  5. Home Improvement            1.17 KSF         0.35 KSF 1         2.29 KSF         1.78 KSF             --         0.97 KSF      1.59 KSF 1
     Superstore
  6. Office Supply Store        0.83 KSF 1        0.22 KSF 1        2.21 KSF 1       1.36 KSF 1       0.63 KSF 1          --          1 KSF 1
  7. Home Furnishing             0.62 KSF                    1       1.21 KSF         0.94 KSF         0.53 KSF       0.51 KSF            --
                                                  0.22 KSF
     Superstore
                                            1
  8. Discount Club              0.81 KSF          0.21 KSF 1         1.78 KSF        1.33 KSF 1       0.61 KSF 1      0.76 KSF      0.97 KSF 1
  9. Pet Supply Superstore      0.54 KSF 1        0.14 KSF
                                                             1       1.17 KSF        0.89 KSF 1       0.41 KSF
                                                                                                                1     0.49 KSF      0.65 KSF 1
 10. Free-Standing Discount      0.43 KSF         0.13 KSF 1         0.85 KSF         0.66 KSF         0.37 KSF       0.36 KSF      0.61 KSF 1
     Superstore
 11. High-Turnover (Sit         0.23 KSF 1        0.06 KSF 1         0.51 KSF        0.37 KSF 1       0.17 KSF 1      0.22 KSF      0.27 KSF 1
     Down) Restaurant
 12. Fast Food Restaurant        0.05 KSF         0.03 KSF 3          0.1 KSF         0.08 KSF         0.05 KSF       0.04 KSF       0.09 KSF
     (Open after 9am)
                                            1
 13. Quality Restaurant         0.27 KSF          0.07 KSF 1         0.64 KSF        0.44 KSF 1        0.2 KSF 1      0.27 KSF      0.32 KSF 1
 14. Hotel                     2.61 Rooms                      1   5.11 Rooms       3.98 Rooms       2.23 Rooms     2.17 Rooms     4.22 Rooms
                                                 1.02 Rooms
                                            2                1                                  2               2
 15. Multiplex Movie Theater    0.78 KSF          0.34 KSF           1.77 KSF        1.24 KSF         0.62 KSF        0.75 KSF      1.05 KSF 2
                                            2                1                                  2               2
 16. Bowling Alley              0.84 KSF          0.29 KSF           1.74 KSF        1.34 KSF         0.67 KSF        0.74 KSF      1.14 KSF 2
                                            1                1                4                 1               1              2
 17. Fitness Center             0.58 KSF          0.15 KSF          1.54 KSF         0.95 KSF         0.44 KSF       0.64 KSF        0.7 KSF 1
 18. Multi-Purpose                0.6 KSF         0.19 KSF 1         1.17 KSF         0.91 KSF         0.51 KSF        0.5 KSF      0.88 KSF 1
     Recreational Center
 19. Apartments                     N/A               N/A               N/A              N/A              N/A            N/A             N/A
 20. Condominiums                   N/A               N/A               N/A              N/A              N/A            N/A             N/A
                              Notes:
                                  a
                                    All of the rates reflect pass-by and internal trip capture estimates for the Carson Marketplace Project.
                                  The values in this table represent conversion rates from one land use to another. The values are based
                                  on conversions rates that would result in the same number of Project trips, with conversions of one use to
                                  another. The trip equivalency is based on the type of trip which would be the most restrictive: average
                                  daily trips (ADT), PM in-bound trips, or PM out-bound trips. Each type of trip may be more or less
                                  restrictive, depending on the travel characteristics of the two uses. All of the conversion rates in the table
                                  reflect ADT, unless noted as follows:
                                    1
                                       PM-inbound trips
                                    2
                                       PM-outbound trips
                                    3
                                       ADT and PM-outbound trips are equally limiting
                                    4
                                       PM-inbound trips and PM-outbound trips are equally limiting
                                    5
                                       ADT, PM-inbound trips and PM-outbound trips are equally limiting
                                  b
                                    Conversion factors for land uses permitted under the Carson Marketplace Specific Plan that are not
                                  specified in this table shall be determined by the City's Traffic Engineer.
Source: PCR Services, Appendix C of DEIR, SCH No. 2005051059
                                                                       TABLE B
                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE
                        TRIP GENERATION EQUIVALENCIES BASED ON NET TRIP GENERATION RATES a,b
         TO THIS USE           FROM THIS USE
                                                                         10.              11.
                                                                   Equivalency to Equivalency to          12.            13.
                                      8.                           1 KSF of Free 1 KSF of High- Equivalency to Equivalency               14.
                               Equivalency 9. Equivalency             Standing      Turnover (Sit 1 KSF of Fast to 1 KSF of Equivalency to
                                to 1 KSF of to 1 KSF of Pet           Discount           Down)           Food          Quality      1 Room of
     Land Use                 Discount Club Supply Store             Superstore       Restaurant      Restaurant     Restaurant        Hotel
  1. Shopping Center              1.1 KSF           1.68 KSF         1.92 KSF
                                                                               2
                                                                                      2.62 KSF
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                      6.93 KSF
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                     1.73 KSF
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                    0.22 KSF
                                                                                                                                               2
  2. General Office                          2                2                2               2                2               2              2
                                0.96 KSF           1.44 KSF          1.62 KSF          2.2 KSF        5.83 KSF       1.46 KSF       0.18 KSF
  3. Supermarkets               0.46 KSF 1          0.7 KSF 1        0.74 KSF 1       1.11 KSF 2      2.91 KSF 1     0.73 KSF 2     0.09 KSF 2
  4. Electronic Superstore                   3                2               4                 2               2               2              2
                                0.72 KSF           1.07 KSF           1.2 KSF         1.64 KSF        4.34 KSF       1.08 KSF       0.13 KSF
  5. Home Improvement            1.29 KSF           1.96 KSF         2.41 KSF 2       3.28 KSF
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                      8.69 KSF
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                     2.17 KSF
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                    0.27 KSF
                                                                                                                                               2
     Superstore
  6. Office Supply Store        1.03 KSF 1         1.53 KSF 1        1.63 KSF 1       2.67 KSF 2      6.43 KSF 1     1.76 KSF 2     0.21 KSF 1
                                                                               2                2               2               2
  7. Home Furnishing             0.68 KSF           1.04 KSF         1.42 KSF         1.93 KSF        5.11 KSF       1.28 KSF       0.16 KSF 2
     Superstore
  8. Discount Club                    --            1.5 KSF 4        1.59 KSF 1       2.29 KSF 2      6.06 KSF 2     1.51 KSF 2     0.19 KSF 2
  9. Pet Supply Superstore       0.66 KSF               --           1.07 KSF 1       1.53 KSF
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                      4.05 KSF
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                     1.01 KSF
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                    0.13 KSF
                                                                                                                                               2
 10. Free-Standing Discount      0.48 KSF           0.73 KSF              --          1.36 KSF 2      3.61 KSF
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                      0.9 KSF
                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                    0.11 KSF
                                                                                                                                               2
     Superstore
 11. High-Turnover (Sit         0.28 KSF 1         0.42 KSF 1        0.45 KSF 1            --         1.75 KSF 1     0.66 KSF 2     0.06 KSF 1
     Down) Restaurant
 12. Fast Food Restaurant        0.06 KSF           0.09 KSF          0.12 KSF          0.2 KSF            --         0.16 KSF       0.02 KSF
     (Open after 9am)
                                             1
 13. Quality Restaurant         0.33 KSF           0.49 KSF 1        0.53 KSF 1       1.18 KSF 1      2.07 KSF 1          --        0.07 KSF 1
 14. Hotel                     2.87 Rooms         4.38 Rooms        6.04 Rooms       9.98 Rooms 30.08 Rooms       1 7.94 Rooms            --
 15. Multiplex Movie Theater                 2                2                2                2               2               2              2
                                0.89 KSF           1.33 KSF          1.49 KSF         2.03 KSF        5.38 KSF       1.34 KSF       0.17 KSF
 16. Bowling Alley                           2                2                2                2               2               2              2
                                0.96 KSF           1.44 KSF          1.61 KSF         2.19 KSF        5.81 KSF       1.45 KSF       0.18 KSF
                                             1                1                1               2                1               2
 17. Fitness Center             0.72 KSF           1.07 KSF          1.14 KSF          1.7 KSF        4.49 KSF       1.13 KSF       0.14 KSF 2
 18. Multi-Purpose               0.66 KSF             1 KSF           1.38 KSF         2.28 KSF       5.65 KSF 1      1.82 KSF      0.19 KSF 1
     Recreational Center
 19. Apartments                      N/A               N/A               N/A              N/A             N/A            N/A            N/A
 20. Condominiums                    N/A               N/A               N/A              N/A             N/A            N/A            N/A
                              Notes:
                                   a
                                     All of the rates reflect pass-by and internal trip capture estimates for the Carson Marketplace Project.
                                   The values in this table represent conversion rates from one land use to another. The values are based
                                   on conversions rates that would result in the same number of Project trips, with conversions of one use to
                                   another. The trip equivalency is based on the type of trip which would be the most restrictive: average
                                   daily trips (ADT), PM in-bound trips, or PM out-bound trips. Each type of trip may be more or less
                                   restrictive, depending on the travel characteristics of the two uses. All of the conversion rates in the table
                                   reflect ADT, unless noted as follows:
                                     1
                                        PM-inbound trips
                                     2
                                        PM-outbound trips
                                     3
                                        ADT and PM-outbound trips are equally limiting
                                     4
                                        PM-inbound trips and PM-outbound trips are equally limiting
                                     5
                                        ADT, PM-inbound trips and PM-outbound trips are equally limiting
                                   b
                                     Conversion factors for land uses permitted under the Carson Marketplace Specific Plan that are not
                                   specified in this table shall be determined by the City's Traffic Engineer.
Source: PCR Services, Appendix C of DEIR, SCH No. 2005051059
                                                                      TABLE B
                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE
                       TRIP GENERATION EQUIVALENCIES BASED ON NET TRIP GENERATION RATES a,b
        TO THIS USE         FROM THIS USE
                                                                                      18. Equivalency
                             15. Equivalency                                            to 1 KSF of           19.
                               to 1 KSF of        16. Equivalency 17. Equivalency Multi Purpose Equivalency to 20. Equivalency
                             Multiplex Movie        to 1 KSF of       to 1 KSF of        Recreation        1 DU of        to 1 DU of
    Land Use                      Theater          Bowling Alley Fitness Center            Center        Apartments     Condominiums
 1. Shopping Center             0.78 KSF
                                             1
                                                     0.92 KSF
                                                                1
                                                                       1.24 KSF          0.79 KSF
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                          0.2 KSF
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                          0.13 KSF
                                                                                                                                    2
 2. General Office                           2                2                 2                  2                2               2
                                1.08 KSF               1 KSF          1.29 KSF           0.66 KSF        0.17 KSF         0.11 KSF
 3. Supermarkets                0.29 KSF 1           0.34 KSF 1        0.63 KSF          0.33 KSF 2      0.09 KSF 2       0.05 KSF 2
 4. Electronic Superstore                    1                  1                                  2                2               2
                                0.47 KSF             0.56 KSF          0.81 KSF          0.49 KSF        0.13 KSF         0.08 KSF
                                             1                  1
 5. Home Improvement            1.03 KSF             1.21 KSF          1.45 KSF          0.99 KSF 2      0.25 KSF
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                          0.16 KSF
                                                                                                                                    2
    Superstore
 6. Office Supply Store         0.65 KSF 1           0.76 KSF 1       1.43 KSF 1          0.8 KSF 2      0.21 KSF 2       0.13 KSF 2
                                             1                                                     2                2
 7. Home Furnishing             0.65 KSF               0.7 KSF         0.77 KSF          0.58 KSF        0.15 KSF         0.09 KSF 2
    Superstore
 8. Discount Club               0.63 KSF 1           0.74 KSF 1        1.13 KSF          0.69 KSF 2      0.18 KSF 2       0.11 KSF 2
                                             1                  1
 9. Pet Supply Superstore       0.42 KSF             0.49 KSF          0.74 KSF          0.46 KSF 2      0.12 KSF
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                          0.07 KSF
                                                                                                                                    2
                                            1                   1
10. Free-Standing Discount       0.4 KSF             0.46 KSF          0.54 KSF          0.41 KSF 2      0.11 KSF
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                          0.07 KSF
                                                                                                                                    2
    Superstore
11. High-Turnover (Sit          0.18 KSF 1           0.21 KSF 1        0.32 KSF           0.3 KSF 2      0.08 KSF 3       0.05 KSF 3
    Down) Restaurant
12. Fast Food Restaurant         0.06 KSF             0.06 KSF         0.07 KSF           0.09 KSF        0.02 KSF         0.01 KSF
    (Open after 9am)
                                             1
13. Quality Restaurant          0.21 KSF             0.24 KSF 1        0.41 KSF          0.37 KSF 1        0.1 KSF        0.07 KSF 5
14. Hotel                      2.89 Rooms           2.94 Rooms       3.23 Rooms                      2  0.78 Rooms       0.55 Rooms
                                                                                       3.66 Rooms
15. Multiplex Movie Theater           --                        2      1.12 KSF                    2                2              2
                                                     0.93 KSF                            0.61 KSF        0.16 KSF          0.1 KSF
16. Bowling Alley                            1            --            1.1 KSF                    2                2              2
                                0.85 KSF                                                 0.66 KSF        0.17 KSF          0.1 KSF
                                             1                  1                                  2                2
17. Fitness Center              0.45 KSF             0.53 KSF              --            0.51 KSF        0.13 KSF         0.08 KSF 2
18. Multi-Purpose                0.57 KSF            0.67 KSF 3        0.74 KSF               --          0.18 KSF         0.12 KSF
    Recreational Center
19. Apartments                       N/A                 N/A              N/A                N/A               --                  2
                                                                                                                          0.62 DU
20. Condominiums                     N/A                 N/A              N/A                N/A           1.44 DU             --
                            Notes:
                                 a
                                    All of the rates reflect pass-by and internal trip capture estimates for the Carson Marketplace Project. The
                                 values in this table represent conversion rates from one land use to another. The values are based on
                                 conversions rates that would result in the same number of Project trips, with conversions of one use to
                                 another. The trip equivalency is based on the type of trip which would be the most restrictive: average daily
                                 trips (ADT), PM in-bound trips, or PM out-bound trips. Each type of trip may be more or less restrictive,
                                 depending on the travel characteristics of the two uses. All of the conversion rates in the table reflect ADT,
                                 unless noted as follows:
                                    1
                                      PM-inbound trips
                                    2
                                      PM-outbound trips
                                    3
                                      ADT and PM-outbound trips are equally limiting
                                    4
                                      PM-inbound trips and PM-outbound trips are equally limiting
                                    5
                                      ADT, PM-inbound trips and PM-outbound trips are equally limiting
                                 b
                                    Conversion factors for land uses permitted under the Carson Marketplace Specific Plan that are not
                                 specified in this table shall be determined by the City's Traffic Engineer.
Source: PCR Services, Appendix C of DEIR, SCH No. 2005051059
                                                                  TABLE C
                                                             CARSON MARKETPLACE
                                                 PROPOSED PROJECT TRIP GENERATION ESTIMATES
                                                                                           AM Peak Hour              PM Peak Hour
No.                  Land Use                  ITE Code    Size      Unit    Daily      In     Out      Total     In     Out       Total
     REGIONAL RETAIL
 1   Shopping Center [a]                          820    500.000     KSF    19,332    251      160      411    869       942      1,811
     (Less-20% Internal)                                                    (3,866)   (50)     (32)      (82)  (174)     (188)     (362)
     (Less-25% Pass By - PM & Daily)                                        (4,833)     0       0         0    (217)     (236)     (453)
                                      Subtotal                              10,633    201      128      329    478       518       996
 2   Supermarket                                  850     70.000     KSF    6,078     139       89      228    373       359       732
     (Less-20% Internal)                                                    (1,216)   (28)     (18)      (46)   (75)      (72)     (146)
     (Less-40% Pass By)                                                     (1,945)   (44)     (28)      (73)  (119)     (115)     (234)
                                      Subtotal                              2,917      67       43      109    179       172       352
 3   Electronic Superstore                        863     50.000     KSF    2,252      10       4        14    110       115       225
     (Less-20% Internal)                                                     (450)     (2)      (1)       (3)   (22)      (23)      (45)
     (Less-10% Pass By)                                                      (180)     (1)      0         (1)    (9)       (9)      (18)
                                      Subtotal                              1,622       7       3        10     79        83       162
 4   Home Improvement Superstore                  862    150.000     KSF    4,262      97       83      180    173       195       368
     (Less-20% Internal)                                                     (852)    (19)     (17)      (36)   (35)      (39)      (74)
     (Less-20% Pass By)                                                      (682)    (16)     (13)      (29)   (28)      (31)      (59)
                                      Subtotal                              2,728      62       53      115    110       125       235
 5   Discount Club                                861    150.000     KSF    6,270      60       24       84    318       318       636
     (Less-20% Internal)                                                    (1,254)   (12)      (5)      (17)   (64)      (64)     (127)
     (Less-30% Pass By)                                                     (1,505)   (14)      (6)      (20)   (76)      (76)     (153)
                                      Subtotal                              3,511      34       13       47    178       178       356
 6   Home Furnishing Superstore                   869    350.000     KSF    16,734    128       55      183    632       772      1,404
     (Less-20% Internal)                                                    (3,347)   (26)     (11)      (37)  (126)     (154)     (281)
     (Less-20% Pass By)                                                     (1,339)   (20)      (9)      (29)  (101)     (124)     (225)
                                      Subtotal                              12,048     82       35      117    405       494       898
 7   Office Supply Store                          867     50.000     KSF    1,700       7       3        10     90        80       170
     (Less-20% Internal)                                                     (340)     (1)      (1)       (2)   (18)      (16)      (34)
     (Less-20% Pass By)                                                      (476)     (1)      0         (2)   (14)      (13)      (27)
                                      Subtotal                               884        5       2         6     58        51       109
 8   Pet Supply Superstore                        866     50.000     KSF    2,480      11       4        15    124       124       248
     (Less-20% Internal)                                                     (496)     (2)      (1)       (3)   (25)      (25)      (50)
     (Less-10% Pass By)                                                      (198)     (1)      0         (1)   (10)      (10)      (20)
                                      Subtotal                              1,786       8       3        11     89        89       178
          Subtotal for Regional Retail Center           1,370.000    KSF   36,129     466      280      744   1,576     1,710     3,286
     NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL
 9   Supermarket                                  850     20.000     KSF    2,731      40       25       65    107       102       209
     (Less-20% Internal)                                                     (546)     (8)      (5)      (13)   (21)      (20)      (42)
     (Less-40% Pass By)                                                      (874)    (13)      (8)      (21)   (34)      (33)      (67)
                                      Subtotal                              1,311      19       12       31     52        49       100
10   Shopping Center [a]                          820    110.000     KSF    7,225     101       65      166    320       347       667
     (Less-20% Internal)                                                    (1,445)   (20)     (13)      (33)   (64)      (69)     (133)
     (Less-25% Pass By - PM & Daily)                                        (1,806)     0       0         0     (80)      (87)     (167)
                                      Subtotal                              3,974      81       52      133    176       191       367
    Subtotal for Neighborhood Retail Center              130.000     KSF    5,285     100      64       164    228       240       467
     RESIDENTIAL
11   Apartments                                   220      400        DU    2,554      40      160      200    155        83       238
12   Condominiums                                 230     1,150       DU    5,117      62      302      364    298       147       445
                      Subtotal for Residential            1,550      DU     7,671     102      462      564    453       230       683
     HOTEL
13   Hotel                                        310      300      Rooms   3,058      98       62      160     94        83       177
                           Subtotal for Hotel              300     Rooms    3,058      98      62       160     94        83       177
                                                                        TABLE C
                                                                  CARSON MARKETPLACE
                                                       PROPOSED PROJECT TRIP GENERATION ESTIMATES
                                                                                                 AM Peak Hour             PM Peak Hour
   No.                     Land Use                  ITE Code   Size      Unit     Daily      In     Out      Total    In     Out      Total
           RESTAURANTS
   14      High-Turnover (Sit Down) Restaurant          932    50.000     KSF     6,358     300      276       576   333      213       546
           (Less-20% Internal)                                                    (1,272)   (60)     (55)     (115)  (67)     (43)     (109)
           (Less-20% Pass By)                                                     (1,017)   (48)     (44)      (92)  (53)     (34)      (87)
                                            Subtotal                              4,069     192      177       369   213      136       350
   15      Fast Food Restaurant                         933    15.000     KSF     10,740    395      263       658   200      192       392
           (Less-20% Internal)                                                    (2,148)   (79)     (53)     (132)  (40)     (38)      (78)
           (Less-30% Pass By)                                                     (2,578)   (95)     (63)     (158)  (48)     (46)      (94)
                                            Subtotal                              6,014     221      147       368   112      108       220
   16      Quality Restaurant                           931    16.125     KSF     1,450       8       5         13    81       40       121
           (Less-20% Internal)                                                     (290)     (2)      (1)       (3)  (16)      (8)      (24)
           (Less-10% Pass By)                                                      (116)     (1)      0         (1)   (7)      (3)      (10)
                                            Subtotal                              1,044       5       4          9    58       29        87
                           Subtotal for Restaurants            81.125     KSF    11,127     418      328       746   383      273       657
           COMMERCIAL RECREATION/ENTERTAINMENT
   17      Multiplex Movie Theater                      445     4500     Seats    3,600      12       1         13   130      230       360
           (Less-20% Internal)                                110.000     KSF      (720)     (2)      0         (3)  (26)     (46)      (72)
           (Less-10% Pass By)                                                      (288)     (1)      0         (1)  (21)     (37)      (58)
                                            Subtotal                              2,592       9       1          9    83      147       230
   18      Bowling Alley                                437    25.000     KSF      833       47       31        78    31       44        89
           (Less-20% Internal)                                                     (167)     (9)      (6)      (16)   (6)      (9)      (18)
           (Less-10% Pass By)                                                       (67)     (4)      (3)       (6)   (3)      (4)       (7)
                                            Subtotal                               599       34       22        56    22       31        64
   19      Fitness Center                               492    35.000     KSF     1,153      18       24        42    72       70       142
           (Less-20% Pass By)                                                      (231)     (4)      (5)       (8)  (14)     (14)      (28)
                                            Subtotal                               922       14       19        34    58       56       114
   20      Multi-Purpose Recreation Center              435    44.000     KSF     2,450      39       10        49    91       56       147
           (Less-20% Internal)                                                     (490)     (8)      (2)      (10)  (18)     (11)      (29)
           (Less-20% Pass By)                                                      (392)     (6)      (2)       (8)  (15)      (9)      (24)
                                            Subtotal                              1,568      25       6         31    58       36        94
Subtotal for Commercial Recreation/Entertainment              214.000     KSF     5,681      82      48        130   221      270       502
                                         TOTAL                                    68,951   1,266    1,244     2,508 2,955    2,806     5,772
Source: PCR Services, Appendix D of DEIR, SCH No. 2005051059
                                       APPENDIX F
     Preservation of Assisted Housing At Risk Of Conversion
                                         Analysis
As required by Government Code Section 65583, the City must analyze the extent to
which low income, multi-family rental units are at risk of becoming market rate housing,
and if necessary, develop programs to preserve or replace these assisted housing units.
The multi-family units to be considered are any units that were constructed using
various federal assistance programs, state or local mortgage revenue bonds,
redevelopment tax increments, in-lieu fees or an inclusionary housing ordinance, or
density bonus.
Low income multi-family housing is considered to be at risk if it is eligible to convert to
non-low income housing due to: (1) the termination of a rental subsidy contract; (2)
mortgage repayment; or (3) the expiration of affordability restrictions.
For the current planning period 2014-2021, there are two housing developments at-risk
of converting to market rate, the Carson Gardens Retirement Apartments and the Grace
Manor Apartments. An additional two developments are also at-risk of converting to
market rate between the period 2021-2024, El Camino Village Senior Complex and
Avalon Courtyard Senior Project. Provided below is an analysis and estimate of the
costs of replacement and preservation of the above-identified units that are at risk of
conversion to market rate units if annual contract renewals are not approved by HUD.
This section will address:
        An identification of assisted housing units that are at-risk of converting to market
         rate housing,
        An analysis of the costs of preserving and/or replacing these units,
        Resources that could be used to preserve at-risk units, and
        Program efforts for preservation of at-risk housing units.
Identification of At-Risk Units
Within the City of Carson there are several low- to moderate-income housing projects
that have existing affordability controls listed in Table 27. Identified below are four
developments that would be at-risk of converting to market rate in the next ten years
(2014-2024) if annual contracts are not renewed or extended.
City of Carson                         APPENDIX F                    2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                    Table F-1
                                               City of Carson
                                         Potential At-Risk Units
                            Types of        Earliest     Total  Number of
                                                                                       Number
  Project                   Project-       Potential   Number     Units                          Reported
              Address                                                         Tenant      of
   Name                   Based Govt.     Conversion   Units in Subject to                       Condition
                                                                                      Bedrooms
                           Assistance        Dates      Project Conversion
  Carson      21811 S.    HUD 221 D4      Applying for    101      100        Senior    1&2        Good
  Gardens      Main St.                     a 5-year
Retirement     Carson,                     extension
Apartments        CA                        on 10/09
                90745
   Grace       223rd &    HUD Section      7 units are    38       30         Family   1,2, & 3  Very Good
   Manor        Grace          236        market rate
Apartments     Carson,                     & 30 units
                  CA                      are Section
                90745                     8 vouchers
 El Camino    21735          Housing          2022         45      44         Senior      1         Poor
   Village    So. Main       Authority
   Senior     St.             Funds
  Complex     Carson,
              CA 90745
   Avalon     22121        Low Income         2024        92       91         Senior      1      Very Good
 Courtyard    So.          Housing Tax
   Senior     Avalon      Credits/Agency
   Project    Blvd.         Set-Aside
              Carson,
              CA 90745
Cost of Preservation of Units
While there are many options to preserving units including providing financial incentives
to project owners to extend lower income use restrictions, purchasing affordable
housing units by a non-profit or public agency or providing local subsidies to offset the
difference between the affordable and marker rate units, the strategy considered below
is to provide a local rental subsidy to residents. The rent subsidy would provide financial
assistance to residents if their affordable units converted to market rate. To determine
the subsidy needed, Fair Market Rents were compared to market rate rents.
                                                    Table F-2
                                               City of Carson
                                         2013 Fair Market Rents
                       Size of Unit                                      Fair Market Rent
 0-bedroom                                                                                          $911
 1-bedroom                                                                                        $1,101
 2-bedroom                                                                                        $1,421
 3-bedroom                                                                                        $1,921
 4-bedroom                                                                                        $2,140
Source: HUD, 2009
City of Carson                                 APPENDIX F                      2014-2021 Housing Element
                                                            Table F-3
                                                      City of Carson
                 Estimated Monthly Subsidy to Preserve “At-Risk” Units
                            Monthly Rents
                                                             Number of                             Monthly            Annual
   Unit Size        Fair Market            Market                               Difference
                                                                Units                              Subsidy            Subsidy
                       Rents1               Rate2
Studio                        $911                     -                   0               $0              $0                $0
1-bedroom                  $1,101               $1,150                  245               $49        $12,005           $144,060
2-bedroom                  $1,421               $1,700                   10              $279         $2,790            $33,480
3-bedroom                  $1,921               $2,010                   10               $89            $890           $10,680
4-bedroom                  $2,140                      -                   0               $0              $0                $0
                                                                                                      TOTAL            $188,220
Source: HUD Fair Market Rents 2013, Carson Rental Survey
Notes
1
 HUD Fair Market Rents, 2013
2
 Carson Rental Survey
Cost of Replacement of Units
The City of Carson can also consider the cost of replacing the units with new
construction. Construction cost estimates include all hard and soft costs associated with
construction in addition to per unit land costs. The analysis assumes the replacement
units are apartments with parking provided on-site, concrete block with steel frame.
Square footage estimates are based on estimated size of units to be replaced and
assuming housing units are developed on multi-family zoned properties. Land costs
have been determined on a per unit basis.
                                                            Table F-4
                                                      City of Carson
                                        Replacement Cost by Unit Type
                                                                          Average Square            Replacement Cost per
         Unit Size                 Cost per Square Foot1
                                                                              Foot/Unit2                        Unit3
Studio                                                      $220                                 -                            -
1-bedroom                                                   $220                              584                      $158,480
2-bedroom                                                   $220                              780                      $201,600
3-bedroom                                                   $220                            1,010                      $252,200
4-bedroom                                                   $220                                 -                            -
Source: Saylor Publications, Inc. www.saylor.com, 2009
Notes
1
 Based on prevailing market conditions. Units assumed as apartments with on-site parking; concrete block and steel frame.
2
 Based on estimated size of units to be replaced.
3
 Includes construction costs, financing, and land acquisition costs of $30,000 per unit.
City of Carson                                       APPENDIX F                                 2014-2021 Housing Element

                                                             Table F-5
                                                        City of Carson
                                   Replacement Cost of “At-Risk” Units1
                                    Replacement Cost                                                Total Replacement
         Unit Size                                                      Number of Units
                                            per Unit                                                          Costs
  Studio                                                          -                            0                                $0
  1-bedroom                                            $158,480                             245                    $38,827,600
  2-bedroom                                            $201,600                              10                      $2,016,000
  3-bedroom                                            $252,200                              10                      $2,522,000
  4-bedroom                                                       -                            0                                $0
Source: Willdan
Notes
1
 Based on prevailing market conditions. Units assumed as apartments with on-site parking; concrete block and steel frame. Includes
  construction costs, financing, and land acquisition costs of $30,000 per unit.
Resources to Preserve At-Risk Units
The high costs of developing and preserving housing, along with limitations on both the
amount and uses of funds, necessitates that a variety of funding sources may be
required to preserve or replace affordable housing units. The Housing Resources
section of the housing element describes in detail the two primary local funding sources
for housing currently used in the City of Carson including Carson Housing Authority
Funds and City CDBG funds. Both of these sources could potentially be used to assist
in the support and development of affordable housing. Table 38 provides a complete list
of funding programs divided into funding categories including federal, state, county, and
private resources that could be used for: acquisition, rehabilitation, home buyer
assistance, refinancing, rental assistance, and new construction. Adapted from Table 38
is a listing of funding programs that could be used for new construction.
          State and Federal Home Investment Partnership Act (HOME) Funds
          Section 202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly
          Section 207 Multifamily Rental Housing
          Section 207 Manufactured Home Parks
          Section 213 Cooperative Housing
          Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities
          Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC)
          California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) Multiple Rental Housing Program
          Redevelopment Housing Fund
          Tax Exempt Housing Revenue Bond
          California Community Reinvestment Corporation
          Federal Home Loan Bank Affordable Housing Program
City of Carson                                         APPENDIX F                             2014-2021 Housing Element

Program to Preserve At-Risk Units
The City has established a program to monitor affordable housing units assisted by the
Redevelopment Agency that are at risk of converting to market rate. This program will
be expanded to serve as an early warning system to monitor all at risk units in the City.
Owners of such units will be contacted to assess the owner’s intent to prepay a
federally-assisted mortgage or to renew or opt out of project-based Section 8 contracts.
The owners will be encouraged to consider renewal of HUD Section 8 contracts.
Owners who want to opt out of a Section 8 contract, prepay a HUD subsidized
mortgage or sell their property upon the expiration of the rental subsidy will be
encouraged to provide 18-24 months advance notice to tenants. Through the program,
tenants will be informed of the potential conversion of their units to market rate, and
they will be educated on the potential tenant purchase of units.
Non-Profit Resources Available for Preservation of Units
The following non-profit corporations are potential organizations with the experience
and capacity to assist in preserving at-risk units:
        Los Angeles Center for Affordable Tenant Housing
        BUILD Leadership Development Inc.
        Century Housing Corporation
        Century Pacific Equity Corporation
        Community Partnership Development Corporation
        DML & Associates Foundation
        East Los Angeles Community Corporation
        Foundation for Quality Housing Opportunities Inc.
        Housing Authority of the City of Los Angeles
        Housing Corporation of America
        Jamboree Housing Corporation
        Keller & Company
        Los Angeles Housing Partnership Inc.
        Los Angeles Low Income Housing Corporation (LALIH)
        National Community Renaissance
        Neighborhood Housing Services of the Inland Empire Inc.
        Nexus for Affordable Housing
        Orange Housing Development Corporation
        Southern California Housing Development Corporation
City of Carson                        APPENDIX F                 2014-2021 Housing Element

        Southern California Presbyterian Homes
        The East Los Angeles Community Union (TELACU)
City of Carson                       APPENDIX F        2014-2021 Housing Element

City of Carson APPENDIX F 2014-2021 Housing Elemen

CITY OF CARSON
2014-2021 Housing Element
     CHAPTER 6
SAFETY ELEMENT
                                           CHAPTER 6
                                      SAFETY ELEMENT
GUIDING PRINCIPLE
                 The City of Carson is committed to promoting safety in order to enhance the
                 livability, quality of life, business environment, positive image of the community,
                 and reduce the effects of crime and environmental hazards to all citizens.
1.0     INTRODUCTION
                 The Safety Element is an official guide for the City Council, government agencies,
                 and individuals to identify and understand potential hazards confronting the City of
                 Carson. The Element evaluates natural and man-made hazards that have the
                 potential to endanger the welfare and safety of the general public and aims to
                 reduce the potential risk of death, injuries, property damage and the economic and
                 social dislocation resulting from them. The concerns are subsequently incorporated
                 into goals, policies and implementation actions to reduce the impacts of hazards.
2.0     STATE LAW REQUIREMENTS
                 The State of California Government Code Section 65302(g) requires that a General
                 Plan include:
                     “...a safety element for the protection of the community from any unreasonable
                     risks associated with the effects of seismically induced surface rupture, ground
                     shaking, ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope instability
                     leading to mudslides and landslides; subsidence, liquefaction and other seismic
                     hazards identified pursuant to Chapter 7.8 (commencing with §2690) of the
Carson General Plan                                 SAF-1                                        Chapter 6

                                                                                         SAFETY ELEMENT
                   Public Resources Code, and other geologic hazards known to the legislative
                   body; flooding; and wild land and urban fires.”
              Policies and information for this element are contained in the Alquist-Priolo
              Earthquake Fault Zoning Act (Public Resources Code Section 2621, et seq.), the
              Seismic Hazards Mapping Act (Public Resources Code Section 2690, et seq.), and
              the Unreinforced Masonry Law (Government Code Section 8875, et seq.).
3.0 SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
3.1     CITY PLANS AND PROGRAMS
              The Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS), California Code of
              Regulations, Title 19, Division 2, Section 2443, requires compliance with the SEMS
              to.... “be documented in the areas of planning, training, exercise, and performance."
              Compliance with the SEMS requires that emergency plans address the following five
              SEMS functions:
                      Management;
                      Operations;
                      Logistics;
                      Planning/Intelligence; and
                      Finance/Administration.
              The plan should also address mutual aid, operational areas, and multi/inter-agency
              coordination.
              Carson has prepared a Multi-Hazard Functional Plan (1996) for emergency
              response within the City. The Plan meets the State’s Standardized Emergency
              Management System (SEMS) requirements of State law. The City also complies
              with the Los Angeles County Emergency Management Plan.
              Threats and emergency response are thoroughly described and outlined in the
              SEMS Multi-Hazard Functional Plan. Key points of the plan include the
              identification of critical areas in the City that represent both dangers, as well as
              areas for meeting and staging in an emergency event, communications, and
              emergency evacuation. Parks and other large areas are identified as emergency
              shelter and meeting locations. An Emergency Operation Center (EOC), fully
              equipped with emergency communication equipment and cooking, showering and
              sleeping facilities is provided in City hall for seismic or other disaster situations. A
              Citywide amateur radio operating system has been implemented to maintain
              communications should other systems fail.
              The Plan also identifies emergency routes. The City is fortunate in having four
              major freeways (I-405, SR-91, I-110, and I-710) that would serve as potential
              evacuation routes during a disaster. Arterial streets with right-of-way widths of from
              80 to 100 feet form a grid pattern throughout the City at one-half mile intervals.
              East-west arterial streets that would be used as evacuation routes include Lomita
Chapter 6                                       SAF-2                               Carson General Plan

SAFETY ELEMENT
                 Boulevard, Sepulveda Boulevard, 223rd Street, Carson Street, Del Amo Boulevard,
                 Victoria Street, Artesia Boulevard, and Alondra Boulevard. North-south arterial
                 streets include Santa Fe Avenue, Alameda Street, Wilmington Avenue, Avalon
                 Boulevard, Main Street, Figueroa Street and Broadway.
3.2      EXISTING CONDITIONS
                 The potential threat from natural and man-made hazards can pose significant
                 danger to a community. Natural hazards include flooding, seismic activity, geology,
                 soils and wind. Man-made hazards involve hazardous materials, transportation, oil
                 production facilities, civil unrest, national security emergencies and terrorism. This
                 section of the Safety Element addresses the existing conditions of these hazards and
                 programs currently in place to address them.
3.2.1    NATURAL HAZARDS
                 FLOODING
                 Flood Hazards
                 Historically, flooding problems in the City of Carson have occurred in low lying
                 areas and in areas where slopes are very flat and peak storm flows are unable to be
                 quickly conveyed into the storm water collection system. Although Carson is
                 located relatively close to the Pacific Ocean, the City has not been vulnerable to
                 storm surge inundation associated with hurricanes and/or tropical storms.
                 According to the City of Carson’s SEMS Multi-Hazard Functional Plan, the City is
                 not subject to inundation associated with dam failure. The limits of the 100-year
                 storm are limited to the Dominguez Channel. In the event of a 500-year storm, the
                 entire City would be flooded. Areas outside the 100-year storm limits may also
                 flood due to deficient storm water conveyance.
                 During heavy rains, run-off water from the northeast part of the City is caught and
                 contained in Del Amo Park, located at Avalon Boulevard and Del Amo Boulevard.
                 Del Amo Park is designated by the Los Angeles County Food Control District as a
                 catch basin to relieve the storm drain of excessive water that cannot be immediately
                 handled during a rainstorm. A Los Angeles County pump station, located at the
                 northeast corner of the catch basin, pumps the basin dry when the water flow
                 subsides. An area for potential flooding is in the southeast corner of the City at a
                 catch basin located on Santa Fe Street between Carson and Wardlow Streets. Run-
                 off water is handled in the same manner as at Del Amo Park, which is used on a
                 daily basis as a City recreation park facility. The catch basin on Santa Fe Avenue is
                 also a public street on a day-to-day basis.
                 If evacuation due to flooding is necessary, the selection of sites for relocation
                 centers should consider the following:
                        Carriage Crest Park and Del Amo Park are low points and should not be
                         used during a flooding incident.
Carson General Plan                                 SAF-3                                       Chapter 6

                                                                                  SAFETY ELEMENT
                 Dolphin Park may flood during a heavy storm.           Its safety should be
                  ascertained before use.
                 If schools are to be used, avoid Towne Avenue Elementary, which is in a
                  flood prone area, and Leapwood Avenue Elementary, which is in a mudslide
                  prone area.
                 California State University at Dominguez Hills is on high ground and is
                  large enough to handle a major relocation, but access from south Carson
                  may be blocked by flooded intersections and mudslides near the campus.
                  Access routes must be carefully planned, if the campus is to be utilized as an
                  emergency shelter.
          According to the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) administered by the
          Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Carson is designated as a Zone
          “C” City (area of minimal flooding). Up until February 2000, FEMA indicated that
          roughly the eastern third of the City would be flooded during a 100-year storm
          event. However, on February 25, 2000, FEMA redesignated this area as not being
          within a flood zone, due to restoration of a section of the Los Angeles River levee
          system that provides flood protection for part of four surrounding communities,
          including the City of Carson. As a result of the restoration, areas in the City of
          Carson that were previously designated within Zone AR have been changed to the
          Zone X designation. Within the designation of Zone X, there is no federal
          obligation on lenders to require flood insurance. Exhibit SAF-1, Flood Zones Map,
          shows existing flood zone areas within Carson.
          The City’s Emergency Operations Center (EOC) is located at City Hall. Should the
          City Hall EOC not be available for use due to flooding, or any other circumstances,
          the designated alternate EOC at the City’s Corporate Yard, would be activated.
          The City also has a mobile command unit.
          Drainage Facilities
          The Los Angeles County Department of Public Works (LACDPW) is the
          responsible agency for regional flood control protection within Los Angeles County.
          LACDPW presently owns and maintains three regional flood control facilities
          within or in close proximity to the City of Carson. These facilities include the
          Dominguez Channel, Compton Creek, and Wilmington Channel. Flows in the City
          are conveyed by several networks of large drainage facilities to the Dominguez
          Channel, the primary regional flood control system that traverses and serves the
          City. Areas in the southwest portion of the City and two smaller areas to the
          northeast do not convey flows to the Dominguez Channel.
Chapter 6                                 SAF-4                              Carson General Plan


                                                                                        SAFETY ELEMENT
                  Two drainage reaches in the City of Carson are classified as unimproved
                  watercourses. The first reach is aligned through the Victoria Golf Course, a Los
                  Angeles County Department of Parks and Recreation facility, and extends from
                  Dominguez Channel to 192nd Street. The second reach is aligned through the
                  Carson Harbor Village Mobilehome Park, from Victoria Street to Albertoni Street.
                  The California State Department of Transportation (Caltrans) also operates and
                  maintains several drainage facilities within the State’s operating rights-of-way
                  associated with the Harbor (I-110), Redondo Beach/Artesia (SR-91), and San Diego
                  (I-405) Freeways.
                  In 1987, the City of Carson developed a Master Plan of Drainage. The Master Plan
                  of Drainage divided the City into 12 major drainage zones and described the existing
                  and proposed facilities required in each zone. In addition to the drainage facilities
                  identified above, the Master Plan of Drainage identifies approximately 130
                  additional existing storm drains within the City.1 The City’s Master Plan of
                  Drainage concluded that the existing storm drain system is generally adequate to
                  provide flood protection for developed areas of the City with a few exceptions.
                  Exhibit SAF-2, Existing Drainage Facilities, shows the existing drainage facilities
                  within Carson.
                  The Master Plan of Drainage provides for flood protection from a storm with a
                  return frequency of 50 years for sump areas and natural drainage courses, with the
                  exception of Zone 2. For all other areas, flood protection from a storm with a
                  return frequency of ten years is provided for in the Plan.
                  GEOLOGY
                  Geologic Characteristics
                  The City of Carson is located within the northerly end of the Peninsular Ranges
                  geomorphic province. The Peninsular Ranges province extends from the Los
                  Angeles Basin south of the Santa Monica Mountains to the tip of Baja California.
                  This geomorphic province is characterized by elongated northwest trending
                  mountain ranges separated by straight-sided sediment floored valleys. The
                  northwest trend is further reflected in the direction of the dominant geologic
                  structural features of the province, which are northwest-trending faults and folds.
                  These include the Newport-Inglewood fault zone, the Paramount syncline2, the
                  Dominguez anticline3, the Gardena syncline, the Wilmington anticline, and the
                  Wilmington syncline. Geologic units of the northern Peninsula Ranges province
                  consist of Jurassic and Cretaceous age basement rocks overlain by as much as 32,000
                  feet of marine and non-marine sedimentary strata ranging in age from the late
        1
          City of Carson Master Plan of Drainage, page 5, September 1987.
        2
          Syncline: A fold that is convex downwards.
        3
          Anticline: A fold that is convex upwards.
Chapter 6                                                 SAF-6                     Carson General Plan


                                                                                  SAFETY ELEMENT
          Cretaceous to Holocene epochs. The north, west, and southern portions of Carson
          is underlain by stream Quaternary Non-marine Terrace Deposits (Qt). The central
          and southeastern portion of the City of Carson is directly underlain by Holocene age
          alluvial (Qal) deposits of the Downey Plain and Dominguez Gap. The alluvial
          deposits are composed of poorly consolidated sand, silt, clay, and gravel.
          The City of Carson is situated in the northern part of the physiographic basin known
          as the Los Angeles Basin, or the Coastal Plain of Los Angeles. The most prominent
          landform within the City is the Dominguez Hills, which represents the central
          portion of the Newport-Inglewood fault zone (or uplift). In addition, the
          Dominguez Gap is another important landform feature within the City.
          Dominguez Hills. The Dominguez Hills lie immediately west of the Alameda Street
          corridor, between the Redondo Beach/Artesia Freeway (SR-91) on the north and
          Del Amo Boulevard on the south. The Dominguez Hills are a feature consisting of
          an elliptical, northwest trending anticlinal dome that ranges in elevation from
          approximately 20 feet above mean sea level (msl) to 195 feet msl.
          Dominguez Gap. The Dominguez Gap constitutes a portion of the Downey Plain
          lying between the Dominguez Hills and the northwestern extension of Signal Hill.
          The gap is approximately 1.6 miles wide at its narrowest point and approximately
          seven miles long. It was entrenched mainly by the ancestral San Gabriel River,
          which has a southward flowing ancestral Los Angeles River as a tributary. An
          estimated 150 feet of Holocene materials has been deposited within the Dominguez
          Gap.
          Mineral Resources
          Carson is located in the Los Angeles Basin, a major oil-producing district in
          Southern California. The City is located within the Wilmington and Dominguez oil
          fields. Oil was first discovered in the basin in 1889, and many active oil wells exist
          today within the City.
          Soils
          Soils within Carson are variable, ranging from sand to clay loam soil types. Table
          SAF-1, General Physical Properties of Soils in the Carson Area, which is based on
          information from the Los Angeles Soil Survey (USSCS, 1969) general soils map,
          indicates the general properties of soil associations that underlay Carson.
          According to the standards set by the Soil Conservation Service of the U.S.
          Department of Agriculture (USSCS), no prime agricultural soils exist within the
          City of Carson.
Chapter 6                                  SAF-8                              Carson General Plan
SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                       Table SAF-1
                           General Physical Properties of Soils in the Carson Area
   Association                                                 Depth            Erosion   Shrink-Swell
                   Soil Association          Soil Type                Slope (%)
    Number                                                   (inches)           Potential   Potential
       10        Oceano                 Sand                    60"      2-5    Mod-High       Low
       13        Netz-Cortina           Fine sand and           60"      0-5    Low-Mod        Low
                                        fine sandy loam
       14        Hanford                Sandy loam              60"      2-5      Low          Low
       15        Yolo                   Silty loam              60"       0     Low-Mod       Mod
       20        Chino (with            Clay loam               60"       0       Low         Mod
                 inclusions of the
                 Foster and
                 Grangeville
                 Associations)
       21        Ramona-Placentia       Sandy loam             18-60"    2-5    Low-Mod       High
   Source: U.S. Soil Conservation Service, 1969.
                   Geotechnical Constraints
                   Differential Settlement. A major geotechnical consideration for development in the
                   City of Carson is differential settlement. Differential settlement occurs when loose,
                   cohesionless sandy sediments consolidate or compact under the load of an overlying
                   static mass, such as a building. Clayey soils, generally cohesive, typically do not
                   consolidate under loads as much as cohesionless soils. Differential settlement is
                   related to dynamic settlement but differs in that it occurs under static loading, and
                   not as a result of shaking or seismic loading. Given the lateral and vertical variation
                   of the alluvial soils underlying Carson, differential settlement could occur in areas
                   thought to have a low susceptibility to settlement.
                   Differential settlement may also occur within the 14 former landfills in the City.
                   Areas where such activities have occurred may be subject to the generation of
                   organic gases associated with decomposition, and possibly experience differential
                   settlement as portions of the ground surface collapse inward.
                   Subsidence. As previously mentioned, the Dominguez and Wilmington oil fields are
                   located within the City. There is no documented ground subsidence associated with
                   the Dominguez oil field. However, the historic withdrawal of oil has been known to
                   cause subsidence in portions of the Wilmington oil field. By the early 1980s,
                   subsidence at the oil fields had been mitigated and was no longer occurring.4
         4
           Source: City of Carson Safety Element, 1981.
Carson General Plan                                       SAF-9                                  Chapter 6
                                                                                                   SAFETY ELEMENT
                Shallow or Perched Groundwater. Shallow or perched groundwater can also cause
                problems when designing multi-story buildings or underground facilities, such as
                parking lots or storage tanks. Construction of underground facilities usually
                requires excavating near vertical walls of earth. Shallow groundwater conditions
                combined with loose unconsolidated sediments tend to make these types of
                excavations unstable, requiring special construction techniques to insure the safety
                of workers. Also of concern is the additional pressure that the groundwater adds
                against subterranean walls. Special drainage systems have to be designed to help
                reduce the additional pressure and to prevent flooding. In addition, leaking of
                underground storage tanks can cause contamination of the underlying regional
                water table. Groundwater within the City of Carson occurs at a depth of
                approximately 30 feet below ground surface (bgs) to 70 feet bgs.5
                Slope Instability/Landslides. Due to the relative absence of significant elevation
                changes in the City, slope instability in Carson is limited to the slopes adjacent to the
                flood control channels that intersect the City. The loose unconsolidated nature of
                the sediments, exposed in slopes that are not faced with concrete may cause the
                slopes to be surficially unstable.
                Shrink/Swell Potential. The shrink/swell characteristics of soils also present a
                geotechnical constraint within the City. Soils with a high clay content typically have
                high shrink/swell characteristics. Shrinking and swelling of soil can cause overlying
                concrete to crack and settle. Refer to Table SAF-1, which cites the general
                characteristics of soils in the City.
                SEISMICITY
                Earthquakes occur frequently in Southern California, and particularly in the Los
                Angeles Basin, where numerous faults accommodate the complex tectonic stresses
                caused by the convergence of the North American and Pacific Plates.
                Seismic activity of a fault is measured by the frequency and magnitude of past
                earthquakes associated with that fault. An active fault is a fault that exhibits
                movement or shows evidence of movement within the last 11,000 years. A
                potentially active fault is a fault that has exhibited evidence of movement within the
                last two million years. The better known seismically active faults in Southern
                California are shown on Exhibit SAF-3, Regional Fault Map.
                The intensity of earthquakes is measured, or expressed, in terms of two scales. One,
                the Richter scale, measures the strength of an earthquake, or the strain energy
                released, as determined by seismographic observations. The second, the Mercalli
                Intensity Scale, describes the intensity in terms of observable impacts. See Table 3.4-
                4 in the Existing Conditions Report. Historical records indicate that the faults
                described below are considered active and capable of generating earthquakes that
                could affect the City.
        5
          Annual Survey and Report of Groundwater Replenishment, Water Replenishment District of California, Plate 2,
1998.
Chapter 6                                            SAF-10                                   Carson General Plan

                                                                                    SAFETY ELEMENT
          Newport-Inglewood Fault Zone. The Newport-Inglewood fault extends from the
          southern edge of the Santa Monica Mountains southeastward to an area offshore of
          Newport Beach. This zone, commonly referred to as the Newport-Inglewood uplift
          zone, can be traced at the surface by following a line of geomorphically young
          anticlinal hills and mesas. These hills and mesas include the Baldwin Hills,
          Dominguez Hills, Signal Hill, Huntington Beach Mesa and Newport Mesa. Recent
          earthquake focal mechanisms for 39 small earthquakes (1977 to 1985) show faulting
          along the north segment (north of Dominguez Hills) and along the south segment
          (south of Dominguez Hills to Newport Beach). The 1933 Long Beach earthquake
          has been attributed to movement on the Newport-Inglewood fault zone. Based on
          historic earthquakes, the fault zone is considered active. The Newport-Inglewood
          fault zone is considered capable of generating a maximum credible earthquake of a
          magnitude 7.0 on the Richter Scale. The Cherry Hill branch of the Newport-
          Inglewood fault zone traverses the City in the area of Dominguez Gap just to the
          north of Del Amo Boulevard. Movement along the fault is northeast side up,
          resulting in vertical displacement of waterbearing sediments extending for several
          miles. It was previously designated as an Earthquake Fault Zone but was removed
          by the State prior to 1986.
          Avalon-Compton Fault Zone. The Avalon-Compton Fault zone, which is part of
          the Newport-Inglewood Fault Zone, is the only active fault located in the City of
          Carson. The Avalon-Compton fault is located immediately east of Avalon
          Boulevard and north of the Redondo Beach/Artesia Freeway. Historically, the
          Avalon-Compton fault/Regional Shear Zone has moderate to high seismic activity
          with numerous earthquakes greater than Richter magnitude four.
          San Andreas Fault Zone. The San Andreas fault zone is California’s most
          prominent structural feature, trending in a general northwest direction for almost
          the entire length of the state. The southern segment is approximately 280 miles
          long. It extends from the Mexican border into the transverse ranges west of Tejon
          Pass. Along this segment, there is no single traceable fault line; rather, the fault is
          composed of several branches. The fault is considered capable of generating a
          maximum credible earthquake of magnitude 8.25 on the Richter Scale.
          Palos Verdes Fault Zone. The Palos Verdes fault zone is located southwest of the
          City and is traceable in the subsurface along the northern front of the Palos Verdes
          Hills. Offshore data, consisting of acoustic and reflection profiles, suggests very
          recent movement along the Palos Verdes Fault.
          Whittier Fault Zone (Elysian Park Structure). The 1987 Whittier Narrows
          earthquake (Richter magnitude 5.9) has been attributed to subsurface thrust faults
          (a low angle reverse fault) that are reflected at the earth’s surface by a west-
          northwest trending anticline known as the Elysian Park Anticline, or the Elysian
          Park structure. The subsurface faults that create the structure are not exposed at
          the surface, and do not present a potential surface rupture hazard. However, as
          demonstrated by the 1987 earthquake and two smaller earthquakes on June 12,
          1989, the faults are a source of future seismic activity. As such, the structure should
          be considered an active feature capable of generating future earthquakes.
Chapter 6                                  SAF-12                              Carson General Plan

SAFETY ELEMENT
                 Santa Monica Fault Zone. The Santa Monica Fault is an east-west trending left
                 reverse fault that extends approximately 24 kilometers within the immediate vicinity
                 of Pacific Palisades, Westwood, Beverly Hills and Santa Monica. Annual slip rate is
                 estimated between 0.27 mm and 0.39 mm per year along the fault. The Santa
                 Monica Fault has the capability to generate between a 6.0 to 7.0 Richter magnitude
                 earthquake.
                 Seismic Hazards
                 Ground Shaking. The effects of ground shaking in Carson will vary considerably
                 depending on the distance of the seismic source to the City and the duration of
                 strong vibratory motion. In general, long-period seismic waves, characteristic of
                 earthquakes that occur approximately nine miles or more from the area of concern,
                 interact with and damage structures such as high-rise buildings, bridges, and freeway
                 overpasses. Short period waves, however, are generally very destructive near the
                 epicenter of moderate- and large-magnitude seismic events, causing severe damage
                 predominately to low-rise rigid structures (less than three stories) not specifically
                 designed to resist them.
                 Detectable ground shaking within the City of Carson could be caused by any of the
                 active or potential active faults shown on (Exhibit SAF-3, Regional Fault Map). The
                 Newport-Inglewood, Whittier, Santa Monica, and Palos Verdes Faults are the active
                 faults most likely to cause high ground accelerations in the City. The San Andreas
                 Fault has the highest probability of generating a maximum credible earthquake in
                 California within the next thirty years. The anticipated “Big One”, with a magnitude
                 ranging between 7.5 and 8.0 is thought to be capable of seismic intensity values of
                 about IV to V on the Modified Mercalli (MM) Scale. Such an event would have an
                 expected shaking duration of 35 to 50 seconds.
                 As previously described above, the central and southeastern portions of the City are
                 underlain by alluvial deposits; the northern, western and southern portions of the
                 City are underlain by Quaternary non-marine terrace deposits. Because of the
                 area’s unstable sub-base of sandy soil, Carson (as well as the entire South Bay area)
                 is regarded as one of the most severe shock areas in the Los Angeles area.
                 Ground Failure
                 Seismically induced ground failure as discussed in this section includes liquefaction,
                 differential compaction, ground lurching, ground cracking and earthquake induced
                 slope failures.
                 Liquefaction. Liquefaction is a process by which water-saturated granular soils
                 transform from a solid to a liquid state because of a sudden shock or strain. Basic
                 conditions necessary for liquefaction to take place are soil conditions conducive to
                 liquefaction, saturation or these materials by water, and a source of shaking. The
                 Newport-Inglewood fault zone is a potential source of ground stress, and
                 liquefaction could occur in the City of Carson if the ground water table were high
                 enough during an earthquake. Due to existing conditions in the City, particularly in
                 the alluvial and former slough areas, there is the possibility that liquefaction could
Carson General Plan                                SAF-13                                      Chapter 6


SAFETY ELEMENT
                 impact buildings and/or other structures in the event of an earthquake. Exhibit
                 SAF-4, Seismic Hazards, shows the areas in the City which have shown historical
                 occurrence of liquefaction, or local geological, geotechnical and groundwater
                 conditions indicate a potential for permanent ground displacements. Liquefaction
                 can result in the shifting of foundations, settling of roadways and rupture of
                 underground pipelines and cables. Buildings and other objects on the ground
                 surface can settle, tilt and collapse as the foundations beneath them lose support,
                 and lightweight buried structures may float to the surface. A significant portion of
                 the City has been designated as potential liquefaction area and geotechnical
                 investigation reports are required as part of the environmental and building permit
                 processes for most development within these areas.
                 Differential Compaction or Settlement. Differential compaction resulting from
                 earthquake ground shaking is potentially damaging to structures and buried utilities
                 and services. Differential settlement may occur in cohesionless sediments where
                 differences in densities in adjacent materials lead to different degrees of compaction
                 during ground shaking. In the case of saturated cohesionless sediments, post
                 earthquake settlement may occur when excess pore-water pressures generated by
                 the earthquake dissipate. Given the lateral and vertical variation of the alluvial soils
                 underlying Carson, differential settlement could occur as a result of an earthquake
                 in areas thought to have a low susceptibility to settlement. Whereas differential
                 settlement is a potential hazard in Carson, the significance of the hazard at any
                 particular site may only be determined by soils investigations.
                 Ground Cracking, Ground Lurching and Lateral Spreading. Both ground cracking
                 and lurching are secondary features resulting from strong to moderately strong
                 ground shaking and may be associated with liquefaction. Ground cracking usually
                 occurs in near-surface materials, reflecting differential compaction or liquefaction of
                 underlying materials. The potential for ground cracking exists especially in those
                 areas of the City that have a moderate to high potential for liquefaction.
                 Ground lurching results when soft, water-saturated surface soils are thrown into
                 undulatory motion. Areas within Carson occur in those regions indicated on Exhibit
                 SAF-4, Seismic Hazards, that have a high potential for liquefaction.
                 Lateral spreading (a form of landsliding) is referred to as limited displacement
                 ground failure, often associated with liquefaction. Compact surface materials may
                 slide on a liquefied, or low shear strength layer at a shallow depth, moving laterally
                 several feet down slopes of less than two degrees. Such a condition may be present
                 where conditions conductive to shallow liquefaction exist.
                 Surface Faulting. Surface faulting, rupture of the ground surface along a causative
                 fault trace, is associated with the primary movement that produced the seismic event
                 and should not be confused with secondary ground cracking which is simply a result
                 of ground shaking and may occur at some distance from the causative fault. The
                 likelihood of surface rupture on a given fault can be determined principally studying
                 the seismic history of the fault and reviewing geologic evidence which suggests
                 historic or prehistoric surface rupture. Many past studies have shown that future
Carson General Plan                                SAF-15                                      Chapter 6
                                                                                      SAFETY ELEMENT
             surface faulting is most likely to occur where the trace ruptured last, especially if
             there is evidence of repeated and significant displacement on the trace.
             The only active fault within the City limits is the Avalon-Compton structural zone,
             which is part of the Newport-Inglewood Fault Zone. Although the Newport-
             Inglewood structural zone is seismically active, surface faulting does not appear to
             be a significant potential hazard. It is shown on Exhibit SAF 4, Seismic Hazards.
             Seismically Induced Water Waves. Seismically induced water waves include
             tsunamis, seiches and waves generated by failure of retaining structures. Tsunamis
             are generated by earthquake-induced subsea dislocations or landslides which cause
             large volumes of water to move in the form of ocean waves. Coastline configuration
             and tidal influx may cause local amplifying effects. A seiche is a low amplitude wave
             generated in a restrictive body of water due to earthquake motions.
             Due to the distance of the City to the Pacific Ocean, the potential for tsunami
             effects within the City is negligible. The absence of any large bodies of water within
             Carson preclude the possibility of damage from seiche effects. This could change
             should lakes or large reservoirs be constructed within the City.
3.2.2   MAN-MADE HAZARDS
             HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
             The State of California defines a hazardous material as a substance that is toxic,
             ignitable or flammable, or reactive and/or corrosive. An extremely hazardous
             material is defined as a substance that shows high acute or chronic toxicity,
             carcinogenicity, bio-accumulative properties, persistence in the environment, or is
             water reactive (California Code of Regulations, Title 22). “Hazardous waste,” a
             subset of hazardous materials, is material that is to be abandoned, discarded, or
             recycled, and includes chemical, radioactive, and biohazardous waste (including
             medical waste).
             Setting
             The City of Carson has a relatively long history of urban use, including industrial,
             commercial, and oil field development dating back to the early 1920s. Many of
             these uses have involved the use, storage, and/or generation of hazardous materials
             that were and continue to be required for even the most routine industrial and
             manufacturing processes. As a result of this long history of industrial and
             commercial development, and the fact that waste management practices and
             regulations were either not in place or not up to current standards, there are several
             sites within the City that have the potential to have been impacted by previous
             releases of contaminated materials.
             Since the 1980s, hazardous materials have been governed by a variety of
             environmental regulations that require proper storage, handling, employee and
             public noticing, spill contingency planning, business/environmental management
Chapter 6                                      SAF-16                             Carson General Plan

SAFETY ELEMENT
                 plans, and other emergency response measures necessary to ensure public safety and
                 to minimize the risk of accidental releases or environmental impacts. While it is less
                 likely for newer uses to have involved hazardous materials releases, the potential for
                 accidental releases, while minimized under current regulations, is inherent to
                 industrial areas.
                 The increasing volume and variety of hazardous materials that are generated,
                 stored, or transported within the City of Carson is a problem of great concern to
                 public officials and the community. A number of freight trains traverses the City,
                 hauling various types of hazardous and explosive materials including chlorine gas,
                 and low pressure natural gas (LPG). Several fixed-site industrial firms require the
                 use of potentially hazardous materials to operate their businesses. Finally, there are
                 numerous underground pipelines within the City limits that carry flammable and
                 hazardous liquids.
                 Hazardous Waste Management
                 Regulation of hazardous wastes is provided on the Federal, State and local levels.
                 The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the California
                 Department of Toxic Substance Control (DTSC) have developed and continue to
                 update lists of hazardous waste subject to regulation. The South Coast Air Quality
                 Management District (SCAQMD) works with the California Air Resources Board
                 (CARB) and is responsible for developing and implementing rules and regulations
                 regarding air toxins on a local level. The SCAQMD establishes permitting
                 requirements, inspects emission sources, and enforces measures through
                 educational programs and/or fines.
                 In response to the growing Statewide concern of hazardous waste management in
                 the 1970s and 1980s, State Assembly Bill 2948 (Tanner 1986) enacted legislation
                 authorizing local governments to develop comprehensive hazardous waste
                 management plans. The intent of each plan is to assure that adequate treatment
                 and disposal capacity is available to manage the hazardous wastes generated within
                 its jurisdiction. In 1988, Los Angeles County adopted the Los Angeles County
                 Hazardous Waste Management Plan, which was subsequently approved by the State
                 Department of Health Services. The City of Carson subsequently adopted the Plan.
                 The Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan provides policy
                 direction and action programs to address current and future hazardous waste
                 management issues that require local responsibility and involvement in Los Angeles
                 County. In addition, the Plan discusses hazardous waste issues, and analyzes current
                 and future waste generation in the incorporated cities, County, and State and
                 Federal lands.
                 In May 1982, the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors established the
                 Hazardous Materials Control Program in the Department of Health Services.
                 Originally, the program focused on the inspection of hazardous waste generating
                 businesses, but has since expanded to include hazardous materials inspections,
                 criminal investigations, site mitigation oversight and emergency response
                 operations. On July 1, 1991, the program was transferred to the Los Angeles
                 County Fire Department and its name changed to Health Hazards Division.
Carson General Plan                               SAF-17                                       Chapter 6
                                                                                   SAFETY ELEMENT
          Household Hazardous Waste Element
          Adopted in January 1992, the City Household Hazardous Waste Element describes
          existing and future programs to reduce household hazardous waste (HHW). The
          Element seeks to provide safe and convenient means to dispose of HHWs, increase
          recycling and reuse of HHWs, increase education about HHWs to decrease
          dependency and usage of HHWs, and methods to monitor and enforce regulatory
          requirements concerning HHW management.
          Disclosure of Hazardous Materials
          All businesses that handle more than a specified amount of hazardous materials are
          required by both the Federal and State governments to submit a business plan to
          their local administering agency. The quantities for acutely hazardous materials vary
          according to the substance. In the City of Carson, the administering agency is the
          Los Angeles County Fire Department. Every handler is required to submit a
          business plan and an inventory of hazardous substances and acutely hazardous
          materials to the Fire Department on an annual basis. If the hazardous materials
          inventory of a business should change, a revised business plan must be submitted.
          Inspectors from the Los Angeles County Fire Department conduct annual
          inspections of businesses that have submitted a business plan; they also conduct
          follow-up inspections as needed.
          Significant concentrations of hazardous materials, at levels for which a business plan
          is required, are generally associated with manufacturing and industrial areas. It
          should be noted, however, that hazardous materials are also used and stored in
          commercial and residential areas.
          Business and industrial facilities located outside the City limits also may have the
          potential of causing a hazardous materials release incident that could impact
          Carson. Hazardous materials stored in warehouses or in refineries have the
          potential of being released as toxic fumes during an earthquake or fire. The areas of
          the City that could be impacted by a toxic fume are in part dependent upon wind
          direction and other climatological controls. However, because of the risk, facilities
          that store hazardous materials that could pose a toxic-fume threat should not be
          located near predominantly residential neighborhoods and/or facilities that house
          immobile populations (i.e., schools, child care centers, convalescent homes, etc.).
          HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND TOXICS IN CARSON
          Waste Generators
          There are approximately 324 businesses in the City of Carson that handle hazardous
          materials and have a business plan on file or pending with the County of Los
          Angeles Fire Department. As of March 1999, 43 of these businesses handle acutely,
          or highly hazardous materials. A significant portion of these generators are
          associated with the petroleum industry. Other contributors to hazardous waste in
          the City include small quantity generators (SQGs). SQGs refer to generators of less
          than 1,000 kilograms (kg) of hazardous waste per month, such as gas stations,
Chapter 6                                  SAF-18                             Carson General Plan
SAFETY ELEMENT
                 automotive repair shops, dry cleaners, and photo finishers. A small percentage of
                 the City’s hazardous waste is classified as “household hazardous waste,” which
                 includes waste associated with painting, automobiles, cleaning solvents, and
                 pesticides used for gardening.
                 There are 16 businesses in the City and immediately surrounding unincorporated
                 area that have Risk Management Plans (RMPs), in compliance with California’s
                 Accidental Release Program, on file with the Los Angeles County Fire
                 Department’s Hazardous Materials Disclosure Program. This program is intended
                 to manage those materials classified as acutely hazardous materials. The list of
                 businesses that have a RMP is currently being updated. In addition, the City of
                 Carson contains numerous regulatory program sites (Fee Groups 03-05). Refer to
                 Exhibit 3.7-1, Sites with Regulatory Programs, and Table 3.7-1, City of Carson
                 Regulatory Fee Groups, in the Existing Conditions Report.
                 Illegal Dumping
                 Clandestine dumping, the criminal act of disposing of toxic material and hazardous
                 waste on public or private property, can trigger a hazardous material incident. As
                 the costs and restrictions increase for legitimate hazardous waste disposal sites, it
                 can be anticipated that illegal dumping of hazardous materials will increase
                 proportionately.
                 Transport of Hazardous Materials
                 In addition to stationary land uses that have the potential to involve hazardous
                 materials releases, major transportation corridors are also a potential source of
                 accidental releases or environmental incidents that could affect various areas of the
                 City. Heavy truck traffic travels on the Harbor (I-110), Redondo Beach/Artesia
                 (SR-91), San Diego (I-405), and Long Beach (I-710) Freeways each day. In
                 addition, arterial streets, including the Alameda Corridor, are also a potential
                 source of accidental releases of hazardous materials in the event of an accident.
                 Trucks carrying hazardous materials in support of local and regional industry and
                 commerce regularly use these transportation routes. One or more of every 10
                 commercial vehicles usually carries hazardous materials. In addition, hazardous
                 materials are often transported through the eastern portion of the City by rail lines.
                 The Los Angeles County Fire Department responds to all hazardous materials
                 incidents within the City, including those along the railways. The California
                 Highway Patrol is in charge of abating spills that occur on the freeway, with the local
                 police and fire departments and Caltrans responsible for additional enforcement
                 and routing assistance.
                 Oil and Gas Well Inventory
                 For the purposes of this Element, an oil well is defined as a hole drilled from the
                 surface into the earth for prospecting for, or production of oil, natural gas, or other
                 hydrocarbon substances. This definition also encompasses a well or a hole used for
                 the subsurface injection into the earth of oil field waste, gases, water, or liquid
                 substances, including any well or hole that has not been abandoned and is now in
Carson General Plan                               SAF-19                                        Chapter 6

                                                                                     SAFETY ELEMENT
          existence. The depth of an oil or gas well can range from a few hundred feet below
          ground surface (bgs) to more than 20,000 bgs.
          As previously mentioned, portions of the City of Carson are located within the
          Dominguez and Wilmington oil fields. According to the 1998 Preliminary Report of
          California Oil and Gas Production Statistics, dated January 1999, the Dominguez Oil
          Field produced approximately 237,000 barrels of oil and the on-shore oil production
          portion of the Wilmington Oil Field produced approximately 4,400,000 barrels of
          oil. See Table 3.7-4, Oil and Gas Well Inventory, in the Existing Conditions Report.
          Oil Production Hazards
          Gas Migration. Development within an oil field could result in construction of
          structures over abandoned wells. If the wells are leaking, methane and hydrogen
          sulfide gas could migrate upward and could accumulate beneath developed areas
          where concrete and asphalt surfaces prevent the natural migration of the methane
          gas to the atmosphere. Migration of gas through cracks in concrete foundations into
          the interior of structures could create the potential for an explosion or fire.
          Soil Contamination. Oil contaminated soil is known to occur in oil fields
          particularly adjacent to oil wells. Unrefined oil contains a variety of hazardous
          constituents, including polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), which are carcinogens,
          benzene, toluene, xylene, ethylbenzene and heavy metals; however, it should be
          noted that all oil-contaminated soil is considered hazardous under Federal and State
          standards. Due to the historic drilling activities within the City, contaminated soils
          may exist in the City.
          Blowouts. Blowout prevention devices are generally used by well operators
          whenever oil wells are being drilled or reworked. However, improper installation or
          faulty devices could potentially create a blowout at a drilling facility.
          Pipelines
          There are several crude oil and petroleum product pipelines that transect the City.
          Several petroleum handlers (i.e., Equilon, Tosco, a portion of the Texaco Refinery,
          and Arco which was acquired by BP, British Petroleum) are located within the City.
          The Southern Pacific Pipeline transports an unlimited amount of various products
          through the City from several locations (refer to Appendix C, Hazardous Materials,
          in the Existing Conditions Report). If one of these pipes is broken, the local fire
          department is responsible for contacting the operator of the damaged pipeline and,
          in the case of fire or explosion, for fire suppression. The Los Angeles County Fire
          Department has the emergency, 24-hour telephone numbers of the operators of the
          hazardous pipelines that transect the City (refer to Hazardous Materials Incidence
          Response, and Exhibit 3.7-3, Los Angeles Basin Call Wheel, in the Existing
          Conditions Report). In addition, the Fire Department has to report any pipe
          rupture, fire, or explosion to the State Office of Emergency Services. Although a
          release of crude oil and/or refined petroleum product would not pose as immediate
          a threat to the City residents as a toxic cloud would, the long-term environmental
          impacts of such an incident can be serious and costly. For example, if spilled crude
Chapter 6                                  SAF-20                                Carson General Plan
SAFETY ELEMENT
                  oil and/or refined product leak into the ground, the shallow ground water could be
                  contaminated, requiring ground water clean-up or remediation.
                  Superfund Sites
                  A search of the EPA’s database of Superfund Sites revealed a total eight hazardous
                  waste sites in Carson; however, none of the sites has been placed on the National
                  Priorities List.6 The search query results can be found in Appendix C, of the Existing
                  Conditions Report.
                  Underground Storage Tank Leaks
                  Based on a review of the California Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
                  Hazardous Waste and Substance Sites (CORTESE) list, and the State Water
                  Resources Control Board list of Releases of Hazardous Substances from
                  Underground Storage Tanks (USTs), in 1999, at least 72 Leaking Underground
                  Storage Tanks (LUSTs) had been reported in Carson. Of these, approximately 18
                  cases currently have remedial activities underway, while further site assessment/
                  investigation activities are reported for the remaining 54 LUST sites. Refer to Table
                  3.7-2 and Appendix C in the Existing Conditions Report.
                  Closed and Inactive Landfills
                  In addition to commercial and industrial uses within the City of Carson, several solid
                  waste landfills have been documented to exist in the area. The 1988 Federal
                  Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act
                  Information System (CERCLIS) list potentially hazardous waste sites included 14
                  sites within the City that were investigated by the EPA. The CERCLIS inventory
                  lists sites that have been identified as having a potential for releasing hazardous
                  substances into the environment (refer to Appendix C of the Existing Conditions
                  Report). According to information provided by VISTA Information Solutions, Inc.,
                  there are no Federal National Priorities List (NPL) sites within the City. However,
                  these 14 sites are currently being reviewed/ assessed for possible inclusions on the
                  NPL.
                  The composition of waste materials disposed of in several of these facilities is not
                  well known and many of these facilities are undergoing site investigation and/or
                  monitoring for contaminant constituents, including the generation of methane gas
                  associated with waste decomposition.
                  The City currently has 14 inactive sanitary landfills and no active landfills. Although
                  none of these landfills currently accepts materials that decompose chemically or
                  biologically, some of these sites had previous organic landfill activity and may be
                  subject to decomposition and the production of landfill gases. Any future
                  development proposed on or near these sites should be carefully studied and a
                  landfill gas control plan and monitoring system may be required for safety. Other
         6
           Source: http://www.epa.gov/superfund. November 16, 2001.
Carson General Plan                                   SAF-21                                     Chapter 6

                                                                                                     SAFETY ELEMENT
                  sites will probably not produce landfill gases since they contain non-water soluble,
                  non-decomposable inert solids.
                  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE
                  The City of Carson recognizes that the presence of hazardous materials associated
                  with industrial activities poses unique dangers to the health and welfare of the
                  citizens of Carson. In order to efficiently manage hazardous materials emergencies
                  and to minimize their effects, the City of Carson and assisting agencies have
                  developed a comprehensive Hazardous Material Response Plan. The Los Angeles
                  County Fire Department is responsible for responding to hazardous material release
                  incidents in Carson. The Los Angeles County Fire Department is not a part of a
                  Joint Powers Authority (JPA); however, it is a member of a Certified Unified
                  Program Agency (CUPA), which conducts inspections of businesses, manages and
                  reviews various hazardous waste permits for business plans, and oversees cleanups.7
                  First response to all hazardous materials incidents within the City is conducted by
                  the Los Angeles County Fire Department.
                  There are six primary fire stations that provide fire and emergency medical service
                  to the City of Carson, four of which are located within the corporate boundaries
                  (refer to Section 3.9, Public Services, in the Existing Conditions Report for the
                  location of these fire stations). In Carson, all of the businesses that store acutely
                  hazardous substances are located within 1.5 miles of a Los Angeles County Fire
                  Station. Average response time for a hazardous materials release in the City is the
                  same as for a fire, approximately five minutes.
                  Los Angeles Basin Call Wheel
                  In addition to the Los Angeles County Fire Department, an industry developed and
                  maintained “Call Wheel” notification system has been prepared for pipeline leak
                  notification to petroleum companies within the Los Angeles Basin, as shown on
                  Exhibit, 3.7-3, Los Angeles Basin Call Wheel, in the Existing Conditions Report. The
                  purpose of the “Call Wheel” is for leak information notification to those companies
                  on the Call Wheel, who may be the parties responsible for the leak.
3.2.3     AIR TRAFFIC, RAIL LINE AND TRUCKING HAZARDS
                  AIRCRAFT OVERFLIGHT HAZARDS
                  Aircraft originating and departing from a number of airports located within
                  Southern California heavily occupy the skies over Carson. The airports nearest to
                  Carson that handle the greatest amount of air traffic are described below.
                          Los Angeles International Airport (LAX). It is the fourth busiest airport in
                           the world and in 2001 served 61.6 million annual passengers. Planes arrive
          7
            Telephone interview with Battalion Chief John Tucker of the Los Angeles County Fire Department on March
17, 1999.
Chapter 6                                               SAF-22                                   Carson General Plan

SAFETY ELEMENT
                         and depart at a rate of one per minute. This airport is located 12.7 miles
                         northwest of the City of Carson.
                        Long Beach Airport. In 1995, the Long Beach Airport served 400,000
                         passengers. Planes arrive and depart at a rate of 1.5 every two minutes. This
                         airport is located 13 miles southeast of the City of Carson.
                        John Wayne Airport. It is ranked tenth nationally in terms of air traffic and
                         served 7.8 million annual passengers in 2000. This airport is located
                         approximately 23 miles southeast of Carson.
                        Ontario Airport. In 2001, 6.7 million annual passengers were served at the
                         Ontario Airport, which is experiencing a three percent growth rate that is
                         projected to continue. This airport is located 70 miles east of the City of
                         Carson.
                        Burbank Airport. In 2001, 5 million annual passengers were served at this
                         airport. This airport is located approximately 26 miles north of Carson.
                 Aircraft flying over Carson are located in the Los Angeles Terminal Control Area
                 (TCA). The TCA is airspace restricted to large, commercial airliners. Each TCA
                 has an established maximum and minimum altitude in which a large aircraft must
                 travel. Smaller aircraft desiring to transit the TCA may do so by obtaining Air
                 Traffic Control clearance. The aircraft may then proceed to transit when traffic
                 conditions permit. Aircraft departing from other than LAX, whose route of flight
                 would penetrate the TCA, are required to give this information to Air Traffic
                 Control on appropriate frequencies. Pilots operating small aircraft often rely on
                 landmarks, rather than charts, to indicate their locations. If a pilot is unfamiliar
                 with the geographical landmarks within the Southern California Basin, he/she could
                 inadvertently enter the restricted TCA airspace. This misunderstanding could result
                 in a mid-air collision.
                 Two busy general aviation airports are also located near the City—Compton and
                 Torrance Airports—and accidents have occurred from aircraft using these airports.
                 Train Derailment
                 The City of Carson is served by three railroads. All are transcontinental systems:
                 Union Pacific, Southern Pacific and Santa Fe. Thus, virtually every industry and
                 business is on a direct transcontinental rail line. The Union Pacific runs along the
                 eastern section of the City, as it converges onto the Los Angeles City container
                 transfer facility, which borders the west side of Long Beach. The Southern Pacific
                 runs along the central, southern and eastern section of the City. The Santa Fe
                 extends into the eastern section of the City.
                 In addition to the rail lines that serve business and industrial uses, the Metro Blue
                 Line light rail traverses the City. The Metro Blue Line, part of the Metro Rail
                 system, operates as part of the multimodal transportation system developed by the
                 Los Angeles County Transportation Authority (LACTA). The Metro Blue Line is
Carson General Plan                                SAF-23                                     Chapter 6

                                                                                         SAFETY ELEMENT
               operated by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA). The Blue Line
               runs through the eastern portion of the City. In the event of a major earthquake,
               segments of the line from the Long Beach to the Del Amo passenger station and
               from the Artesia passenger station to the Slauson passenger station, as well as
               segments of the line from the Slauson to the 7th and Flower station are expected to
               sustain serious damage. There are also off-system hazards that may impact the
               system, including facilities that store or process hazardous materials, high voltage
               lines, petroleum pipelines and natural gas mains.
               Public safety hazards typically associated with train operations can be broken down
               into two groups: 1) accidents associated with population exposure to rail operations
               (primarily pedestrian and vehicular accidents involving trains) and 2) accidents
               involving the trains themselves (i.e., derailments). A major train derailment could
               encompass many threats, such as hazardous materials incident, fire, and severe
               damage to either adjacent buildings or vehicles, and the loss of life to pedestrians
               and those in adjacent buildings or vehicles. (For locations of railroad lines within the
               City of Carson, please refer to Section 3.2, Circulation, of the Existing Conditions
               Report.)
               Trucking Hazards
               A major truck incident could encompass many threats, such as a hazardous
               materials incident, fire, severe damage to either buildings or vehicles, and loss of life
               to pedestrians or those in buildings or vehicles. Carson is served by four major
               freeways, several major north-south/east-west truck routes, and contains 29 truck
               parking zones. See Exhibit 3.2-5, Truck Routes and Truck Parking Zones in the
               Existing Conditions Report and additional discussion in Chapter 3, Transportation
               and Infrastructure Element.
3.2.4   CRIME, FIRE AND MEDICAL EMERGENCIES
               POLICE PROTECTION SERVICES
               Police services are provided by the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department.
               There is one existing Carson Sheriff Station, located at 21356 South Avalon in
               Carson, as shown on Exhibit 3.9-1, Existing Fire and Sheriff Stations, located in the
               Existing Conditions Report. In 2002, 187 sworn personnel and 35 civilian personnel
               operated from this station. There are approximately 2.1 sworn personnel per 1,000
               residents and 0.40 civilian personnel per 1,000 residents. A standard of 1.7 officers
               per 1,000 residents is considered excellent. Within a 24-hour period, there are
               approximately 31 patrol cars serving the Carson area, divided among three work
               shifts.
               Response Times
               Data for response times is divided into three categories: emergent response (a call
               which requires a code-3 response), immediate response (a call which requires a
Chapter 6                                        SAF-24                             Carson General Plan

SAFETY ELEMENT
                 prompt non code-3 response), and routine response (a call of a non-emergent
                 nature). Refer to Table SAF-2, Emergency Response Times.
                                                      Table SAF-2
                                             Emergency Response Times
                         Type of Response                 Month                  Daily Average
                  EMERGENT                      May 2002                               5.1
                                                June 2002                              4.9
                                                July 2002                              4.3
                                                Average                                4.7
                   IMMEDIATE                    May 2002                               7.6
                                                June 2002                              7.1
                                                July 2002                              7.6
                                                Average                                7.4
                   ROUTINE                      May 2002                              34.1
                                                June 2002                             36.0
                                                July 2002                             34.9
                                                Average                               35.0
                 FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES
                 Fire protection services in the City of Carson are provided by the Los Angeles
                 County Fire Department. There are six primary fire stations that provide both fire
                 and emergency medical service to the City of Carson, with four of the stations
                 located within Carson’s boundaries. In addition to the fire stations, there is a Fire
                 Prevention Office located at the Carson City Hall. Each of the primary stations has
                 established an expanded response matrix for its individual jurisdiction, which
                 increases the resources available to help a fire station respond to an emergency.
                 These include additional engine companies, truck companies, paramedic units and
                 hospitals. As 9-1-1 emergency calls are processed, a computer dispatching system
                 selects from this matrix to provide the closest available unit that can meet the
                 emergency need. The Los Angeles County Fire Department operates under the
                 1996 Uniform Fire Code.
                 Table SAF-3, Fire Station Response Times for Carson, shows the number of incidents
                 and the average response time for each category of fire calls.
Carson General Plan                             SAF-25                                        Chapter 6

                                                                                           SAFETY ELEMENT
                                               Table SAF-3
                                 Fire Station Response Times for Carson
                                               Number of Incidents         Average Response Time
      Emergency Medical Service                       1,047                         4.7
      Fire                                              81                          5.0
      Hazardous Materials                               78                          5.0
      Other                                            377                          5.4
      Grand Total                                     1,583                         4.9
                  Paramedic Care
                  Squads 36 and 116, located within the City of Carson, provide paramedic definitive
                  care. Additional paramedic squads are located in the surrounding area (Lomita,
                  Lawndale, Hawthorne, Lakewood, Paramount and Rolling Hills) to augment
                  coverage in Carson. Three LACFD helicopters are strategically located to provide
                  air ambulance and paramedic service to the area that includes Carson.
                  Ambulance service for the Carson area is provided by American Medical Response,
                  with units based at East 223rd Street and Lucerne Avenue in Carson.
                  Emergency Response and Recovery
                  The City of Carson conducted a hazard analysis study as part of the preparation of
                  its SEMS Multi-Hazard Functional Plan, which is summarized on the following
                  pages. The City of Carson is located within Area E, Los Angeles County (southeast
                  section), Region I, Southern Administrative Region of the State Office of
                  Emergency Services. City staff has been designated to coordinate all State
                  Emergency Management System (SEMS) functions. The City has its own Public
                  Services, Development Services, Administrative Services, and Economic
                  Development departments. The City does not have its own police or fire
                  department, but relies on the County of Los Angeles for the provision of these
                  services. During the response phase, the Carson Sheriff’s Station EOC or Watch
                  Commander serves as the coordination and communication point, and the access to
                  the Los Angeles County Operational Area. Following are descriptions of various
                  types of events that could trigger the need for emergency response, in addition to
                  hazardous materials and natural disaster response. These list specific conditions or
                  details related to such events in the City of Carson when applicable.
                  Civil Unrest. An incident of civil unrest could impact not only the immediate area,
                  but possibly the entire City. Civil unrest can be spurred by specific events, such as
                  large sporting events or criminal trials, or can be the result of long-term disfavor
                  with authority. Civil unrest is usually noted by the fact that normal on-duty police
                  and safety forces cannot adequately deal with the situation until additional resources
Chapter 6                                          SAF-26                              Carson General Plan

SAFETY ELEMENT
                 can be acquired. The City of Carson has faced civil unrest in various forms since the
                 Watts Riots of 1964. The 1992 Rodney King verdicts caused the most widespread
                 rioting in recent history, with countywide losses of property in the millions.
                 National Security Emergency. The entire Los Angeles basin is considered a risk
                 area for a nuclear weapons event; therefore, both sheltering and evacuation should
                 be considered. Neither the City nor the County of Los Angeles has the capability to
                 plan for the organized evacuation of the basin; therefore, the extent of planning at
                 this time is restricted to assisting and expediting spontaneous evacuation. In the
                 increased readiness stage, expedient shelters would be utilized as appropriate and
                 information would be provided to the public, but the fallout shelter identification
                 program is no longer maintained or utilized within the State of California. The City
                 of Carson is not within the planned range of a radioactive plume from any nuclear
                 power plants, however, the recent approval of the nuclear storage facility in Nevada,
                 and the transport of radioactive materials to that site increases the potential for this
                 type of event.
                 Terrorism. Throughout California there is a nearly limitless number of potential
                 targets for terrorist activity, depending on the cause supported by a terrorist or a
                 terrorist group. Some of these targets include: religious facilities, government
                 offices, abortion clinics, public places, schools, power plants, refineries, utility
                 infrastructures, water storage facilities, dams, private homes, prominent individuals,
                 financial institutions, and businesses. In conducting a threat assessment, a variety of
                 situations should be considered: the groups that exist or operate within an area; the
                 structural targets; the significant dates for specific terrorist groups; the potential
                 personal targets; and the special events held in the area.
                 Any single incident or a combination of events could require evacuation and/or
                 sheltering of the population of Carson.
                 Evacuation Routes
                 Evacuation, if necessary because of an emergency, would be conducted by the Los
                 Angeles County Sheriff’s Department in accordance with the City’s Evacuation
                 Plan. Should the City Hall Emergency Operations Center (EOC) not be available
                 because of damage, an alternate EOC would be activated. Alternate EOC and
                 staging sites are as follows: a) City of Carson Facilities and Maintenance Building at
                 2930 E. Dominguez Street, b) City of Carson City Hall, second floor Executive
                 Conference Room, and c) mobile command vehicle located at Carson Sheriff’s
                 Station parking lot.
                 The City has also created a list of numerous locations within the City of Carson that
                 would be used in case of a disaster or major emergency, referred to as Casualty
                 Collection Points. See Table 3.8-1 in the Existing Conditions Report. Exhibit SAF-5,
                 Evacuation Routes/Casualty Collection Points, shows the location of the Points and
                 the evacuation routes for the City.
Carson General Plan                                SAF-27                                       Chapter 6


SAFETY ELEMENT
4.0      PLANNING ISSUES, GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION
                 The acronyms listed below are used for the implementation measures:
                     RA/D:    Responsible Agency/Division
                     FS:      Funding Source
                     TF:      Time Frame
                 ISSUE:     PROTECTION IN THE EVENT OF NATURAL DISASTERS
                 It is important that there is adequate protection from such natural disasters as
                 earthquakes and flooding, and that the City is adequately prepared in the event of an
                 emergency.
                 Goal:      SAF-1:      Minimize the risk of injury, loss of life, and property damage
                                        caused by earthquake hazards.
                 Policies: SAF-1.1      Continue to require all new development to comply with the
                                        most recent City Building Code seismic design standards.
                            SAF-1.2     Work with the City’s Public Information Office and Public
                                        Safety Division to:
                                           Educate residents in earthquake safety at home,
                                           Educate the public in self-sufficiency practices necessary
                                            after a major earthquake (e.g., alternative water sources,
                                            food storage, first aid, family disaster plans, and the like),
                                            and
                                           Identify locations where information is available to the
                                            public for planning self-sufficiency.
                            SAF-1.3     Examine the potential to create a commercial loan program
                                        to subsidize the cost of retro-fitting buildings to meet seismic
                                        safety regulations. To this end, pursue all sources of state
                                        and federal funding in order to retro-fit buildings to meet
                                        seismic requirements.
                 Implementation Measures:
                            SAF-IM-1.1      Apply City Building Code consistently                 to    all
                                            development. (Implements SAF-1.1)
                                            RA/D:     Building & Safety
                                            FS:       Building fees, General Fund
                                            TF:       Ongoing
                            SAF-IM-1.2      Design and complete flyers, website pages, and programs.
                                            (Implements SAF-1.2)
Carson General Plan                              SAF-29                                          Chapter 6

                                                                               SAFETY ELEMENT
                                 RA/D:       Public Information Office, Public Safety, GIS
                                 FS:         General Fund, grants
                                 TF:         2003-05
                    SAF-IM-1.3   Assign a task force to research feasibility and funding
                                 sources for a retro-fit loan program. (Implements SAF-
                                 1.3)
                                 RA/D:       Development Services Administration, Building
                                             & Safety
                                 FS:         General Fund
                                 TF:         2003-04
          Goal:     SAF-2:   Strive to minimize injury and loss of life, damage to public
                             and private property and infrastructure, and economic and
                             social disruption caused by flood hazards.
          Policies: SAF-2.1  Continue to maintain and improve levels of storm drainage
                             service.
                    SAF-2.2  Continue to work with the appropriate local, State and
                             Federal agencies (i.e., Los Angeles County Department of
                             Public Works, Caltrans, Federal Emergency Management
                             Agency, etc.) to reduce the potential for flood damage in the
                             City of Carson.
                    SAF-2.3  Ensure that areas experiencing localized flooding problems
                             are targeted for storm drain improvements. To this end,
                             work closely with Los Angeles County Department of Public
                             Works and other cities in the South Bay region to ensure that
                             facilities are adequate to accommodate storm waters.
                    SAF-2.4  As development intensifies and/or as redevelopment occurs
                             in the City, ensure that storm drain systems are adequate to
                             accommodate any intensification of uses, as well as existing
                             uses.
                    SAF-2.5  Periodically review and recommend appropriate changes to
                             the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works for the
                             Storm Drainage Master Plan for Los Angeles County.
          Implementation Measures:
                    SAF-IM-2.1   Target areas which experience storm drainage
                                 deficiencies for improvements through the Capital
                                 Improvement Program.
Chapter 6                              SAF-30                             Carson General Plan
SAFETY ELEMENT
                                        RA/D:      Public Works
                                        FS:        CIP
                                        TF:        2003-08
                           SAF-IM-2.2   Propose that the Los Angeles County Department of
                                        Public Works construct and operate a new storm water
                                        pump station in an area prone to flooding.)
                                        RA/D:      Public Works
                                        FS:        CIP
                                        TF:        2003-2004
                 Goal:     SAF-3:   Minimize the effects from natural and urban disasters to
                                    reduce, to the extent possible, the social and economic
                                    impacts that these may have on the community.
                 Policies: SAF-3.1  Continue to ensure that each development or neighborhood
                                    in the City has adequate emergency ingress and egress.
                           SAF-3.2  Maintain and update, as necessary, the SEMS Multi-Hazard
                                    Functional Plan which identifies emergency response and
                                    recovery actions in the event of an incident.
                           SAF-3.3  Continue to be able to provide assistance in shelter, relief
                                    and first-aid operations.
                           SAF-3.4  Work with the City’s Public Information Office and Public
                                    Safety Division and the County Fire and Sheriff’s
                                    Departments to promote and expand public education
                                    programs and seminars on safety.
                           SAF-3.5  Support legislation and tax measures which tie disaster
                                    insurance and tax rates to hazard reduction measures.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           SAF-IM-3.1   Review neighborhood access needs and solve problems,
                                        if possible. (Implements SAF-3.1)
                                        RA/D:      Engineering, Planning
                                        FS:        General Fund, Gas Tax
                                        TF:        2004-2005 and Ongoing
                           SAF-IM-3.2   Regularly update the SEMS Multi-Hazard Functional
                                        Plan. (Implements SAF-3.2)
                                        RA/D:      Public Safety
                                        FS:        General Plan
                                        TF:        Annually
Carson General Plan                          SAF-31                                     Chapter 6

                                                                                      SAFETY ELEMENT
                      SAF-IM-3.3       Meet regularly with aid agencies to coordinate resources.
                                       (Implements SAF-3.3)
                                       RA/D:      Public Safety
                                       FS:        General Fund
                                       TF:        Ongoing
                      SAF-IM-3.4       Meet and implement regular              safety   educational
                                       programs. (Implements SAF-3.4)
                                       RA/D:      Public Safety/PIO
                                       FS:        General Fund, Grants
                                       TF:        Ongoing
                      SAF-IM-3.5       Monitor legislation and prepare positions for the City
                                       Council. (Implements SAF-3.5)
                                       RA/D:      Public Safety, City Attorney
                                       FS:        General Fund
                                       TF:        Ongoing
                                                                                              
          ISSUE:      PUBLIC SAFETY RELATING TO THE HANDLING AND EXPOSURE OF THE
                      COMMUNITY TO HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
          The administration of appropriate safety procedures to protect the public from accidents
          involving the handling, use and transportation of hazardous materials is important.
          Goal:       SAF-4:       Minimize the threat to the public health and safety and to the
                                   environment posed by a release of hazardous materials.
          Policies: SAF-4.1        Strictly enforce federal, state and local laws and regulations
                                   relating to the use, storage, and transportation of toxic,
                                   explosive, and other hazardous and extremely hazardous
                                   materials to prevent unauthorized discharges.
                      SAF-4.2      Periodically review and amend the appropriate ordinances
                                   which regulate the storage and handling of hazardous
                                   materials to conform with the standards and definitions of
                                   the state and other regulatory agencies.
                      SAF-4.3      Through the planning and business permit processes,
                                   continue to monitor the operations of businesses and
                                   individuals which handle hazardous materials.
                      SAF-4.4      Explore the possibility of identifying specific routes for the
                                   transport of hazardous materials, to include both railroad
                                   and street systems.
Chapter 6                                    SAF-32                              Carson General Plan

SAFETY ELEMENT
                             SAF-4.5      As truck routes within the City are altered, inform Caltrans
                                          and transporters of hazardous materials of the changes.
                             SAF-4.6      Develop an educational awareness program which
                                          encourages proper residential management of hazardous
                                          materials.
                             SAF-4.7      Continue to implement the goals, policies and programs
                                          identified in the City’s Household Hazardous Waste
                                          Element.
                             SAF-4.8      Maintain cooperative relationships with the chemical
                                          handlers, response agencies and community representatives
                                          through such organizations as South Bay Community
                                          Awareness and Emergency Response (CAER), to ensure an
                                          informed and coordinated response to chemical emergencies.
                 Implementation Measures:
                             SAF-IM-4.1       Require that businesses located within ¼-mile or less
                                              from a residential neighborhood, or ½-mile from a
                                              critical care facility follow the strictest guidelines possible
                                              regarding the handling, storage, containment, and
                                              transportation of extremely hazardous substances.
                                              RA/D:      Public Safety
                                              FS:        General Fund
                                              TF:        Ongoing
                             SAF-IM-4.2       Continue to conduct periodic inspections of all
                                              businesses using or storing hazardous materials to ensure
                                              safe practices and improve communications with business
                                              personnel.
                                              RA/D:      Public Safety
                                              FS:        General Fund
                                              TF:        Ongoing
                                                                                                       
                 ISSUE:      URBAN FIRES
                 Urban fires represent a significant risk to both residents and workers within Carson.
                 Fires in commercial and industrial areas can result in the release of hazardous toxic
                 substances, fires in high occupancy apartment and office buildings present special safety
                 problems, and fires spread by “branding,” wind driven embers, can threaten whole
                 neighborhoods where roofing materials are not fire resistant.
Carson General Plan                                 SAF-33                                          Chapter 6

                                                                              SAFETY ELEMENT
          Goal:     SAF-5:   Minimize the public hazard from fire emergencies.
          Policies: SAF-5.1  Coordinate with the Fire Department to provide fire and
                             paramedic service at standard levels of service.
                    SAF-5.2  Continue to involve the Fire Department in reviewing and
                             making recommendations on projects during the
                             environmental, site planning and building plan review
                             processes.
                    SAF-5.3  Continue to work with the Fire Department to ensure their
                             capability to address fires and other emergencies at
                             refineries, tank farms, and other heavy industrial facilities
                             within the City.
                    SAF-5.4  Work with the City’s Public Information Office and County
                             Fire Department to promote and expand public education
                             programs and seminars on safety and emergency response
                             for those areas surrounding refineries, tank farms, and other
                             heavy industrial facilities.
                    SAF-5.5  Continue to enforce current regulations which relate to
                             safety from fire, particularly in critical and high occupancy
                             facilities.
                    SAF-5.6  Work with the City’s Public Information Office and the Fire
                             Department to continue to promote and enhance public
                             outreach programs which educate the community about the
                             importance of fire resistant building materials, promote the
                             use of smoke alarms/detectors, and highlight other ways to
                             reduce the public hazard from fire emergencies.
          Implementation Measures:
                    SAF-IM-5.1   Request that the Fire District maintain a level of service
                                 to allow for personnel to attend meetings and to respond
                                 promptly to the City’s environmental, site planning, and
                                 building plan review processes.
                                 RA/D:      Fire, Planning Division
                                 FS:        District
                                 TF:        Ongoing
                    SAF-IM-5.2   Continue to conduct annual fire prevention inspections.
                                 RA/D:      Fire
                                 FS:        District
                                 TF:        Ongoing
Chapter 6                              SAF-34                             Carson General Plan

SAFETY ELEMENT
                              SAF-IM-5.3         Urge the use of smoke alarms, sprinkler systems,
                                                 evacuation ladders, and offer fire protection and/or risk
                                                 reduction devices.
                                                 RA/D:      Fire, Building and Safety
                                                 FS:        District, General Fund
                                                 TF:        Ongoing
                              SAF-IM-5.4         Encourage the replacement of wood shake roofs with
                                                 Class C roofing materials or better.
                                                 RA/D:      Fire, Building and Safety
                                                 FS:        District, General Fund
                                                 TF:        Ongoing
                                                                                                    
                 ISSUE:       SAFETY FROM CRIME
                 Safety from crime is a primary concern in any community; specific concerns in Carson
                 relate to graffiti, gang activity, burglary, and assault.
                 Goal:        SAF-6:        Strive to provide a safe place to live, work and play for
                                            Carson residents and visitors.
                 Policies: SAF-6.1          Coordinate with the Sheriff’s Department to provide sheriff
                                            service at standard levels of service.
                              SAF-6.2       Continue to involve the Sheriff’s Department in reviewing
                                            and making recommendations on projects during the
                                            environmental, site planning and building plan review
                                            processes. To this end, promote the development of
                                            defensible spaces, or Crime Prevention Through Design
                                            (CPTD), through the use of site and building lighting, visual
                                            observation of open spaces, and secured areas.
                              SAF-6.3       Develop standards and/or guidelines for new development
                                            and redevelopment with an emphasis on site and building
                                            design, or CPTD, to minimize vulnerability to criminal
                                            activity. Said standards and/or guidelines shall balance
                                            public safety and design objectives, and at a minimum
                                            address:
                                                High risk circumstances such as dark alleys, enclosed
                                                 stairwells, and dark entrances,
                                                Site security lighting, including exterior lighting that
                                                 enhances safety and night use (but minimize impacts on
                                                 surrounding land uses),
Carson General Plan                                   SAF-35                                     Chapter 6

                                                                               SAFETY ELEMENT
                                Utilization of landscape treatments which will not
                                 obstruct the visibility of walkways and entrances, and
                                Similar public safety and design issues.
                   SAF-6.4   Maintain and improve the effectiveness of code enforcement
                             and policing programs such as increased community policing
                             activities, such as foot and bicycle patrols in areas where
                             warranted, and related programs.
                   SAF-6.5   Continue to promote and enhance the Sheriff Department’s
                             public outreach programs.
                   SAF-6.6   Continue to promote the Community Watch Programs.
                   SAF-6.7   Continue to support strict enforcement of the California
                             Motor Vehicle Code and local speed limits, particularly in
                             the areas near schools and off-ramps from area freeways.
                   SAF-6.8   Ensure appropriate signage, street striping and other
                             markings at crosswalks for pedestrian safety. And ensure the
                             visibility of signage and markings through proper landscape
                             maintenance including trimming of shrubbery and trees.
                   SAF-6.9   Evaluate the need for future new Sheriff facilities.
          Implementation Measures:
                   SAF-IM-6.1    Train new planners in the principles of CPTD.
                                 (Implements SAF-6.2)
                                 RA/D:       Planning, Sheriff
                                 FS:         General Fund
                                 TF:         Ongoing
                   SAF-IM-6.2    Prepare CPTD standards and guidelines for public use.
                                 (Implements SAF-6.3)
                                 RA/D:       Planning, Sheriff
                                 FS:         General Fund
                                 TF:         2005-2006
                   SAF-IM-6.3    Prepare a display for the City Hall lobby showing the
                                 principles of CPTD. (Implements SAF-6.3)
                                 RA/D:       Planning, Sheriff
                                 FS:         General Fund
                                 TF:         2005-2006
Chapter 6                              SAF-36                             Carson General Plan

SAFETY ELEMENT
                           SAF-IM-6.4   Work with the Sheriff’s Department to implement and
                                        fund existing and new policing and community programs.
                                        (Implements SAF-6.4-SAF-6.7)
                                        RA/D:       Public Safety, Sheriff
                                        FS:         General Fund, Grants
                                        TF:         Ongoing
                           SAF-IM-6.5   Provide flyers and other materials promoting safety
                                        measures for youth, including bicycle, skateboard and
                                        scooter helmets and other protection. (Implements SAF-
                                        6.5)
                                        RA/D:       Sheriff, Recreation Services
                                        FS:         General Fund, Grants
                                        TF:         Ongoing
                           SAF-IM-6.6   Research, implement, and maintain pedestrian safety
                                        devices. (Implements SAF-6.8)
                                        RA/D:       Engineering, Public Works, Sheriff
                                        FS:         General Fund, Grants
                                        TF:         2003-2004 and Ongoing
                           SAF-IM-6.7   Identify needs and alternatives for providing new Sheriff
                                        facilities. (Implements SAF-6.9)
                                        RA/D:       Sheriff, Public Safety, City Manager
                                        FS:         General Fund
                                        TF:         2006-2007
                 Goal:     SAF-7:   Reduce, to the greatest extent possible, the number of
                                    violent or criminal acts perpetrated, with specific emphasis
                                    on youth.
                 Policies: SAF-7.1  Continue to take a “zero tolerance” approach to gangs and
                                    gang activity in Carson.
                           SAF-7.2  Continue to work with the community, and specifically
                                    involve and educate parents, to reduce criminal behavior by
                                    Carson’s youth.
                           SAF-7.3  Continue to support immediate, positive consequences for
                                    minor criminal behavior by youth, such as graffiti removal
                                    programs, restitution programs, and other effective
                                    acceptable programs.
Carson General Plan                           SAF-37                                     Chapter 6

                                                                              SAFETY ELEMENT
                   SAF-7.4   Continue to encourage and promote jobs programs for youth
                             in both the public and private sector in order to reduce
                             crime.
                   SAF-7.5   Work with the City’s Public Information Office and the
                             Sheriff’s Department to promote community awareness
                             regarding drug use, graffiti, gangs, and other youth related
                             crimes.
                   SAF-7.6   Maintain the comprehensive Carson Youth Accountability
                             Network and youth diversion programs. These programs
                             should include education, intervention, and enforcement
                             strategies.
          Implementation Measures:
                   SAF-IM-7.1    Sheriff, Public Safety, and City Management implement
                                 existing and new programs targeting youth crime.
                                 (Implements SAF-7.1, SAF-7.3, SAF-7.5-SAF-7.7)
                                 RA/D:     Sheriff, Public Safety, City Manager
                                 FS:       General Fund, Grants
                                 TF:       Ongoing
                   SAF-IM-7.2    Research and implement new jobs programs for youth.
                                 (Implements SAF-7.4)
                                 RA/D:     Employment Development
                                 FS:       Federal and State Grants
                                 TF:       Ongoing
                                                                                       
Chapter 6                             SAF-38                              Carson General Plan

    CHAPTER 7
NOISE ELEMENT
                                          CHAPTER 7
                                      NOISE ELEMENT
GUIDING PRINCIPLE
                 The City of Carson is committed to preventing, regulating, and controlling
                 unnecessary and excessive noise emanating from uses and activities within the
                 City. To this end, the City will continue promoting compatible land uses,
                 considering sensitive receptors, and implementing enforcement procedures and
                 mitigation measures.
1.0     INTRODUCTION
                 The Noise Element of a general plan is a comprehensive program to limit the
                 exposure of the community to excessive noise levels. The Element lists and maps
                 current and projected noise levels for existing and planned uses within the City of
                 Carson. The projected noise levels are used to guide future land decisions to limit
                 noise and its effects on the community, including noise-sensitive land uses. Federal,
                 State and City regulations relating to noise are outlined in this section. This Noise
                 Element establishes goals, policies and programs to ensure that Carson residents
                 will be protected from excessive noise. In addition, noise contours in the form of
                 community noise equivalent level (CNEL) or day-night average level (Ldn) are
                 provided for all referenced sources.
                 The adopted Noise Element serves as a guideline for compliance with the State’s
                 noise element, which serves as a guideline for compliance with the state’s noise
                 insulation standards.
Carson General Plan                               N-1                                         Chapter 7

                                                                                            NOISE ELEMENT
2.0     STATE LAW REQUIREMENTS
              The State of California Government Code Section 65302(f) requires that a General
              Plan include:
                  “…a noise element which shall identify and appraise noise problems in the
                  community. The Noise Element shall recognize the guidelines established by the
                  Office of Noise Control in the State Department of Health Services and shall
                  analyze and quantify…current and projected noise levels for all of the following
                  sources: (1) highways and freeways; (2) primary arterials and major local
                  streets; (3) passenger and freight on-line railroads operations and ground rapid
                  transit systems; (4) commercial, general aviation, heliport, and military
                  operations, aircraft overflights, jet engine test stands, and all other ground
                  facilities and maintenance functions related to airport operation; (5) local
                  industrial plants, including but not limited to, railroad classification yards; (6)
                  other ground stationary noise sources identified by local agencies as contributing
                  to the community noise environment.”
3.0 SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
3.1     NOISE SCALES AND DEFINITIONS
              Decibels (dB) are based on the logarithmic scale. The logarithmic scale compresses
              the wide range in sound pressure levels to a more usable range of numbers in a
              manner similar to the Richter scale used to measure earthquakes. In terms of
              human response to noise, a sound 10 dB higher than another is judged to be twice as
              loud; and 20 dB higher four times as loud; and so forth. Everyday sounds normally
              range from 30 dBA (very quiet) to 100 dBA (very loud). The A-weighted sound
              pressure level is the sound pressure level, in decibels, as measured on a sound level
              meter using the A-weighted filter network. The A-weighting filter de-emphasizes
              the very low and very high frequency components of the sound, placing greater
              emphasis on those frequencies within the sensitivity range of the human ear.
              Examples, of various sound levels in different environments are shown in Table N-1,
              Sound Levels and Human Response.
              Many methods have been developed for evaluating community noise to account for,
              among other things:
                      The variation of noise levels over time;
                      The influence of periodic individual loud events; and
                      The community response to changes in the community noise environment.
              Numerous methods have been developed to measure sound over a period of time.
              These methods include: 1) the community noise equivalent level (CNEL); 2) the
              equivalent sound level (Leq); and 3) the day/night average sound level (Ldn).
Chapter 7                                        N-2                                   Carson General Plan

NOISE ELEMENT
                                                         Table N-1
                                          Sound Levels and Human Response
                                                           dB(A)
                    Noise Source                           Noise                             Response
                                                           Level
                                                            150
                                Carrier Jet Operation       140          Harmfully Loud
                                                            130          Pain Threshold
                       Jet Takeoff (200 feet; thence.)
                                          Discotheque       120
                                Unmuffled Motorcycle                     Maximum Vocal Effort
                           Auto Horn (3 feet; thence.)      110
                                     Rock'n Roll Band                    Physical Discomfort
                                     Riveting Machine
                                   Loud Power Mower                      Very Annoying
                      Jet Takeoff (2000 feet; thence.)      100          Hearing Damage
                                       Garbage Truck                     (Steady 8-Hour Exposure)
                       Heavy Truck (50 feet; thence.)
                    Pneumatic Drill (50 feet; thence.)       90
                                          Alarm Clock
                       Freight Train (50 feet; thence.)      80          Annoying
                   Vacuum Cleaner (10 feet; thence.)
                    Freeway Traffic (50 feet; thence.)       70          Telephone Use Difficult
                                         Dishwashers                     Intrusive
             Air Conditioning Unit (20 feet; thence.)        60
                 Light Auto Traffic (100 feet; thence.)      50          Quiet
                                          Living Room        40
                                              Bedroom
                                                 Library
                       Soft Whisper (15 feet; thence.)       30          Very Quiet
                                  Broadcasting Studio        20
                                                             10          Just Audible
                                                             0           Threshold of Hearing
 Source: Melville C. Branch and R. Dale Beland, Outdoor Noise in the Metropolitan Environment, 1970, Page 2.
Carson General Plan                                         N-3                                              Chapter 7
                                                                                         NOISE ELEMENT
3.1.1   COMMUNITY NOISE EQUIVALENT LEVEL (CNEL)
               The predominant community noise rating scale used in California for land use
               compatibility assessment is the community noise equivalent level (CNEL). The
               CNEL reading represents the average of 24 hourly readings of equivalent levels,
               known as Leq’s, based on an A-weighted decibel with upward adjustments added to
               account for increased noise sensitivity in the evening and night periods. These
               adjustments are +5 dBA for the evening, 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., and +10 dBA for
               the night, 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. CNEL may be indicated by “dBA CNEL” or just
               “CNEL”.
3.1.2   EQUIVALENT SOUND LEVEL (LEQ)
               The Leq is the sound level containing the same total energy over a given sample
               time period. The Leq can be thought of as the steady sound level which, in a stated
               period of time, would contain the same acoustic energy as the time-varying sound
               level during the same period. Leq is typically computed over 1, 8 and 24-hour
               sample periods.
3.1.3   DAY NIGHT AVERAGE (LDN)
               Another commonly used method is the day/night average level or Ldn. The Ldn is a
               measure of the 24-hour average noise level at a given location. It was adopted by
               the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for developing criteria for the
               evaluation of community noise exposure. It is based on a measure of the average
               noise level over a given time period called the Leq. The Ldn is calculated by
               averaging the Leq’s for each hour of the day at a given location after penalizing the
               “sleeping hours” (defined as 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.), by 10 dBA to account for the
               increased sensitivity of people to noises that occur at night. The maximum noise
               level recorded during a noise event is typically expressed as Lmax. The sound level
               exceeded over a specified time frame can be expressed as Ln (i.e., L90, L50, L10, etc.).
               L50 equals the level exceeded 50 percent of the time, L10 ten percent of the time, etc.
3.2     NOISE STANDARDS
3.2.1   FEDERAL NOISE STANDARDS
               The United States Noise Control Act of 1972 (NCA) recognized the role of the
               Federal government in dealing with major commercial noise sources in order to
               provide for uniform treatment of such sources. As Congress has the authority to
               regulate interstate and foreign commerce, regulation of noise generated by such
               commerce also falls under congressional authority. The Federal government
               specifically preempts local control of noise emissions from aircraft, railroad and
               interstate highways.
               The EPA has identified acceptable noise levels for various land uses, in order to
               protect public welfare, allowing for an adequate margin of safety, in addition to
               establishing noise emission standards for interstate commerce activities.
Chapter 7                                        N-4                               Carson General Plan

NOISE ELEMENT
3.2.2    STATE NOISE STANDARDS
                 The Office of Noise Control in the State Department of Health Services has
                 developed criteria and guidelines for local governments to use when setting
                 standards for human exposure to noise and preparing noise elements for General
                 Plans. These guidelines include noise exposure levels for both exterior and interior
                 environments. In addition, Title 25, Section 1092 of the California Code of
                 Regulations sets forth requirements for the insulation of multiple-family residential
                 dwelling units from excessive and potentially harmful noise. The State indicates that
                 locating units in areas where exterior ambient noise levels exceed 65 dBA is
                 undesirable. Whenever such units are to be located in such areas, the developer
                 must incorporate into building design construction features which reduce interior
                 noise levels to 45 dBA CNEL. Tables N-2 and N-3, below, summarize standards
                 adopted by various State and Federal agencies. Table N-2, Noise and Land Use
                 Compatibility Matrix, presents criteria used to assess the compatibility of proposed
                 land uses with the noise environment. Table N-3, Interior and Exterior Noise
                 Standards, indicates standards and criteria that specify acceptable limits of noise for
                 various land uses throughout Carson. These standards and criteria will be
                 incorporated into the land use planning process to reduce future noise and land use
                 incompatibilities. These tables are the primary tools that allow the City to ensure
                 integrated planning for compatibility between land uses and outdoor noise.
3.2.3    CITY NOISE STANDARDS
                 Section 4100 (Unnecessary Noises) of Chapter I, Article IV in the Carson Municipal
                 Code, controls any disturbing, excessive or offensive noise which causes discomfort
                 or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the
                 community.
                 Noise Ordinance. In 1995, Carson adopted the “Noise Control Ordinance of the
                 County of Los Angeles,” as amended, as the City’s Noise Control Ordinance. The
                 adopted Noise Ordinance sets standards for noise levels citywide and provides the
                 means to enforce the reduction of obnoxious or offensive noises. The noise sources
                 enumerated in the Noise Ordinance include radios, phonographs, loudspeakers and
                 amplifiers, electric motors or engines, animals, motor vehicles and construction
                 equipment. The Noise Ordinance sets interior and exterior noise levels for all
                 properties within designated noise zones, unless exempted, as shown in Table N-4,
                 Noise Ordinance Standards. Enforcing the Noise Ordinance includes requiring
                 proposed development projects to show compliance with the ordinance, and
                 requiring construction activity to comply with established schedule limits. The
                 ordinance will be reviewed periodically for adequacy and amended as needed to
                 address community needs and development patterns.
Carson General Plan                               N-5                                           Chapter 7

                                                                                                                  NOISE ELEMENT
                                                              Table N-2
                                          Noise and Land Use Compatibility Matrix
                                                                                 Community Noise Exposure
                Land Use Category                                                      Ldn or CNEL, dB
                                                          Normally          Conditionally         Normally             Clearly
                                                         Acceptable           Acceptable        Unacceptable       Unacceptable
Residential-Low Density                                     50-60                 60-65             65-75               75-85
Residential-Multiple Family                                 50-60                 60-65             65-75               75-85
Transient Lodging-Motel, Hotels                             50-65                 65-70             70-80               80-85
Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing
                                                            50-60                 60-65             65-80               80-85
Homes
Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters                    NA                   50-65              NA                 65-85
Sports Arenas, Outdoor Spectator Sports                      NA                   50-70              NA                 70-85
Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                             50-70                  NA               70-75               75-85
Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation,
                                                            50-70                  NA               70-80               80-85
Cemeteries
Office Buildings, Business Commercial and
                                                           50-67.5              67.5-75             75-85                NA
Professional
Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture           50-70                 70-75             75-85                NA
Source: Modified from U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Guidelines and State of California Standards.
NOTES: NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE
           Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional
           construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.
           CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE
           New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements
           is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows
           and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice.
           NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE
           New Construction or development should be discouraged. If new construction or development does proceed, a detailed
           analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
           CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE
           New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
            NA: Not Applicable
  Chapter 7                                                        N-6                                     Carson General Plan
NOISE ELEMENT
                                                            Table N-3
                                       Interior and Exterior Noise Standards
                           Land Use Categories                                                         CNEL
       Categories                                  Uses                                  Interior1                Exterior2
       Residential           Single family Duplex, Multiple Family                        45 - 55                   50 – 60
                             Mobile Home                                                    45                        65
       Commercial            Hotel, Motel, Transient Lodging                                45                         --
        Industrial
       Institutional         Commercial Retail, Bank, Restaurant                            55                         --
                             Office Building, Research and Development,                     50                         --
                             Professional Offices, City Office Building
                             Amphitheater, Concert Hall, Auditorium,
                             Meeting Hall                                                   45                         --
                             Gymnasium (Multipurpose)
                                                                                            50                         --
                             Sports Club
                                                                                            55                         --
                             Manufacturing, Warehousing, Wholesale,
                             Utilities                                                      65                         --
                             Movie Theaters                                                 45                         --
       Institutional         Hospital, Schools’ Classrooms                                  45                        65
                             Church, Library                                                45                         --
      Open Space             Parks                                                           --                       65
NOTES:
1.  Indoor environmental including:       Bedrooms, living areas, bathrooms, toilets, closets, corridors.
2. Outdoor environment limited to:        Private yard of single family
                                           Multi-family private patio or balcony which is served by a means of exit
                                              from inside the dwelling
                                           Balconies 6 feet deep or less are exempt
                                           Mobile home park
                                           Park’s picnic area
                                           School’s playground
3.  Noise level requirement with closed windows. Mechanical ventilating system or other means of natural ventilation shall be
    provided as of Chapter 12, Section 1205 of UBC.
4.  Exterior noise levels should be such that interior noise levels will not exceed 45 CNEL.
Carson General Plan                                             N-7                                                       Chapter 7

                                                                                                     NOISE ELEMENT
                                                       Table N-4
                                            Noise Ordinance Standards
                    Designated Noise
                                                                                 Exterior Noise     Interior Noise
Noise Zone            Zone Land Use                  Time Interval (dB)
                                                                                      Level             Level
                   (Receptor Property)
      I        Noise Sensitive-Area                       Anytime                      45                 ---
      II       Residential Properties         10:00 pm to 7:00 am (nighttime)          45                 ---
                                              7:00 am to 10:00 pm (daytime)
                                                                                       50                 ---
     III       Commercial Properties          10:00 pm to 7:00 am (nighttime)          55                 ---
                                              7:00 am to 10:00 pm (daytime)
                                                                                       60                 ---
     IV        Industrial Properties                      Anytime                      70                 ---
 All Zones     Multi-family                         10:00 pm – 7:00 am                 ---                40
               Residential                          7:00 am – 10:00 pm                 ---                45
Source: Section 12.08.490 and 12.08.400 in County of Los Angeles County Code. Nov. 2001.
3.3      EXISTING NOISE CONDITIONS
                  The sources of noise in Carson fall into four basic categories. These are:
                            Roadways (including major and minor arterials and freeways);
                            Aircraft overflights (from the Compton Airport and Long Beach Airport);
                            Stationary sources (including construction activity and industrial and
                             commercial centers); and
                            Trains (including Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR), Burlington Northern
                             Santa Fe (BNSF) Railroad and the Metro Blue Line).
3.3.1    ROADWAY NOISE
                  As is typical of most urbanized areas, the most pervasive noise source in the City of
                  Carson are motor vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, buses and motorcycles.
                  The noise produced by these sources occurs primarily around roadways and may be
                  of sufficient magnitude to expose various land uses to excessive noise levels. As a
                  general observation, the speed of the vehicle is directly correlated to the noise level;
                  an increase in speed causes an increase in noise levels. The major roadways in the
                  City include: Figueroa Street, Main Street, Avalon Boulevard, Wilmington Avenue,
                  Santa Fe Avenue, Lomita Boulevard, Sepulvada Boulevard, 223rd Street, Carson
                  Street, Del Amo Boulevard, University Drive, Victoria Street, Gardena Boulevard,
                  Alondra Boulevard and Alameda Street. Noise levels along Alameda Street, also
                  known as the “Alameda Corridor,” are often higher than projected due to large
                  volumes of truck traffic and rail line operations. Additionally, Interstate 405 (I-405)
                  and State Route 91 (SR-91) generate substantial noise levels within the community.
Chapter 7                                                  N-8                                  Carson General Plan

NOISE ELEMENT
                 Noise levels along roadways are determined by a number of traffic characteristics.
                 Most important is the average daily traffic (ADT). Additional factors include the
                 percentage of trucks, vehicle speed, the time distribution of this traffic, and gradient
                 of the roadway. In general, most of the land uses along the major roadways are
                 commercial, open space, and light industrial. However, single- and multi-family
                 areas, as well as public facilities, are situated along many of the major roadways
                 indicated above.
3.3.2    AIRCRAFT NOISE
                 The primary source of aircraft noise within the City of Carson is the Compton
                 Airport located immediately north of the City. At its closest distance, the runway is
                 located approximately 3,000 feet from the City’s northern boundary. Compton
                 Airport does not generate a significant level of noise. According to the City of
                 Compton General Plan Existing Airport Noise Contours, the 60 and 65 CNEL
                 contours for the Compton Airport do not extend into the City of Carson. However,
                 there is some intrusion of noise from the airport in Long Beach.
                 Flyover noise is generated from air traffic into Los Angeles International Airport,
                 Long Beach Airport, and, to a lesser extent, Torrance General Aviation Airport.
                 Should the volume of air traffic at the Long Beach Airport increase, it could become
                 a significant problem for residential areas on the east side of the City.
3.3.3    STATIONARY NOISE
                 INDUSTRIAL NOISE
                 Industrial land uses have the potential to exert a relatively high level of noise impact
                 within their immediate operating environments. The scope and degree of noise
                 impact generated by industrial uses, and hence the characterization of any given
                 industrial use as a noise source, is dependent upon various critical factors, including
                 type of industrial activity, hours of operation, and the location relative to other land
                 uses.
                 Industrial noise sources are located in several isolated pockets throughout the City.
                 Delivery trucks, other truck movements, air compressors, generators, outdoor
                 loudspeakers and gas venting are common noise sources associated with industrial
                 land uses. Industrial activities produce noises above the general level of their
                 surroundings, though few exceed the 65 dBA norm for residential areas.
                 COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL RELATED NOISE
                 A variety of stationary noise sources associated with commercial and residential
                 activities exist throughout the City of Carson. Commercial noise sources may
                 include mechanical equipment and engines in non-moving motors such as power
                 tools (i.e., automobile repair shops). Stationary noise sources associated with
                 residential areas are primarily due to air conditioners and pool/spa equipment.
                 Additional stationary noise sources include animals, stereos, musical instruments,
Carson General Plan                                 N-9                                          Chapter 7

                                                                                                       NOISE ELEMENT
                  sporting events and horns. These noise sources have the potential to temporarily
                  disrupt the quietness of an area. Effective control of these noise sources cannot be
                  accomplished through decibel standards, but instead may be accomplished through
                  provisions in the Noise Ordinance.
3.3.4   RAIL LINE NOISE
                  The City of Carson is served by three railroads: Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR),
                  Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) Railroad and the Metro Blue line. The
                  UPRR runs two lines (San Pedro and Wilmington) along the extreme western
                  portion of the City, as it converges on the Los Angeles City container transfer
                  facility, which borders the west side of Long Beach. Several UPRR spur lines
                  extend westward from the San Pedro and Wilmington lines into the central portion
                  of Carson providing rail service to many of the major petroleum production
                  companies. A UPRR line also runs within the right-of-way of the Dominguez
                  Channel. A BNSF rail line traverses the southern portion of the City from the
                  Alameda Street Corridor to the Harbor Freeway (I-110). The Metro Blue line
                  crosses the extreme eastern section of the City, running north to downtown Los
                  Angeles and south through Long Beach; no Blue Line stations are in the City.
                  Three UPRR lines run within the City of Carson: San Pedro line, Wilmington line,
                  and Dominguez Channel line. The San Pedro line carries five trains each day. The
                  Wilmington line, which runs parallel to the Alameda Corridor line and is the
                  preferred route out of the harbor, operates 15 trains each day. The train(s) run
                  approximately every three hours on the Wilmington line. In approximately three
                  years, the San Pedro line will be the only UPRR line in operation. However, the
                  Wilmington line will remain in place and serve as an auxiliary line. The Dominguez
                  Channel line carries five (5) trains per day in each direction. However, when the
                  trains are used for shipping coal, the line is utilized 10 to 15 times per day each
                  direction.1
                  According to the Alameda Corridor Environmental Impact Report, dated January
                  1993, residents located immediately adjacent to the Alameda and Wilmington lines
                  between Dominguez Street and 223rd Street are experiencing noise levels of 68 dBA
                  CNEL, which exceeds the City exterior noise standard of 65 dBA CNEL by 3 dBA.
                  However, this noise level includes vehicular-generated noise associated with
                  Alameda Street.
                  The BNSF line is located in the southern portion of Carson and runs from Alameda
                  Street west through light industrial and residential areas to the Harbor Freeway.2
                  There are approximately 38 trains that utilize the BNSF rail line within the City of
                  Carson each day. No acoustical data or additional operational information was
                  provided by BNSF, regarding operations within the City of Carson.
        1
          Mr. Mike Irvine, General Superintendent of Transportation, Union Pacific Railroad, April 7, 1999.
        2
          Train operation data associated with the BNSF Railroad line were provided by Mr. Don Cleveland, staff with
BNSF, April 14, 1999.
Chapter 7                                              N-10                                    Carson General Plan
NOISE ELEMENT
                 The City has no control over railroad noise which is preempted by the Federal
                 Government.
3.4      NOISE SENSITIVE RECEPTORS
                 The City of Carson has identified residences, public and private school/preschool
                 classrooms, churches, hospitals and elderly care facilities as noise sensitive
                 receptors. The maximum interior exposure for these land uses is 45 dBA CNEL
                 (maximum exterior exposure is 65 dBA CNEL).
                 With the exception of residential land uses, Table N-5, Noise Sensitive Receptors,
                 provides a listing of noise sensitive land uses along with their street address. Exhibit
                 N-1, Location of Sensitive Receptors, illustrates the location of these land uses.
                 The potential exists for noise sensitive receptors located adjacent to roadways to
                 experience excessive noise levels. Depending on the setback location of these
                 adjacent noise sensitive receptors and nature of existing noise attenuation features
                 (if any), the 65 CNEL contour may fall within the outdoor living areas of these land
                 uses (i.e., playground or backyard).
                 Field measurements to identify ambient noise levels within the City limits were
                 conducted on March 9, March 10, and March 11, 1999.3 Field monitoring consisted
                 of 30 noise measurements recorded at various locations throughout the City. Each
                 measurement was recorded for a period of between 5 and 8 minutes on the sidewalk
                 adjacent to the roadways. The noise measurements take into account mobile noise
                 sources (i.e., vehicular and aircraft) and stationary noise sources (i.e., playgrounds,
                 industry, manufacturing), and are shown in Table N-6, Existing Noise Levels. In
                 addition refer to Exhibit N-2, Location of Noise Measurements, for an approximate
                 location of the field noise recordings.
                 Table N-6 indicates the general location of each noise measurement taken within
                 the City, the recorded dBA, and the location and type of adjacent sensitive receptors
                 (i.e., residential units, schools, health care facilities). The measured noise levels
                 ranged from 65.9 dBA to 83.2 throughout the City. As previously indicated above,
                 the noise measurements were taken on the sidewalk immediately adjacent to the
                 roadway within the right-of-way. In addition, heavy truck traffic was observed on
                 many of the roadways during the field measurements. It should be noted that the
                 noise measurements do not take into account noise attenuation measures (i.e.,
                 soundwalls, berms) or setbacks. Therefore, it is anticipated that existing residential
                 areas along the roadways identified in Table N-6, are experiencing noise levels
                 below the ambient noise measurements due to existing soundwalls or physical
                 setbacks from the existing edge of right-of-way.4
         3
           Measurements taken by RBF Consulting.
         4
           Sound/privacy walls typically provide sound attenuation on the order of 5 to 10 dBA.
Carson General Plan                                        N-11                                  Chapter 7
                                                                                             NOISE ELEMENT
                                            Table N-5
                                     Noise Sensitive Receptors
                            Facility                                     Street Address
 HEALTH CARE
 Carson Senior Social Services                    3 Civic Plaza
 El Nido Family Center                            460 East Carson Plaza Drive
 Family Services                                  340 West 224th Street
 Department of Rehabilitation                     451 East Carson Plaza Drive
 CHILD CARE
 Schmitt Family Day Care                          21826 Moneta Avenue
 Patricia Shanklin                                22821 Catskill Avenue
 Voneta Day Care                                  1225 Bankers Drive
 Sotelo Family Day Care                           135 East 229th Place
 Kurious Kids                                     530 Moorhaven Drive
 Taylor’s Family Day Care                         551 East 222 Street
 Artie’s Licensed Day Care                        19303 South Scobey Avenue
 Wilson & Wilson Child Care                       1672 East Cyrene Drive
 McCoy Family Child Care                          409 E. Centerview Drive
 McNeil Family Day Care                           17202 South Billings Drive
 Precious Gems Child Care                         146 East 213th Street
 Olivia’s Family Day Care                         2556 East Jackson Street
 Parra Family Day Care                            177 West 234th Street
 Dani’s Garden Day Care                           19409 Reinhart Street
 Peace and Joy Day Care Center                    1691-1693 Del Amo Boulevard
 Ruiz Family Day Care                             19509 South Annalee Avenue
 Little Angels’ Retreat                           18419 South Avalon Boulevard
 Jenkins Day Care                                 16117 Haskins Lane
 Lakeshore Kids and Co.                           2695 East Dominguez Street
 Manna Manor, Inc.                                24825 Neptune Avenue
 Ravenna Home Manna Manor, Inc.                   24713 Ravenna Avenue
 Carson Montessori Academy                        812 East Carson Street
 McClendon’s Family Day Care                      1242 East Cloverbrook Street
 Cobb Family Day Care                             19021 Kemp Avenue
 Community Development Center, Inc.               23033 South Avalon Boulevard
 Little Lambs Training Center                     19129 Radlet Avenue
 Shirley Currie                                   1860 East Kamm Street
 Davis Family Day Care                            357 Centerview Drive
 Golden Wings Academy                             20715 South Avalon Boulevard #100
 Gonzalez Family Day Care                         519 East 237th Street
 Connie M. & Jesse Jackson                        17906 Lysander Drive
 Jenkins Day Care                                 16220 Malloy Avenue
 Love Christian Child Care                        903 East Gladwick
 Audrey Christine Andersen                        628 Elsmere Drive
 Andrade’s Family Day Care                        20927 South Margaret Street
 Dotty’s Day Care                                 1413 East 220th Street
Chapter 7                                      N-12                                     Carson General Plan

NOISE ELEMENT
                                               Table N-5 [continued]
                                             Noise Sensitive Receptors
                            Facility                                              Street Address
 CHILD CARE – Continued
 Beezer Family Day Care                                    19227 Cliveden Avenue
 Tweet’s Day Care Center                                   921 East Dimondale Drive
 Jacqueline Brown Family Day Care Center                   1754 Fernrock Street
 Elisia & Rofino Cardoso                                   337 East Double Street
 Kids World                                                21601 South Moneta Avenue
 PRE-KINDERGARTEN
 Ambler Avenue School                                      319 East Sherman Drive
 Annalee Avenue School                                     19419 Annalee Avenue
 Bonita Street School                                      21929 Bonita Street
 Broadacres Avenue School                                  19421 South Broadacres Avenue
 Catskill Avenue School                                    23536 Catskill Avenue
 Del Amo School                                            21228 Water Street
 Dolores Street School                                     22526 Dolores Street
 Leapwood Avenue School                                    19302 Leapwood Avenue
 Caroldale Avenue School                                   22424 Caroldale Avenue
 Carson Street School                                      161 East Carson Street
 Towne Avenue School                                       18924 Towne Avenue
 SCHOOLS
 Federation Head Start                                     22504 South Avalon Boulevard
 Ralph Bunche School                                       16223 Haskins Lane
 CSU, Dominguez Hills                                      1000 East Victoria Street
 Towne Avenue Elementary Schools                           18924 Towne Avenue
 Curtis Junior High School                                 1254 East Helmick Street
 Del Amo Elementary School                                 21228 Walter Street
 Carnegie Junior High School                               21820 Bonita Street
 Eagle Tree High School                                    22628 South Main Street
 Carson High School/Carson Community Adult School          22328 South Main Street
 Caroldale Learning Community                              22424 Caroldale Avenue
 232nd Place School                                        23240 Archibald Avenue
 Domiguez Elementary School                                21250 Santa Fe Avenue
 Stephen M. White Middle School                            22102 South Figueroa Street
 Peninsula Christian School                                22507 South Figueroa Street
 St. Philomena Catholic School                             21832 South Main Street
 CHURCHES
 Baptist Temple of Prayer                                  224 East Carson Street
 Calvary Chapel of South Bay                               415 West Torrance Boulevard
 Carson Baptist Church                                     520 East 228th Street
 Carson Christian Center/Carson-Wilmington Minister’s
                                                           19303 Annalee Avenue
 Fellowship
 Carson Christian Church                                   356 East 220 Street
Carson General Plan                                    N-13                                      Chapter 7

                                                                                                     NOISE ELEMENT
                                               Table N-5 [continued]
                                            Noise Sensitive Receptors
                              Facility                                           Street Address
 CHURCHES – Continued
 Carson Church of Religious Science                       220 East Carson Street
 Carson Hope Chapel Foursquare                            129 East 223rd Street
 Carson Pentecostal Church                                555 East 220th Street
 Central Baptist Church                                   1641 East Carson Street
 First Christian Faith United Church                      1609 East Del Amo Boulevard
 First Lutheran Church of Carson                          19707 South Central Avenue
 Grace Orthodox Presbyterian Church                       22511 South Figueroa Street
 Harbor Community Chapel                                  21521 South Avalon Boulevard
 Immanuel Missionary Baptist Church                       503 East 220th Street
 Judson Baptist Church                                    451 East 223rd Street
 Kaiser Hospital Chapel                                   24733 Marbella Avenue
 Keystone Assembly of God                                 21916 Moneta Avenue
 Mission Eben-Ezer Family Church                          225 West Torrance Boulevard
 Mountain Movers Church                                   519 East 245th Street
 New Life Christian Center                                1210 East 223rd Street
 Pentecostal Church of God                                21818 Dolores Street
 Spanish Seventh Day Adventist Church                     21828 Dolores Street
 St. Philomena Catholic Church                            21900 South Main Street
 United Baptist Church                                    435 West 220th Street
 United Samoan Church                                     600 East Double Street
 United Samoan Congregational Christian Church            1717 East Carson Street
 SENIOR CENTERS
 Carson Gardens Retirement Apartments                     21811 South Main Street
 Camino Village Senior Complex                            21735 South Main Street
 Avalon Courtyard Retirement Center                       22121 South Avalon Boulevard
 Carson Retirement Center                                 345 East Carson Street
Chapter 7                                              N-14                                     Carson General Plan


                                                                                                            NOISE ELEMENT
                                                        Table N-6
                                                 Existing Noise Levels
                                          (Based on Field Measurements)
  Site                 General Location of                  Leq                         Orientation/
 Number                Noise Measurement                   dBA                  Type of Sensitive Receptor
          Lomita Boulevard between Avalon Boulevard               Single-family units located immediately adjacent to the
    1     and Main Street (at intersection of Island and   68.2   north.
          Lomita Boulevard)
          Main Street between Sepulveda Boulevard                 None
    2     and Lomita Boulevard (south of railroad          69.0
          trestle)
          Avalon Boulevard between 223rd Street and               Multiple-family residential to the east, single-family
    3     Sepulveda        Boulevard       (at     Avalon  69.4   residential and a day care to the west.
          Boulevard/Bayport intersection).
          At Carson High School, south of the                     Carson High School immediately to the east and
    4                                                      71.2
          intersection of Main Street and 223rd Street.           single-family residential to the west.
          Figueroa Street between Carson Street and               Multiple-family residential located to the west and a
    5                                                      72.6
          223rd Street adjacent to school                         school located immediately to the east.
          Figueroa Street between 228th Street and                Single-family residential located to the east and west
    6     Sepulveda Boulevard (at intersection of 234th    68.3   respectively.
          Street and Figueroa Street)
          Main Street between Carson Street and 223rd             Multiple-family residential to the west; church and
    7     Street (at intersection 22nd Street and Main     67.2   school to the east.
          Street
    8     Intersection of Main Street and 213th Street     67.4   Single-family residential areas to the east and west.
          Intersection of Main Street and Del Amo                 None
    9                                                      68.2
          Boulevard
   10     Main Street south of Victoria Street             69.9   Single-family residential to the east.
          Main Street Between Gardena Boulevard and               None
   11     SR-91 (at intersection of Walnut Street and      74.0
          Main Street)
          Broadway between Gardena Boulevard and                  None
   12                                                      69.0
          Alondra Boulevard
          Avalon Boulevard adjacent to Hemingway                  Church to the east; park to the west.
   13                                                      79.4
          Memorial Park
          Avalon Boulevard between SR-91 and Victoria             Colony Cove and Carson Harbor Village Mobile Home
   14                                                      74.4
          Street                                                  Parks
          Intersection of Avalon Boulevard and 192nd              Single-family residential to the east; school to the west.
   15                                                      65.9
          Street
          Intersection of Avalon Boulevard and Del Amo            None
   16                                                      75.1
          Boulevard
          Central Avenue between University Drive and             Church to the west; single-family residential to the
   17                                                      66.9
          Del Amo Boulevard (south of Hemlick Street)             east.
          University Drive between Avalon Boulevard               Single-family residential to the south.
   18                                                      70.0
          and Central Avenue
          Artesia Boulevard between Avalon Boulevard              Park and single-family residential to the south.
   19                                                      73.4
          and Central Avenue (south of SR-91)
          Wilmington Avenue between University Drive              Single-family residential to west.
   20                                                      75.5
          and Del Amo Boulevard
          Wilmington Avenue between 213th Street and              Single-family residential to the west.
   21                                                      79.5
          Carson Street
Chapter 7                                                 N-16                                       Carson General Plan
NOISE ELEMENT
                                                 Table N-6 [continued]
                                                 Existing Noise Levels
                                          (Based on Field Measurements)
   Site                 General Location of                 Leq                          Orientation/
 Number                 Noise Measurement                   dBA                  Type of Sensitive Receptor
    22     Immediately south of I-405                       83.2    None
           Wilmington Avenue between 223 Street and
                                            rd                      None
    23                                                      75.2
           Sepulveda Boulevard
           Alameda Street         between Sepulveda                 None
    24                                                      77.7
           Boulevard and 223rd Street
           Alameda Street between I-405 and Carson                  Single-family residential to the east.
    25     Street ( at intersection 218th Street and        76.3
           Alameda Street)
           Alameda Street between Carson Street and                 None
    26     Dominguez Street ( at intersection of Alameda    72.7
           Street and Harrison Street)
           Santa Fe Avenue between Dominguez Street                 Single-family residential to west; school to east.
    27                                                      73.3
           and Carson Street
           Carson Street between Avalon Boulevard and               Mobile home park and medical center to the south.
    28                                                      71.7
           I-405 (at Carson City Hall)
           223rd Street between Avalon Boulevard and                Single-family residential to the north.
    29                                                      74.4
           Wilmington Avenue
           Carson Street between I-405 and Wilmington               Three (3) churches along north side of Carson Street.
    30                                                      70.3
           Avenue
 NOTE: Noise measurements were recorded on the sidewalk within the right-of-way. Actual sound levels at receptors would
         have an anticipated 5-10 dBA reduction.
 Source: Noise monitoring survey conducted by RBF Consulting on March 9, March 10, and March 11, 1999.
Carson General Plan                                        N-17                                                    Chapter 7

NOISE ELEMENT
3.5      COMMUNITY NOISE CONTOURS
                 The noise environment for Carson can be described using noise contours developed
                 for the major noise sources within the City. These contours represent lines of equal
                 noise exposure, just as the contour lines on a topographic map are lines of equal
                 elevation. The contours shown are the 60 and 65 dB(A) CNEL (Community Noise
                 Equivalency Level) contours. As previously stated, CNEL is a 24-hour time-
                 weighted average noise level where noise which occurs during sensitive time periods
                 is weighted more heavily.
                 Noise contours for Carson were developed based on existing and future traffic
                 levels, and other sources of noise in the community. Carson noise contours are
                 presented in Exhibits N-3 and N-4. Exhibit N-3 shows the noise environment as
                 estimated in 2001 for existing land uses and traffic on major streets in the City.
                 Exhibit N-4 shows the future noise environment as it would exist in 2020 with
                 implementation of the General Plan.
                 The exhibits display the average daily traffic (ADT) volume noise levels at 100 feet
                 from the roadway centerline and the distance from the roadway centerline to the 70,
                 65 and 60 dBA CNEL contours. Tables in the Circulation and Infrastructure
                 Element indicate traffic volumes on designated street segments. Surface traffic
                 noise has the greatest impact on the noise environment of Carson’s residential and
                 sensitive-receptor properties. Contours between 55 and 60 dBA CNEL are common
                 along City collector streets, while 65 dBA CNEL or great contours are common
                 along major streets.
                 The inclusion of an area within a 60 or 65 CNEL contour on Exhibit N-3, Existing
                 Noise Contours (2001), or Exhibit N-4, Future Noise Contours (2020), indicates that
                 noise levels are high enough to be of potential concern, but does not imply that
                 excessive noise levels are present uniformly on all sites within the area. Buildings,
                 walls, berms, and changes in topography affect noise levels. Some locations may be
                 screened from noise impact by the presence of one or more of these features.
                 Exhibit N-4 shows projected 60 dB contours ranging between approximately 32 feet
                 and 439 feet from the roadway centerlines. The 65 dB contour ranges between 15
                 feet and 204 feet along the roadways modeled. This impacts existing residential
                 neighborhoods and school facilities located throughout the City, as identified below:
                        Along Main Street north of Sepulveda Boulevard to Del Amo Boulevard;
                        Along Carson Street from I-405 to Figueroa Street;
                        Along Carson Street from Alameda Street to Santa Fe Avenue;
                        Along Sepulveda Boulevard from Main Street to Avalon Boulevard;
                        Along Figueroa Street from Carson Street to Torrance Boulevard;
                        Along Central Avenue from University Drive to Del Amo Boulevard; and
                        Along Wilmington Avenue from University Drive to Del Amo Boulevard.
Carson General Plan                               N-19                                         Chapter 7

                                                                                        NOISE ELEMENT
             All other noise impacts are located within commercial or industrial areas in the City,
             which are not identified as sensitive receptors. Future noise-sensitive uses
             constructed along these roadways will therefore require noise mitigation.
             60 CNEL. The 60 CNEL contour defines the Noise Study Zone. The noise
             environment for any proposed noise-sensitive land use (for example, single- or
             multi-family residences, hospitals, schools, or churches) within this zone should be
             evaluated on a project specific basis. The project may require mitigation to meet
             City and/or State (Title 24) standards. A site- and project-specific study will be
             necessary to determine what kinds of mitigation will make the interior building
             environment acceptable for the given type of land use. Some sites may already be
             sufficiently protected by existing walls or berms that no further mitigation measures
             are required.
             65 CNEL. The 65 CNEL contour defines the Noise Mitigation Zone. Within this
             contour, new or expanded noise-sensitive developments should be permitted only if
             appropriate mitigation measures, such as barriers or additional sound insulation, are
             included and City and/or State noise standards are achieved. In some instances it
             may be possible to show that existing walls, berms, or screening may exist such that
             required mitigation is already in place.
3.6     CARSON NOISE CONTROL PROGRAM
             Most noise control is carried out indirectly through thoughtful land use planning.
             This entails separations of residential and other uses through effective zoning and
             provision of buffers. Site design also influences noises that infringe on surrounding
             areas. Monitoring noise levels and maintaining land use and building regulations to
             limit noise intrusion are principal mechanisms of noise control. The Community
             Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL), as adopted and utilized in the Noise Element,
             serves as the basis for other regulations. Noise control is an intergovernmental
             responsibility since noises readily cross over territorial boundaries. This is reflected
             in Carson’s existing Noise Control Program. Specific activities identified in the
             Program include:
                    The Sheriff’s Department shall enforce local, state and federal noise laws for
                     mobile sources and complaints in residential zones.
                    The Building and Safety Division of the Development Services Work Group
                     shall enforce noise related building regulations of state and local noise
                     control ordinances and the Building Code.
                    The Planning Division of the Development Services Work Group shall
                     review potential noise impacts on new developments which require
                     environmental assessments and/or environmental impact reports and
                     permits/variances for new uses.
                    The County of Los Angeles Department of Animal Care and Control shall
                     continue the abatement of annoyance caused by barking dogs.
Chapter 7                                      N-20                                Carson General Plan


                                              NOISE ELEMENT
This page intentionally left blank.
Chapter 7                           N-22 Carson General Plan

                                              NOISE ELEMENT
This page intentionally left blank.
Chapter 7                           N-24 Carson General Plan
NOISE ELEMENT
                         The Code Enforcement Division of the Public Safety Work Group shall
                          enforce the City Noise Ordinance.
3.7      STANDARD NOISE ATTENUATION TECHNIQUES
                 Noise reduction can be accomplished by placement of walls, landscaped berms, or a
                 combination of the two, between the noise source and the receiver. Generally,
                 effective noise shielding requires a solid barrier with a mass of at least four pounds
                 per square foot of surface area that is large enough to block the line of sight
                 between source and receiver. Variations may be appropriate in individual cases
                 based on distance, nature and orientation of buildings behind the barrier, and a
                 number of other factors. Garages or other buildings may be used to shield dwelling
                 units and outdoor living areas from traffic noise.
                 In addition to site design techniques, noise insulation can be accomplished through
                 proper design of buildings. Nearby noise generators should be recognized in
                 determining the location of doors, windows and vent openings. Sound-rated
                 windows (extra thick or multi-paned) and wall insulation are also effective. None of
                 these measures, however, can realize their full potential unless care is taken in
                 actual construction: doors and windows fitted properly; openings sealed; joints
                 caulked; plumbing adequately insulated from structural members. And, of course,
                 sound-rated doors and windows will have little effect if left open. This may require
                 installation of air conditioning for adequate ventilation.
                 Noise impacts can be reduced by insulating noise sensitive uses, such as residences,
                 schools, libraries, hospitals, nursing and carehomes and some types of commercial
                 activities. But perhaps a more efficient approach involves limiting the level of noise
                 generation at the source. State and Federal statutes have largely preempted local
                 control over vehicular noise emissions, but commercial and industrial operations
                 and certain residential activities provide opportunities for local government to assist
                 in noise abatement. Local ordinances may establish maximum levels for noise
                 generated on-site. This usually takes the form of limiting the level of noise
                 permitted to leave the property where it may impact other uses.
                 Although vehicular noise emissions standards are established at the State and
                 Federal levels, local agencies can play a significant part in reducing traffic noise by
                 controlling traffic volume and congestion. Traffic noise is greatest at intersections
                 due to acceleration, deceleration and gear shifting. Measures such as signal
                 synchronization can help to minimize this problem. Likewise, reduction of
                 congestion aids in reduction of noise. This can be accomplished through the
                 application of traffic engineering techniques such as channelization of turning
                 movements, parking restrictions, separation of modes (bus, auto, bicycle,
                 pedestrian) and restrictions on truck traffic.
Carson General Plan                                 N-25                                        Chapter 7

                                                                                         NOISE ELEMENT
4.0     PLANNING FACTORS, GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION
             The acronyms listed below are used for the implementation measures:
                  RA/D:     Responsible Agency/Division
                  FS:       Funding Source
                  TF:       Time Frame
             ISSUE:       CARSON’S NOISE ORDINANCE
             Enforcement of the City’s noise ordinance is important in order to protect the serenity of
             residential neighborhoods. Education of the public may assist in the reduction of noise
             levels.
             Goal:        N-1:       Maximize efficiency in noise abatement efforts through clear
                                     and effective policies, plans and ordinances.
             Policies: N-1.1         Continue to implement the City’s Noise Ordinance and
                                     Noise Control Program.
                          N-1.2      Periodically review and amend (and/or combine if
                                     appropriate) plans, ordinances and policies relating to noise
                                     control.
                          N-1.3      Enhance enforcement methods and/or mechanisms by
                                     exploring new enforcement options.
                          N-1.4      Inform the public regarding City noise regulations and
                                     programs.
                          N-1.5      Coordinate with the California Occupational Safety and
                                     Health Administration (Cal-OSHA) to provide information
                                     on occupational noise requirements within the City.
             Implementation Measures:
                          N-IM-1.1 Reinforce City policies and regulations by enhancing
                                     enforcement methods and/or mechanisms.
                                     RA/D:     Code Enforcement
                                     FS:       General Fund
                                     TF:       Ongoing
                          N-IM-1.2 Noise ordinance review and revisions should clearly address
                                     mitigation of noise conflicts between adjacent uses,
                                     construction noise (particularly in or near residential
                                     neighborhoods), noise associated with maintenance
                                     equipment (e.g., leaf blowers, street sweepers, etc.), hours of
Chapter 7                                      N-26                                Carson General Plan

NOISE ELEMENT
                             operation of construction or maintenance equipment, noise
                             standards, abatement, enforcement, procedures, mitigation
                             of impacts from short-term events (i.e., concerts, sporting
                             events, etc.), and other like issues.
                             RA/D:     Planning, Code Enforcement
                             FS:       General Fund
                             TF:       2003-2005
                    N-IM-1.3 Designate one division to act as noise control coordinator.
                             Establish and maintain coordination among appropriate
                             divisions and agencies involved in noise abatement.
                             RA/D:     Code Enforcement
                             FS:       General Fund
                             TF:       2003-2004
                    N-IM-1.4 Require that new equipment purchased by the City comply
                             with noise performance standards.
                             RA/D:     Public Works, Engineering
                             FS:       General Fund, Gas Tax, Grants, Props A and C
                             TF:       Ongoing
                    N-IM-1.5 Support a national uniform sound certification program of
                             published sound ratings for various types of equipment that
                             are sources of noise.
                             RA/D:     Public Works, Code Enforcement
                             FS:       General Fund
                             TF:       2003-2004
                    N-IM-1.6 Examine the potential to establish a Violators Fee for
                             persons requiring a second call/visit for violating the noise
                             ordinances.
                             RA/D:     Code Enforcement
                             FS:       General Fund
                             TF:       2004-2005
                    N-IM-1.7 Create flyers, Web Site information, articles in Carson
                             Report, and other methods of informing the public regarding
                             noise issues, including health and abatement and
                             enforcement procedures.
                             RA/D:     Code Enforcement
                             FS:       General Fund
                             TF:       Ongoing
                                                                                    
Carson General Plan                    N-27                                       Chapter 7

                                                                                        NOISE ELEMENT
          ISSUE:      BUFFERING OF SENSITIVE LAND USES
          Noise sensitive land uses, such as homes, schools and hospitals, should be buffered from
          areas where noise levels may exceed normal expectations including major thoroughfares
          and truck routes, industrial uses, concert venues, and other noise generating uses.
          Goal:       N-2:         Minimize noise impacts on residential uses and noise
                                   sensitive receptors along the City’s streets, ensuring that the
                                   City’s interior and exterior noise levels are not exceeded.
          Policies: N-2.1          Limit truck traffic to specific routes and designated hours of
                                   travel, where necessary, as defined in the Transportation and
                                   Infrastructure Element and by the City’s Development
                                   Services Group. Said routes and hours shall be reviewed
                                   periodically to ensure the protection of sensitive receptors
                                   and residential neighborhoods.
                      N-2.2        Examine the feasibility of implementing sound attenuation
                                   measures along the City’s arterial streets, particularly along
                                   designated truck routes.
                      N-2.3        Examine the feasibility of an ordinance which creates an
                                   overlay zone to be placed over residential properties along
                                   arterial streets and/or designated truck routes. This overlay
                                   zone would provide additional sound attenuation techniques
                                   to improve affected residential homes.
                      N-2.4        Minimize potential transportation noise through proper
                                   design of street circulation, coordination of routing, and
                                   other traffic control measures such as enforcing the speed
                                   limit, shifting travel lanes away from impacted units or
                                   sensitive receptors, adding bike lanes.
                      N-2.5        Discourage through traffic in residential neighborhoods.
                      N-2.6        Actively advocate noise control requirements for all motor
                                   vehicles.
                      N-2.7        Continue to promote the use of alternative clean fueled
                                   vehicles for personal and business use.
          Implementation Measures:
                      N-IM-2.1 Evaluate specific sound attenuation measures, such as,
                                   retrofitting existing residences with double-glazed windows
                                   and sound insulation, construction of sound walls, use of
                                   lower walls and berms, and enclosed courtyards. Prioritize
                                   the areas in need of sound attenuation based on degree of
Chapter 7                                     N-28                                Carson General Plan

NOISE ELEMENT
                             sensitivity of uses, excess of maximum allowable standards,
                             length of time the noise impact has existed, and number of
                             residential units and sensitive receptors impacted.
                             RA/D:      Planning
                             FS:        General Fund
                             TF:        2005-2006
                    N-IM-2.2 Develop a streamlined process to expedite and ease approval
                             of the overlay zone techniques.
                             RA/D:      Planning
                             FS:        General Fund
                             TF:        2005-2006
                    N-IM-2.3 Prepare an informational booklet explaining the purpose of
                             the overlay zone for all owners of property located in the
                             zone.
                             RA/D:      Planning
                             FS:        General Fund
                             TF:        2005-2006
                    N-IM-2.4 Augment the list of eligible improvements under housing
                             programs, such as the Community Development Block Grant
                             (CDBG) Home Improvement Loan/Rebate Program, to
                             include remedial improvements to homes lying within the
                             designated improvement areas and located within the overlay
                             zone, as described above in Policy N-2.3.
                             RA/D:      Housing, Planning
                             FS:        General Fund
                             TF:        2005-2006
                    N-IM-2.5 Ensure the inclusion of noise mitigation measures in the
                             design of new roadway projects in the City.
                             RA/D:      Planning, Engineering, Public Works
                             FS:        Gas Tax
                             TF:        Ongoing
                    N-IM-2.6 Provide for continued evaluation of truck movements and
                             routes to provide effective separation from residential or
                             other noise sensitive land uses.
                             RA/D:      Engineering/Traffic
                             FS:        General Fund
                             TF:        Ongoing
Carson General Plan                     N-29                                     Chapter 7
                                                                               NOISE ELEMENT
                    N-IM-2.7 Encourage the enforcement of State Motor Vehicle noise
                             standards for cars, trucks and motorcycles through
                             coordination with the California Highway Patrol and the
                             Sheriff’s Department.
                             RA/D:     Public Safety
                             FS:       General Fund
                             TF:       Ongoing
                    N-IM-2.8 Establish a noise monitoring and abatement program to
                             identify sound levels in all neighborhoods significantly
                             affected by increased traffic, and if problems, identify
                             potential solutions.
                             RA/D:     Code Enforcement, Engineering
                             FS:       General Fund
                             TF:       2005-2006
                    N-IM-2.9 Study the use of electric, fuel cell or other non-polluting
                             fuels, which are also quieter, for Carson Circuit buses and
                             other City vehicles.
                             RA/D:     Transportation
                             FS:       General Fund, Grants
                             TF:       2003-2004
          Goal:     N-3:     Minimize noise impacts from the Alameda Corridor.
          Policies: N-3.1    Coordinate with the businesses along the Corridor to ensure
                             that noise attenuation measures are addressed in the
                             selection of the vehicle technology, location of truck pick-up
                             and loading areas, locations of mechanical and electrical
                             equipment, exterior speaker boxes, public address systems,
                             and similar noise sources.
                    N-3.2    Continue to incorporate noise assessments into the
                             environmental review process for both transportation-related
                             and development projects along the Corridor.
                    N-3.3    At such a time when Alameda Street becomes a state
                             highway:
                                Encourage Caltrans to meet the City’s standard for
                                 exterior noise levels of 65 dBA CNEL;
                                Where appropriate and feasible, encourage Caltrans to
                                 keep interior residential noise levels below the City’s
                                 standard of 45 dBA CNEL; and
Chapter 7                              N-30                              Carson General Plan

NOISE ELEMENT
                                       Coordinate with Caltrans to ensure the inclusion of noise
                                        mitigation measures in the design of improvements to the
                                        Corridor.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           N-IM-3.1 The environmental noise assessments should identify
                                    potential noise sources, potential noise impacts, and
                                    appropriate sound attenuation. Potential noise sources
                                    include truck pick-up and loading areas, locations of
                                    mechanical and electrical equipment, and similar noise
                                    sources. Mitigation of all significant noise impacts should be
                                    required as a condition of project approval.
                                    RA/D:      Planning
                                    FS:        Application Fee
                                    TF:        Ongoing
                 Goal:     N-4:     Minimize noise impacts from the freeway corridors which
                                    surround and bisect the City of Carson, ensuring that the
                                    City’s interior and exterior maximum noise level standards
                                    are not exceeded.
                 Policies: N-4.1    Encourage Caltrans to meet the City’s standard for exterior
                                    noise levels of 65 dBA CNEL.
                           N-4.2    Where appropriate and feasible, encourage Caltrans to keep
                                    interior residential noise levels below the City’s standard of
                                    45 dBA CNEL.
                           N-4.3    Coordinate with Caltrans to ensure the inclusion of noise
                                    mitigation measures in the design of improvements to
                                    existing facilities, as well as any new highway projects.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           N-IM-4.1 Coordinate with Caltrans to ensure that sound walls are
                                    installed along residential areas abutting the freeways. Sound
                                    walls are to use landscaping and other attractive treatments.
                                    RA/D:      Engineering, Planning
                                    FS:        State Funds
                                    TF:        2003-2006
                           N-IM-4.2 Encourage Caltrans to develop a range of sound attenuation
                                    alternatives. Sound walls should not be the only mitigation
                                    measure presented or available.
Carson General Plan                            N-31                                          Chapter 7

                                                                                NOISE ELEMENT
                             RA/D:      Engineering, Planning
                             FS:        State Funds
                             TF:        2003-2006
                    N-IM-4.3 Evaluate interior sound attenuation measures such as,
                             double-glazed windows and sound insulation, additional
                             right-of-way to provide a buffer, and land uses and
                             developments which act as manmade noise buffers.
                             RA/D:      Planning
                             FS:        General Fund
                             TF:        2005-2006
          Goal:     N-5:     Minimize noise impacts on residential areas from rail and/or
                             transit operations.
          Policies: N-5.1    Continue to encourage the railroad and transit operators
                             within the City to schedule trains during the daylight hours,
                             when possible.
                    N-5.2    Require noise attenuation measures for residential
                             construction in areas affected by the 65 dBA CNEL railroad
                             noise contour. Sound attenuation measures shall reduce
                             interior noise to a maximum of 45 dBA CNEL. These
                             measures shall apply to new residential construction as well
                             as renovations, remodels, and building additions.
                    N-5.3    Coordinate with the railroad and transit operators to ensure
                             that noise attenuation measures are addressed in the
                             selection of the rail and vehicle technology for use along
                             rail/transit lines and the design and reconstruction of existing
                             lines, and the operators address other noise concerns.
          Implementation Measures:
                    N-IM-5.1 Meet regularly with railroad and transit operators to discuss
                             mutual issues. (Implements Policies N-5.1, N-5.3)
                             RA/D:      Engineering, Planning
                             FS:        General Fund
                             TF:        Ongoing
                    N-IM-5.2 Require noise impact studies as part of any environmental
                             review of new projects and establish mitigation measures as
                             required to meet City noise standards. (Implements Policy N-
                             5.2)
                             RA/D:      Planning
                             FS:        Application Fee
                             TF:        Ongoing
Chapter 7                               N-32                              Carson General Plan
NOISE ELEMENT
                 Goal:     N-6:     Minimize noise impacts on residential areas from nearby
                                    airport operations.
                 Policies: N-6.1    Continue to monitor noise associated with airport operations
                                    at the Compton and Long Beach Airports.
                           N-6.2    Coordinate with the operators of the Long Beach Airport to
                                    ensure that any increase in operations will not adversely
                                    impact the residential areas on the eastern side of the City.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           N-IM-6.1 Assign coordination of         airport  noise   to   the  Code
                                    Enforcement Division.
                                    RA/D:     City Manager
                                    FS:       General Fund
                                    TF:       2003-2004
                 Goal:     N-7:     Incorporate noise considerations into land use planning
                                    decisions.
                 Policies: N-7.1    Incorporate noise considerations into land use planning
                                    decisions by establishing acceptable limits of noise for
                                    various land uses throughout the community.
                           N-7.2    Continue to incorporate noise assessments into the
                                    environmental review process, as needed. Said assessments
                                    shall identify potential noise sources, potential noise impacts,
                                    and appropriate sound attenuation. In non-residential
                                    projects, potential noise sources shall include truck pick-up
                                    and loading areas, locations of mechanical and electrical
                                    equipment, and similar noise sources. Require mitigation of
                                    all significant noise impacts as a condition of project
                                    approval.
                           N-7.3    Require all new residential construction in areas with an
                                    exterior noise level greater than 65dBA CNEL to include
                                    sound attenuation measures that reduce interior noise levels
                                    to the standards shown in Table N-3. Sound attenuation
                                    measures include:
                                       Sound walls,
                                       Double glazing,
                                       Building location, and/or
                                       Facade treatment.
Carson General Plan                           N-33                                          Chapter 7

                                                                                 NOISE ELEMENT
                   N-7.4     Ensure acceptable noise levels near schools, hospitals,
                             convalescent homes, churches, and other noise sensitive
                             areas in accordance with Table N-2. To this end, require
                             buffers or appropriate mitigation of potential noise sources.
                             Such sources include, but are not limited to truck pickup and
                             loading areas, mechanical and electrical equipment, exterior
                             speaker boxes, and public address systems.
          Implementation Measures:
                   N-IM-7.1 Adopt the noise standards presented in Table N-2, Noise and
                             Land Use Compatibility Matrix, which identify interior and
                             exterior noise standards in relation to specific land uses.
                             RA/D:     Planning
                             FS:       General Fund
                             TF:       2003-2005
                   N-IM-7.2 Ensure that the noise standards fully integrate noise
                             considerations into land use planning decisions to prevent
                             new noise/land use conflicts. Use the criteria of Table N-2.
                             RA/D:     Planning
                             FS:       General Fund
                             TF:       2003-2005
                   N-IM-7.3 Incorporate noise reduction features during site planning.
                             RA/D:     Planning
                             FS:       Application Fees
                             TF:       Ongoing
                   N-IM-7.4 Require a noise impact evaluation for projects through the
                             environmental review process, if determined necessary.
                             RA/D:     Planning
                             FS:       Application Fees
                             TF:       Ongoing
                   N-IM-7.5 Establish a noise monitoring program to identify progress in
                             achieving noise abatement and to perform necessary
                             updating of the Noise Element.
                             RA/D:     Code Enforcement, Planning
                             FS:       General Fund
                             TF:       2005-2006
Chapter 7                              N-34                                Carson General Plan
NOISE ELEMENT
                           N-IM-7.6 Require that automobile and truck access to commercial and
                                    industrial developments, when located adjacent to residential
                                    neighborhoods, be located at the maximum practical distance
                                    from the residential parcel(s).
                                    RA/D:     Planning
                                    FS:       Application Fees
                                    TF:       Ongoing
                           N-IM-7.7 Maintain a technical resource for builders, developers, and
                                    operators of construction equipment which discusses a
                                    variety of sound attenuation measures, the amount of noise
                                    reduction each produces and how to combine them to meet
                                    City requirements.
                                    RA/D:     Planning
                                    FS:       General Fund
                                    TF:       2005-2006
                           N-IM-7.8 Require that new commercial, industrial or any
                                    redevelopment projects or proposed developments near
                                    existing residential land uses demonstrate compliance with
                                    the City Noise Ordinance prior to approval of the project.
                                    RA/D:     Planning
                                    FS:       Application Fees
                                    TF:       Ongoing
                 Goal:     N-8:     Minimize noise impacts associated with residential uses in
                                    mixed use development.
                 Policies: N-8.1    Require the design of mixed use structures to incorporate
                                    techniques to prevent transfer of noise and vibration from
                                    the commercial to the residential uses.
                           N-8.2    Encourage commercial uses in mixed use developments
                                    which are not noise intensive.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           N-IM-8.1 Orient residential units away from major noise sources in
                                    mixed use projects.
                                    RA/D:     Planning
                                    FS:       Application Fees
                                    TF:       Ongoing
Carson General Plan                           N-35                                       Chapter 7
                                                                    NOISE ELEMENT
            N-IM-8.2 Locate balconies and operable windows of residential units in
                     mixed use projects away from primary roadways and other
                     major noise sources.
                     RA/D:    Planning
                     FS:      Application Fees
                     TF:      Ongoing
                                                                            
Chapter 7                     N-36                             Carson General Plan

                          CHAPTER 8
OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                          CHAPTER 8
         OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
GUIDING PRINCIPLE
                 The City of Carson is committed to conserving and enhancing its key natural
                 features and resources, including, but not limited to, trees and vegetation, open
                 space, water, and other natural resources. To this end, the City shall continue
                 promoting environmental awareness and practices to protect these resources.
1.0     INTRODUCTION
                 At one time, Carson had ample accessible open spaces and natural resources within
                 its boundaries. During the Rancho period in California history, vast herds of cattle
                 freely roamed the Dominguez Rancho, of which the City of Carson is a part. The
                 area had a rich endowment of natural resources: abundant potable groundwater,
                 prime agricultural soils, a mild and healthful climate, and oil. However, these open
                 space areas and resources began to diminish as the City grew and the region
                 urbanized. As the area population grew, economics dictated that the most profitable
                 use of land was not for agricultural production but rather development.
2.0     STATE LAW REQUIREMENTS
                 The California State Government Code mandates that all general plans include both
                 an open space and a conservation element. The open space and conservation
                 elements complement one another due to the overlap in State requirements and the
                 inter-relationship of issues within each element. This is particularly true in Carson,
                 which no longer has abundant open space and undeveloped natural resources. It is
                 therefore important to focus on the conservation of the City’s remaining resources
Carson General Plan                               OSC-1                                        Chapter 8

                                                                      OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
              and open spaces. For these reasons, the Open Space and Conservation Elements
              have been combined in the Carson General Plan.
2.1     OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
              Government Code Section 65302(e) stipulates that a general plan include an open
              space element. The contents of the open space element are identified in
              Government Code Section 65560 as follows:
                  “(b) Open space land is any parcel or area of land or water which is essentially
                        unimproved and devoted to an open space use…and which is designated
                        on a local, regional or state open space plan as any of the following:
                        (1)   Open space for the preservation of natural resources including, but
                              not limited to, areas required for the preservation of plant and
                              animal life…
                        (2)   Open space used for the managed production of resources,
                              including but not limited to…agricultural lands… areas required for
                              recharge of ground water basins…and areas containing major
                              mineral deposits, including those in short supply.
                        (3)   Open space for outdoor recreation, including but not limited to,
                              areas of outstanding scenic, historic and cultural value; areas
                              particularly suited for park and recreation purposes…and areas
                              which serve as links between major recreation and open space
                              reservations, including utility easements…trails, and scenic highway
                              corridors.
                        (4)   Open space for public health and safety, including, but not limited
                              to, areas which require special management or regulation because of
                              hazardous or special conditions such as earthquake fault zones,
                              unstable soils areas, floodplains, watersheds, areas presenting high
                              fire risks, areas required for the protection of water quality and water
                              reservoirs and areas required for the protection and enhancement of
                              air quality.”
              The intent of the open space element is to assure that cities “recognize that open
              space land is a limited and valuable resource which must be conserved wherever
              possible” and “will prepare and carry out open space plans which, along with state
              and regional open space plans, will accomplish the objectives of a comprehensive
              open space program.” (Government Code Section 65562.)
2.2     CONSERVATION ELEMENT
              Government Code Section 65302(d) requires that the general plan include a
              conservation element for the “conservation, development, and utilization of natural
              resources including water and its hydraulic force…soils, rivers and other
              waters…wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources. That portion of the
Chapter 8                                         OSC-2                                Carson General Plan

OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                  conservation element including waters shall be developed in coordination with any
                  countywide water agency and with all district and city agencies which have
                  developed, served, controlled or conserved water for any purpose for the county or
                  city for which the plan is prepared… The conservation element may also cover:
                          The reclamation of land and waters.
                          Prevention and control of streams and other waters.
                          Regulation of the use of land in…areas required for the accomplishment of
                           the conservation plan.
                          Prevention, control, and correction of the erosion of soils, beaches, and
                           shores.
                          Protection of watersheds.
                          The location, quantity and quality of the rock, sand and gravel resources.
                          Flood control.”
3.0 SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
3.1      OPEN SPACE
                  The City’s open space is comprised of Recreational Open Space which includes
                  parks and a public golf course and General Open Space which consists of utility
                  transmission corridors, drainage and flood control facilities (i.e., Dominguez
                  Channel, Compton Creek and Wilmington Channel), the Blimp Port. The various
                  forms of open space within the City and the associated current acreage is
                  summarized in Table OSC-1, Open Space in Carson, below.
                                                  Table OSC-1
                                            Open Space in Carson
                             Type of Open Space                                 Approximate Acreage
 Recreational Open Space
      Parks                                                                            153
      Victoria Public Golf Course                                                      162
 General Open Space
      Blimp Port                                                                        30
      Drainage Courses and Utility Transmission Corridors                              254
 TOTAL                                                                                  599
                  In addition to the above, substantial open space is incorporated into street medians
                  and parkways throughout the City. Also, public schools in the City include
                  approximately 197 acres, of which about 60 percent or 118 acres are open space.
                  Finally, California State University Dominguez Hills (CSUDH) has 125 acres of
                  existing and planned recreational open space (including the planned 85-acre
                  National Training Center).
Carson General Plan                                    OSC-3                                     Chapter 8

                                                                    OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
               There are also other areas in Carson which contain temporary open space. These
               areas are designated for a variety of uses other than Recreational and/or General
               Open Space. They include the Dominguez Public Golf Course, which is designated
               for General Commercial use on the Land Use Policy Map, and closed landfills
               which have not yet been fully remediated.
3.1.1   OPEN SPACE FOR THE PRESERVATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES
               The Government Code requires that open space for the preservation of natural
               resources be incorporated into the General Plan. Such resources include areas
               required for the preservation of plant and animal life, areas of ecological and other
               scientific study value, rivers, streams, bays and estuaries, coastal beaches, and lake
               shores. The only such area identified within Carson is the lake within the Carson
               Village Mobilehome Park. This lake, covering approximately 17 acres, provides
               habitat for a variety of plants and small animals.
3.1.2   OPEN SPACE FOR THE PRODUCTION OF RESOURCES
               In Carson, open space used for the production of resources includes agricultural
               lands and areas used for the production and management of oil and petroleum
               products.
               Excluding small agricultural areas along the utility transmission corridors, there are
               approximately 62 acres of property within the City which are under agricultural
               production. Under the Zoning Ordinance, agricultural uses are permitted within
               the Residential - Agricultural, General Commercial, and Open Space zones. While
               agricultural production is not a significant factor in the City’s economy, agriculture
               does offer a positive contribution to the City’s inventory of open space.
               As discussed later in this Element, portions of Carson are located within the
               Dominguez and Wilmington Oil Fields. As a result, there are large areas of the City
               devoted to the management and production of oil and petroleum products. These
               areas are designated Heavy Industrial on the Land Use Policy Map due to the
               nature of activities associated with these uses. These areas have been approved for
               approximately 4.7 million square feet of commercial and industrial development.
               That development was underway as of adoption of this Element. Continued
               buildout will proceed based on market factors.
3.1.3   OPEN SPACE FOR OUTDOOR RECREATION
               As discussed in the Parks, Recreation and Human Services Element, the
               recreational land in the City totals 315 acres (including Victoria Park and Victoria
               Golf Course, both County facilities). The City’s target for the ratio of park acres to
               population is four acres per 1,000 population. The current ratio of park acres to
               population is 3.5 acres per 1,000 (counting the Victoria Golf Course). However, this
               ratio does not take into account the joint use of public school athletic fields or the
               Dominguez Golf Course (designated General Commercial). If these facilities are
               included, the City meets its target parkland-to-population ratio.
Chapter 8                                         OSC-4                              Carson General Plan

OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                 Because the City is virtually built-out and vacant land (other than closed landfills
                 which require remediation) is scarce, opportunities for new park development are
                 limited. In addition to the joint use of public school facilities and commercial
                 recreational uses, existing open space in the City which may be suitable for
                 recreation purposes include: utility transmission corridors, areas along the banks of
                 drainage channels, and closed landfills (after appropriate remediation).
                 Additional information regarding outdoor recreation can be found in: Sections 3.2,
                 Circulation, and 3.12, Parks and Recreation, in the Existing Conditions Report; and
                 Chapter 9, Parks, Recreation and Human Services Element in this General Plan.
3.1.4   OPEN SPACE FOR PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
                 “Open space for public health and safety,” is defined as those “areas which require
                 special management or regulation because of hazardous or special conditions.”
                 There are four types of special management areas in Carson:
                        Utility Corridors. In order to protect the health and safety of the public,
                         these underground utility and overhead electric transmission corridors are
                         severely constrained for human habitation or employment by law.
                         Nevertheless, within these constraints, many of the utility corridors within
                         the City are suitable for use as greenbelts, mini parks, recreation trails, and
                         open space commercial uses such as wholesale nurseries and growing
                         grounds.
                        Landfills. The 15 closed landfills in Carson are severely restricted by State
                         and Federal regulations. Of those closed landfills, eight have been
                         remediated to varying degrees (e.g., properly capped, appropriate collection
                         systems installed, etc.). The remaining landfills are either vacant and
                         unremediated or are used as golf courses.
                        Flood Control Channels. The primary purpose of flood control channels is
                         the conveyance of water. However, the Dominguez Channel levees can also
                         be used as recreational trails, with suitable improvements and off-levee
                         connections.
                        Earthquake Fault Zones. The Avalon-Compton Fault Zone occupies a
                         small area in the northeastern area of the City. A site-specific geotechnical
                         report is required for construction within 1/8 mile on either side of the Fault
                         Zone.
                 Additional information regarding open space for public health and safety can be found
                 in: Sections 3.4, Geologic Hazards, and 3.7, Hazardous Materials, of the Existing
                 Conditions Report; and Chapters 2, Land Use Element, and 6, Safety Element, of this
                 General Plan.
Carson General Plan                               OSC-5                                         Chapter 8

                                                                  OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
3.2     CONSERVATION
3.2.1   WATER RESOURCES
              Southern California would not exist as an urbanized region without the importation,
              careful management, storage, and reuse of its water supply. Water conservation, the
              use of reclaimed water, and the control and treatment of runoff pollution is critically
              important to Carson and the entire region.
              AGENCIES RESPONSIBLE FOR THE SUPPLY OF WATER
              A number of public and quasi-public agencies act cooperatively with one another to
              supply, distribute, conserve and maintain water resources for the City of Carson and
              the Southern California region.
              Agencies responsible for delivering wholesale water to the area include the
              Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD) and the West Basin
              Municipal Water District (WBMWD). MWD imports water to the region and
              operates several filtration plants to treat water supplies. WBMWD provides
              supplemental imported water to local retail water agencies. The MWD and
              WBMWD act cooperatively to conserve both groundwater and surface water
              resources.
              “Retail” water service in the City is provided by the California Water Company and
              the Southern California Water Company, Southwest District (SCWD).
              Approximately 80 percent of the water supply distributed by California Water
              Company is comprised of imported water, 18 percent is groundwater, and 2 percent
              desalinated water. Approximately 80 percent of the water supply distributed by the
              SCWD is comprised of imported water and 20 percent is groundwater.
              The Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board regulates water quality in
              the region.
              GROUNDWATER RESOURCES
              Groundwater Basins
              There are two groundwater basins which underlie Carson: the Central Water Basin
              and the West Coast Basin.
              Groundwater in the Central Basin is dependent upon local storm runoff, imported
              and recycled water for groundwater recharge, and the injection of imported water
              from the inland side of the Alamitos Seawater Intrusion Barrier. The Central Basin
              is also replenished through subsurface flows from the San Gabriel Valley into the
              Basin and precipitation that falls directly on the Montebello Forebay and percolates
              into the Basin.
Chapter 8                                      OSC-6                               Carson General Plan

OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                 Groundwater for the West Coast basin originates from subsurface flow from the
                 Central basin and injection along the sea water barrier system. Virtually all of the
                 major drainage courses flowing through the Central and West Coast Basins have
                 been developed into a comprehensive system of dams, flood control channels, and
                 percolation ponds for artificially recharging the basins.
                 Los Angeles County studies have indicated that 90 percent of the rain and runoff in
                 the County either percolates naturally into the ground or is captured in the flood
                 control reservoirs for later release to recharge the groundwater basins.
                 Aquifers
                 Several aquifers exist within the Central and West Coast Basins. In the vicinity of
                 Carson, these include the Gage/Gardena, Lynwood, Silverado, and Sunnyside
                 aquifers. Their depths range from 150 to 600 feet, and they are primarily
                 replenished by area rainfall.
                 GROUNDWATER QUALITY
                 The Federal Safe Water Drinking Water Act of 1974 and its 1986 amendments are
                 intended to ensure the quality of water supplies. The quality and safety of drinking
                 water in the United States is regulated by the Federal government through the
                 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). In California, those standards are
                 enforced by the California Department of Health Services (DOHS).
                 The State and Regional Water Quality Control Boards currently administer the
                 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit regulations.
                 Due to recent legislation, the scope of NPDES regulations has been greatly
                 expanded to include stormwater runoff. Stormwater discharges consist primarily of
                 non-point source surface runoff from streets, lawns, parks, and upland undeveloped
                 areas.
                 The City is a permittee under the Los Angeles County Municipal NPDES permit.
                 One of its obligations under the Municipal NPDES permit is to “include watershed
                 and storm water quality and quantity management considerations and policies when
                 updating land use, housing, conservation, and open space elements” of its General
                 Plan.
                 To that end, any new development or redevelopment situated in an environmentally
                 sensitive area or in a sensitive ecological area, or subject to development planning
                 program requirements specified in the Municipal NPDES permit, shall be evaluated
                 for post-construction runoff pollution mitigation measures including, if necessary,
                 infiltration or mechanical treatment controls (e.g., detention basins, wet ponds,
                 vortex separation systems, catch basin inserts, oil/water separators, vegetative filters,
                 pervious asphalt or pavement, and cisterns). Further, peak flow from any new
                 development or redevelopment that enters a natural drainage system (e.g., an
                 unlined stream, river, or channel) shall not be greater than pre-development levels.
                 The purpose of controlling peak flow is to prevent stream erosion and to protect
                 stream habitat.
Carson General Plan                                OSC-7                                        Chapter 8

                                                                  OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
               Water Quality within the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board Region
               The general quality of groundwater within the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality
               Control Board (RWQCB) Region has degraded substantially over the years as a
               result of fertilizers and pesticides; nitrogen and pathogenic bacteria from
               overloaded or improperly sited septic tanks; storage tanks (both aboveground and
               underground) which have leaked or are leaking hazardous substances into the
               subsurface; and a variety of other sources and/or conditions.
               West Coast and Central Basins Water Quality
               Seawater intrusion which has historically occurred in the West Coast and Central
               Basins is now under control in most areas through an artificial recharge system
               consisting of spreading basins and injection wells that form fresh water barriers
               along the coast. Groundwater in the lower aquifers of these basins is generally of
               good quality, but large plumes of saline water have been trapped behind the barrier
               of injection wells within the West Coast Basin, degrading significant volumes of
               groundwater with high concentrations of chloride. Furthermore, the quality of
               groundwater in parts of the upper aquifers of both basins is degraded by both
               organic and inorganic pollutants from a variety of sources, such as leaking tanks,
               leaking sewer lines, and illegal discharges. As the aquifers and confining layers in
               these alluvial basins are typically interconnected, the quality of groundwater in the
               deeper production aquifers is threatened by the migration of pollutants from the
               upper aquifers.
               Additional information regarding water conservation and water quality can be found in:
               Sections 3.5, Hydrology/Drainage, and 3.11, Infrastructure/Utilities, of the Existing
               Conditions Report; and Chapter 4, Transportation and Infrastructure Element, of this
               General Plan.
3.2.2   SOLID WASTE
               In 1989, the California Legislature enacted the California Integrated Waste
               Management Act, in an effort to address solid waste problems and capacities in a
               comprehensive manner. The law required each city and county to divert 50 percent
               of its waste from landfills by the year 2000. The law further required every city and
               county to prepare a Source Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE). Carson’s
               SRRE was approved in 1996.
               Cities are required to meet the requirements of this law while new regulations are
               being developed. The new regulations are expected to be enacted in 2002.
               A private company, provides waste collection services for the City of Carson. Waste
               Management collects approximately 70,000 tons from residential customers and
               153,500 tons from commercial and industrial customers per year. The disposal
               service uses traditional methods of solid waste collection, with standard trash trucks
               and crews. The service also includes the pickup of sorted recyclable materials, which
               are taken directly to a company that separates and sells them.
Chapter 8                                        OSC-8                              Carson General Plan

OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                 Solid waste collected by Waste Management is taken to the company’s waste
                 transfer station in Carson, where it is sorted. After the materials are sorted, special
                 wastes such as tires, green waste, steel, and wood are sent to special facilities for
                 disposal and recycling. The remaining waste materials are loaded onto trailers and
                 taken to a landfill.
                 Additional information regarding solid waste can be found in: Section 3.11,
                 Infrastructure/Utilities, of the Existing Conditions Report; and Chapter 4,
                 Transportation and Infrastructure Element, of this General Plan.
3.2.3   ENERGY
                 ENERGY RESOURCES
                 Energy resources available to Carson play an important role in determining the type
                 and amount of future development in the community. In recent years, dramatic
                 growth in demand and the restructuring of the energy industry have resulted in
                 shortfalls in the provision of electricity to consumers. New development and higher
                 standards of living will result in increased energy needs in the future. Conservation
                 of energy resources, such as oil, electricity and natural gas, is critical in light of their
                 limited supply and environmental concerns related to their production and
                 distribution.
                 Most traditional energy resources are imported. Natural gas is imported by the
                 Southern California Gas Company, while electricity is provided by the Southern
                 California Edison Company (SCE). Regional and local distribution facilities for
                 both electricity and natural gas are located within Carson.
                 Because of past and possible future shortages, alternative energy sources must be
                 developed to supplement conventional sources. Given the area’s sunny climate, the
                 most important alternative and renewable energy resource in Carson is solar. This
                 source has considerable potential and can be developed to substitute for oil, gas, and
                 other energy supplies. Because of solar energy’s ability to substitute for fossil fuels,
                 it can also be an important tool in the battle against air pollution.
                 PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
                 Portions of the City of Carson are located within the Dominguez and Wilmington
                 Oil Fields. There are also several crude oil and petroleum product pipelines that
                 transect the City.
                 Additional information relating to the provision of electricity and natural gas can be
                 found in: Section 3.11, Infrastructure/Utilities, of the Existing Conditions Report; and
                 Chapter 4, Transportation and Infrastructure Element, of this General Plan. More
                 detailed information relating to crude oil, petroleum products and pipelines can be
                 found in Section 3.7, Hazardous Materials, of the Existing Conditions Report, and
                 Chapter 6, Safety Element, of this General Plan.
Carson General Plan                                OSC-9                                           Chapter 8

                                                                  OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
4.0     PLANNING ISSUES, GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION
             The acronyms listed below are used for the implementation measures:
                  RA/D:     Responsible Agency/Division
                  FS:       Funding Source
                  TF:       Time Frame
             ISSUE:       ENHANCEMENT OF CITY OPEN SPACE
             Enhanced landscaping and improved maintenance of Carson’s public areas is important
             to the community. Consideration should be given to the promotion of community gardens
             and/or passive recreational areas, median treatments in strategic locations, and the
             aesthetic enhancement of existing open space areas.
             Goal:        OSC-1:      Enhancement of Carson’s open space resources.
             Policies: OSC-1.1        Preserve and enhance the existing open space resources in
                                      Carson.
                          OSC-1.2     Maintain existing landscaping along the City’s major streets
                                      and expand the landscaping program along other arterial
                                      streets throughout the community.
                          OSC-1.3     Require that adequate, usable and permanent private open
                                      space is provided in residential developments.
                          OSC-1.4     Require access between open space and recreation areas and
                                      adjacent developments, where appropriate.
                          OSC-1.5     Utilize electric transmission and other utility corridors for
                                      greenbelt and recreational uses where appropriate.
                          See also the Goals and Policies in Chapter 2, Land Use Element, of this
                          General Plan.
             Implementation Measures:
                          OSC-IM-1.1      Work with other South Bay cities and the County to
                                          create and implement a plan to: (1) enhance Dominguez
                                          Channel with landscaping and walking and bicycle trails,
                                          and (2) provide landscaping along Compton Creek.
                                          (Implements OSC-1.1)
                                          RA/D:     Parks and Recreation, Public Works, Planning
                                                    and Environmental Services, Los Angeles
                                                    County Department of Public Works
Chapter 8                                      OSC-10                              Carson General Plan

OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                      FS:       General Fund, and Regional, State and Federal
                                                Funds/Grants
                                      TF:       Ongoing
                           OSC-IM-1.2 Preserve areas of open space which, if developed, could
                                      pose a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
                                      community. To this end, work with the County, the Los
                                      Angeles Department of Water and Power, and Southern
                                      California Edison to conserve and maintain existing flood
                                      control facilities and electric transmission corridors
                                      within the City. (Implements OSC-1.1)
                                      RA/D:     Public Works, Planning
                                      FS:       General Fund
                                      TF:       Ongoing
                           OSC-IM-1.3 Create and implement a plan to secure access to and
                                      develop utility corridors for greenbelt, recreational, and
                                      agricultural uses. (Implements OSC-1.1 and OSC-1.5)
                                      RA/D:     Parks and Recreation, Planning
                                      FS:       General Fund, State and Federal Funds/Grants
                                      TF:       Ongoing
                           OSC-IM-1.4 Require landscaping of graded areas along public rights-
                                      of-way concurrent with project development to minimize
                                      erosion and enhance the visual aspects of the community.
                                      (Implements OSC-1.1 and OSC-1.2)
                                      RA/D:     Planning
                                      FS:       Developers
                                      TF:       During review      of   proposed   development
                                                projects
                           OSC-IM-1.5 Examine the potential of extending special median
                                      treatments along important arterials, including, but not
                                      limited to: Central Avenue (between Turmont Street and
                                      University Drive), Wilmington Avenue (between
                                      University Drive and Del Amo Boulevard), and along
                                      Avalon Boulevard (where right-of-way allows and
                                      medians do not presently exist). (Implements OSC-1.2)
                                      RA/D:     Public Works, Planning
                                      FS:       General Fund, Development Fees
                                      TF:       Ongoing
                           OSC-IM-1.6 Develop a program to provide parkway landscaping
                                      along the edges of important arterials in order to buffer
                                      land uses and improve the streetscape. Arterials to be
Carson General Plan                        OSC-11                                       Chapter 8
                                               OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                        considered include but are not limited to: University
                        Drive and Avalon Boulevard. (Implements OSC-1.2)
                        RA/D:     Public Works, Planning
                        FS:       General Fund, Development Fees
                        TF:       Before adoption of the next update of the City’s
                                  Capital Improvement Program after adoption
                                  of this General Plan Element
            OSC-IM-1.7  Require street trees and appropriate landscaping in both
                        residential and non-residential areas. To this end, review
                        and amend, as necessary, the landscape standards
                        contained in the City’s Zoning Ordinance. (Implements
                        OSC-1.2)
                        RA/D:     Planning
                        FS:       General Fund, Property Owners
                        TF:       Ongoing
            OSC-IM-1.8  Periodically review Zoning Ordinance provisions to
                        ensure that open space requirements for private
                        development adequate to meet the goals of the City.
                        (Implements OSC-1.3)
                        RA/D:     Parks and Recreation, Planning
                        FS:       General Fund, Property Owners
                        TF:       Ongoing
            OSC-IM-1.9  Through the development review process, ensure that
                        new developments have access to open space and/or
                        recreation areas, where feasible. (Implements OSC-1.4)
                        RA/D:     Parks and Recreation, Planning
                        FS:       General Fund, Property Owners
                        TF:       Ongoing
            OSC-IM-1.10 Update the City’s Bicycle Master Plan to enhance
                        opportunities for access to open space and/or recreation
                        areas. (Implements OSC-1.4)
                        RA/D:     Parks and Recreation, Public Works, Planning
                        FS:       General Fund, State and Federal Funds/Grants
                        TF:       Within three years after adoption of the
                                  General Plan
                                                                             
Chapter 8                    OSC-12                             Carson General Plan

OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                 ISSUE:       WATER QUALITY AND CONSERVATION
                 Measures to conserve water and protect water quality should be employed in Carson, while
                 the use of reclaimed water for landscaping and large industrial uses should be promoted.
                 Goal:        OSC-2:     Protection and conservation of Carson’s water resources.
                 Policies: OSC-2.1       Maintain and improve water quality.
                              OSC-2.2    Continue to monitor land uses discharging into water sources
                                         and water recharge areas, to prevent potential contamination
                                         from hazardous or toxic substances.
                              OSC-2.2    Minimize soil erosion and siltation from construction
                                         activities through monitoring and regulation.
                              OSC-2.3    Conserve the water supply available to the City and promote
                                         water conservation in the management of public properties.
                              OSC-2.4    Educate citizens about water conservation, encourage its
                                         practice, and monitor its effectiveness.
                              OSC-2.5    Facilitate the completion of the infrastructure of the
                                         reclaimed water facility in the City of Carson.
                              OSC-2.6    Encourage the use of reclaimed water in applications for
                                         which potable water is not necessary.
                 Implementation Measures:
                              OSC-IM-2.1      Facilitate monitoring of all underground storage tanks,
                                              and support EPA’s requirements to remove all single
                                              walled underground storage tanks. (Implements OSC-2.1)
                                              RA/D:     Public Works, Planning
                                              FS:       General Fund, State and Federal Funds/Grants
                                              TF:       Ongoing
                              OSC-IM-2.2      Implement the requirements of the National Pollutant
                                              Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) to improve the
                                              quality of stormwater in the City. (Implements OSC-2.1)
                                              RA/D:     Public Works, Planning
                                              FS:       General Fund, State and Federal Funds/Grants
                                              TF:       Ongoing
                              OSC-IM-2.3      Monitor land uses discharging into water sources and
                                              water recharge areas to prevent potential contamination
Carson General Plan                                OSC-13                                         Chapter 8

                                             OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                     from hazardous or toxic substances. (Implements OSC-
                     2.1)
                     RA/D:     Public Works, Planning
                     FS:       General Fund, State and Federal Funds/Grants
                     TF:       Ongoing
          OSC-IM-2.4 Require revegetation of graded areas concurrent with
                     project development to minimize erosion. (Implements
                     OSC-2.2)
                     RA/D:     Planning
                     FS:       General Fund, Property Owners
                     TF:       Ongoing
          OSC-IM-2.5 Require water conservation design and operation in new
                     development, including enforcement of the City
                     ordinance which requires new development to submit a
                     water conservation plan which meets State requirements,
                     incorporating measures such as the use of low flow
                     plumbing fixtures, drought tolerant plantings, reclaimed
                     water, and water efficient irrigation systems. (Implements
                     OSC-2.3)
                     RA/D:     Public Works, Planning
                     FS:       General Fund, Developers
                     TF:       During review of proposed            development
                               projects
          OSC-IM-2.6 Encourage drought tolerant landscaping and low flow or
                     ‘drip’ irrigation systems as replacements for water
                     consumptive landscaping and irrigation systems in
                     existing development. (Implements OSC-2.3 and OSC-
                     2.4)
                     RA/D:     Public Information, Information          Services,
                               Planning
                     FS:       General Fund, Property Owners
                     TF:       Ongoing
          OSC-IM-2.7 Require automatic or computerized irrigation control
                     systems for purposes of water conservation in public land.
                     Identify opportunities for future conversion to the
                     computerized system(s). (Implements OSC-2.3)
                     RA/D:     Public Works
                     FS:       General Fund
                     TF:       Ongoing
Chapter 8                 OSC-14                               Carson General Plan

OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                           OSC-IM-2.8  Use local media (public service radio and cable television
                                       announcements), the City’s Newsletter, school programs,
                                       advertising materials such as buttons and bumper
                                       stickers, distribution of a home water user’s handbook,
                                       and water bill enclosures to inform citizens of the
                                       importance of water conservation and to teach its
                                       practice. (Implements OSC-2.4)
                                       RA/D:      Public Information, Information Services,
                                                  Public Works, Planning, Local/Regional Water
                                                  Agencies
                                       FS:        General Fund, Water Agency Funds
                                       TF:        Ongoing
                           OSC-IM-2.9  Coordinate with water agencies to evaluate the potential
                                       to establish a rebate program for the replacement of
                                       aging, leaking, and/or inefficient plumbing with more
                                       efficient water-saving plumbing. (Implements OSC-2.3
                                       and OSC-2.4)
                                       RA/D:      Public Works, Planning, Local/Regional Water
                                                  Agencies
                                       FS:        General Fund, Water Agency Funds
                                       TF:        Ongoing
                           OSC-IM-2.10 Work with the West Basin Municipal Water District to
                                       ensure the completion of the reclaimed water facility
                                       infrastructure in the City of Carson. (Implements OSC-
                                       2.5)
                                       RA/D:      Public Works, West Basin Municipal Water
                                                  District
                                       FS:        General Fund, Water Agency Funds
                                       TF:        Until the reclaimed water facility is completed
                           OSC-IM-2.11 Explore the potential for the development of a reclaimed
                                       water system within the City in anticipation of the
                                       reclaimed water facility infrastructure being completed.
                                       (Implements OSC-2.5)
                                       RA/D:      Public Works
                                       FS:        General Fund, Development Fees, State and
                                                  Federal Funds/Grants
                                       TF:        Determine feasibility before the reclaimed
                                                  water facility is completed
                           OSC-IM-2.12 Encourage the use of reclaimed water in industry,
                                       construction, landscaping, golf courses, and other uses
Carson General Plan                         OSC-15                                         Chapter 8

                                                               OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                       where potable water is not necessary. (Implements OSC-
                                       2.5 and OSC-2.6)
                                       RA/D:     Public Works, Planning
                                       FS:       Property Owners, Business Owners, Water
                                                 Agencies
                                       TF:       Starting before the reclaimed water facility is
                                                 completed, and ongoing thereafter
                       OSC-IM-2.13 Require the installation of reclaimed water lines in new
                                       projects and redevelopment projects as appropriate
                                       (based on location and use) in anticipation of the
                                       completion of the reclaimed water facility infrastructure.
                                       (Implements OSC-2.6)
                                       RA/D:     Public Works, Planning
                                       FS:       Property Owners, Water Agencies
                                       TF:       Ongoing
                                                                                                
          ISSUE:       ENERGY CONSERVATION
          Recent history has shown that constraints on energy supplies due to natural, political or
          economic causes can have drastic impacts on the conduct of business, industry and the
          daily lives of the residents in a city. Therefore, energy conservation is of the utmost
          importance to the economic health of Carson and the quality of life of its residents.
          Goal:        OSC-3:      Conservation of scarce energy resources.
          Policies: OSC-3.1        Promote incentives for the use of site planning techniques,
                                   building orientation, building materials, and other measures
                                   which reduce energy consumption.
                       OSC-3.2     Support the development of alternative sources of energy
                                   such as roof-mounted solar panels, fuel cells or new
                                   technology.
                       OSC-3.3     Work with energy providers to develop and implement
                                   programs to reduce electrical demand in residential,
                                   commercial and industrial developments.
                       OSC-3.4     Support energy conservation via alternative forms of
                                   transportation.
          Implementation Measures:
                       OSC-IM-3.1      Where feasible, require all new buildings and
                                       subdivisions to be designed and oriented in such a way as
Chapter 8                                   OSC-16                                 Carson General Plan

OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                      to take maximum advantage of the sun and winds for
                                      natural heating and cooling. (Implements OSC-3.1)
                                      RA/D:       Planning
                                      FS:         Developers
                                      TF:         During review     of   proposed   development
                                                  projects
                           OSC-IM-3.2 In addition to enforcing the energy efficiency
                                      requirements of state law and the Uniform Building
                                      Code, encourage the incorporation of additional energy
                                      conservation techniques, such as innovation building
                                      construction, high-efficiency HVAC systems, etc. in new
                                      construction (Implements OSC-3.1)
                                      RA/D:       Planning
                                      FS:         Developers, Federal and State Grants/Funds
                                      TF:         During review of proposed development
                                                  projects
                           OSC-IM-3.3 Encourage and promote the use of alternative energy
                                      sources, such as solar installations and co-generation
                                      facilities. (Implements OSC-3.1)
                                      RA/D:       Planning
                                      FS:         Developers, Federal and State Grants/Funds
                                      TF:         During review of proposed development
                                                  projects
                           OSC-IM-3.4 Publicize and support energy conservation incentive
                                      programs offered by utility companies, such as rebates to
                                      consumers who replace appliances with more energy-
                                      efficient models. (Implements OSC-3.1 and OSC 3.3)
                                      RA/D:       Public Information, Information       Services,
                                                  Utility Providers
                                      FS:         General Fund, Utility Providers
                                      TF:         Ongoing
                           OSC-IM-3.5 Encourage the use of alternative energy sources, such as
                                      solar panels, in the design of new swimming pools and
                                      the retrofitting of existing pools, as well as pool covers.
                                      (Implements OSC-3.2)
                                      RA/D:       Public Information, Information Services,
                                                  Planning
                                      FS:         General Fund, Property Owners, Developers
                                      TF:         Ongoing
Carson General Plan                         OSC-17                                      Chapter 8
                                                                   OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                        OSC-IM-3.6        Work with Southern California Edison and the Southern
                                          California Gas Company to educate the public in energy
                                          conservation. To this end, use local media (public service
                                          radio and cable television announcements), the City’s
                                          Newsletter, school programs, advertising materials, such
                                          as buttons and bumper stickers, and the distribution of an
                                          energy conservation handbook to promote energy
                                          conservation techniques and teach its practice.
                                          (Implements OSC-3.3)
                                          RA/D:     Public Information, Information          Services,
                                                    Utility Providers
                                          FS:       General Fund, Utility Providers
                                          TF:       Ongoing
                        OSC-IM-3.7        Update the Bicycle Master Plan and encourage use of
                                          bicycle facilities for commuting, school, shopping and
                                          business, as well as for recreational purposes.
                                          (Implements OSC-3.4)
                                          RA/D:     Parks and Recreation, Public Works, Planning
                                          FS:       General Fund, Development Fees
                                          TF:       Within one year after General Plan adoption
                                                                                                 
          ISSUE:        SOLID WASTE REDUCTION
          As landfills rapidly reach their capacities and new landfills become increasingly more
          difficult to establish, the need for waste reduction becomes critical.
          Goal:         OSC-4:        Minimize solid waste generated within Carson.
          Policies: OSC-4.1           Reduce the generation of solid waste from sources in the
                                      City in accordance with the Source Reduction and Recycling
                                      Element for Carson (separate from this General Plan) and
                                      state regulations.
                        OSC-4.2       Develop a public education program to address waste
                                      management and proper household waste sorting and
                                      handling.
                        OSC-4.3       Facilitate physical collection of recyclable waste.
          Implementation Measures:
                        OSC-IM-4.1        Achieve solid waste source reduction targets as identified
                                          in the City’s Source Reduction and Recycling Element
                                          (SRRE) and state regulations. For example, promote
                                          such measures as landscape recycling into compost for
Chapter 8                                      OSC-18                               Carson General Plan

OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                      reuse as fertilizer, and home pick-up of recyclable
                                      materials, including green waste. (Implements OSC-4.1)
                                      RA/D:      Public Works, Waste Haulers
                                      FS:        General Fund, Waste Haulers
                                      TF:        Ongoing
                           OSC-IM-4.2 Work with the City’s waste haulers to educate the public
                                      in source reduction and recycling. To this end, use local
                                      media (public service radio and cable television
                                      announcements), the City’s Newsletter, school programs,
                                      advertising materials such as buttons and bumper
                                      stickers, distribution of a source reduction and recycling
                                      handbook, and utility bill enclosures promoting source
                                      reduction and recycling techniques in order to inform
                                      citizens of the importance of source reduction and
                                      recycling and to teach their practices. (Implements OSC-
                                      4.2)
                                      RA/D:      Public Information, Information Services
                                      FS:        General Fund, Waste Haulers
                                      TF:        Ongoing
                           OSC-IM-4.3 Require that new developments include recycling
                                      collection facilities as part of their trash collection areas.
                                      (Implements OSC-4.3)
                                      RA/D:      Planning and Environmental Services, Public
                                                 Works
                                      FS:        Developers
                                      TF:        During review of proposed development
                                                 projects
                                                                                              
Carson General Plan                        OSC-19                                          Chapter 8

                                   CHAPTER 9
PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                                         CHAPTER 9
                            PARKS, RECREATION AND
                          HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
GUIDING PRINCIPLE
                 The City of Carson is committed to expanding the recreational, cultural, and
                 human services facilities and activities within the City by providing commercial
                 recreational uses, affordable recreation opportunities, various services, and a
                 variety of public and private recreational facilities. The City is also committed to
                 promoting the assets associated with the diversity of the community by involving its
                 citizens in a broad spectrum of cultural and recreational activities and programs.
1.0     INTRODUCTION
                 The Parks, Recreation and Human Services Element is not a mandatory general
                 plan element required by State planning law. This Element is included in the
                 General Plan because the City has determined that there are six important issues
                 relating to community recreation planning which must be addressed, specifically:
                        A need for additional recreational facilities in the City;
                        A need for enhanced safety and maintenance of the City’s parks;
                        A need to promote a variety of recreational and educational facilities for the
                         development of the community’s youth;
                        A need to provide affordable recreational and cultural programs;
Carson General Plan                               P-1                                         Chapter 9

                                                         PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                     A need for leisure services for seniors in the community, as the number of
                      persons over the age of 50 continues to increase;
                     A need for locally based cultural arts programs (i.e., theater, music, art,
                      dance, etc.) to enrich community life; and
                     A need to address the recreation and social needs of the community’s
                      emotionally and physically challenged residents.
2.0     STATE LAW REQUIREMENTS
              Although this is not a mandatory element required by State planning law,
              Government Code Section 65560(b)(3) stipulates that the General Plan address
              “…Open space for outdoor recreation, including but not limited to, areas of
              outstanding scenic, historic and cultural value; areas particularly suited for park and
              recreation purposes…and areas which serve as links between major recreation and
              open space reservations, including utility easements…trails, and scenic highway
              corridors…”
              In addition, Government Code Section 65303 states that local governments may
              adopt “…any other elements or address any other subjects which…relate to the
              physical development of the county or city.” Such “other” elements are called
              “optional” elements. Upon adoption, an optional element becomes an integral part
              of the general plan. It has the same force and effect as the mandatory elements and
              must be consistent with the other elements of the plan. In turn, zoning, subdivisions,
              public works, and specific plans must be consistent with all optional elements.
3.0 SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
3.1     EXISTING PARKS
              The City of Carson has 16 public parks, one County park (Victoria), and two public
              golf courses (Victoria Golf Course and Dominguez Golf Course). The Carson
              Community Center also provides recreation programs and meeting rooms for all
              residents. The total amount of recreational open space, listed above, in Carson is
              354 acres. The total amount of public parkland, including County facilities but not
              Dominguez Golf Course, is 315 acres. This acreage also does not include public
              school athletic fields or commercial recreational facilities.
              The City’s new target, for the ratio of public park acres to population, is four acres
              per 1,000 population. According to the 2000 U.S. Census, the City’s population is
              89,730 persons. Therefore, the current ratio of park acres to population is
              approximately 3.5 acres per 1,000 residents, but only 1.72 acres per 1,000 residents if
              only City facilities are included.
Chapter 9                                        P-2                                Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                 Table P-1, City Parks and Recreational Facilities, and Exhibit P-1, Existing Parks and
                 Recreation Facilities, identify the parks within the City; Table P-1 also lists the major
                 recreational facilities provided at each park.
                 CLASSIFICATION OF PARK TYPES
                 There are three types of parks in the City of Carson: Regional Parks, Neighborhood
                 Parks, and Mini Parks. In addition, there is a community center. These are
                 described below.
                        Regional Parks. A regional park is designed to serve the active and passive
                         recreational needs of the community and surrounding area. These parks are
                         located on or near arterial roadways so as to be easily accessible via
                         automobile, foot, or bicycle. The one regional park in the City, Victoria
                         Park, is a County facility consisting of 36 acres. The park includes ball fields,
                         basketball courts, a swimming pool, a gymnasium, tennis courts, play area, a
                         recreation building, and a picnic area.
                        Neighborhood Parks. Neighborhood parks are intended to serve one
                         neighborhood or group of neighborhoods, and are located within walking or
                         biking distance. These parks provide a wide range of both passive and active
                         recreational opportunities. There are 12 neighborhood parks in the City,
                         ranging in size from 3.4 to 12 acres. Facilities vary at each park, but typically
                         include ball fields, basketball courts, children’s play areas, and picnic areas.
                        Mini Parks. Mini parks are small parks serving a limited area, often where
                         land is not available for a neighborhood facility. These parks generally
                         include children’s play areas and picnic areas. The two existing mini parks in
                         Carson include Friendship Mini Park and Walnut Street Mini Park. In
                         addition, improvements to the Perry Street at Perry and 215th Streets, were
                         in the planning stage at adoption of this Element and Bonita Street Mini
                         Park is still on the drawing table.
                        Community Center. The Carson Community Center is located in the Civic
                         Center complex on twelve acres. It contains a 73,000 square-foot building
                         that is undergoing a 5,400 square-foot expansion. The Center includes
                         facilities for seniors and child care as well as meeting/craft rooms.
3.2     OTHER RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
                 In addition to the parks identified in Table P-1, there are other open space uses in
                 Carson that are suitable for recreational purposes. These include the Dominguez
                 Golf Course and the playfields at the City’s public schools:
                        Dominguez Golf Course is a 39.2-acre, privately owned and operated par 3
                         golf course, which is open to the public. Since this property is privately
                         owned and is designated as General Commercial on the General Plan Land
                         Use Map, it may eventually be replaced by commercial development or
                         recreational open space.
Carson General Plan                                  P-3                                          Chapter 9

                                                                         PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                                                        Table P-1
                                     City Parks and Recreational Facilities
             Name/Location                                                   Improvements
 Anderson Park                          8.5 acres: basketball courts, children’s play area, Frisbee golf course, meeting/craft
 19101 S. Wilmington Avenue             rooms, picnic areas, tennis courts.
 Bonita Street Mini-Park                1.73 acres; improvements included in Capital Improvement Plan.
 Calas Park                             8.7 acres: ball field, basketball courts, children’s play area, meeting/craft rooms,
 1000 W. 220th Street                   picnic areas, snack bar, tennis courts, wading pools.
 Carriage Crest Park                    3.4 acres: ball fields, basketball court, children’s play area, meeting/craft room,
 23800 S. Figueroa Street               picnic areas, snack bar 0.25-acre expansion was completed in May 2002.
 Carson Community Center                12.0 acres: 73,000 sq. ft.: 26 meeting/craft rooms. 5400 sq.ft. expansion planned
 3 Civic Plaza Drive                    that will include a new senior hall and two new early childhood classrooms.
 Carson Park and Pool                   10.9 acres: ball fields, basketball courts, children’s play area, football field, horse-
 21411 S. Orrick Avenue                 shoes, meeting/craft rooms, picnic areas, snack bar, soccer field, volleyball courts,
 21436 S. Main Street                   swimming pool.
 Del Amo Park                           9.5 acres: ball fields, basketball courts, children’s play area, football field,
 703 E. Del Amo Boulevard               meeting/craft rooms, picnic areas, snack bar.
 Dolphin Park and Pool                  11.8 acres: ball fields, basketball courts, children’s play area, meeting/craft rooms,
 21205 Water Street                     picnic areas, snack bar, tennis courts, volleyball courts, wading pools.
                                        9 acres: ball fields, basketball courts, children’s play area, meeting/craft rooms,
 Dominguez Park and Pool
                                        picnic areas, snack bar, tennis courts, swimming pool. Water feature area is being
 21330 Santa Fe Avenue
                                        planned.
 Friendship Mini Park
                                        0.3 acres: children’s play area, picnic areas.
 21930 S. Water Street
 Hemingway Park                         13 acres: ball fields, basketball courts, children’s play area, meeting/craft rooms,
 700 E. Gardena Boulevard               picnic areas, snack bar, tennis courts.
 Mills Park                             5 acres: ball fields, basketball courts, children’s play area, football field,
 700 E. Gardena Boulevard               meeting/craft rooms, picnic areas, snack bar, soccer field, tennis courts.
 Perry Street Mini-Park                 1.16 acres; agreement with owner to transfer property to City.
                                        11.2 acres: ball fields, basketball courts, boxing equipment, children’s play area,
 Scott Park and Pool
                                        gymnasium, horse-shoes, meeting/craft rooms, picnic areas, snack bar, tennis
 23410 Catskill Avenue
                                        courts, volleyball courts, wading pools, swimming pool, boxing center.
                                        11.7 acres: ball fields, basketball courts, children’s play area, horse-shoes,
 Stevenson Park
                                        meeting/craft rooms, picnic areas, snack bar, tennis courts, volleyball courts,
 17400 Lysander Drive
                                        wading pools. Gymnasium is planned.
 Walnut Street Mini Park
                                        1.5 acres: basketball courts, children’s play area, picnic areas.
 440 E. Walnut Street
                                        12.6 acres; ball fields, basketball courts, children’s play area, horse-shoes,
 Veterans Sports Complex and Skate
                                        meeting/craft rooms, snack bar, tennis courts, wading pools. 25,000 sq. ft. building
 Park
                                        with basketball courts, gymnasium, volleyball courts, fitness center, racquetball
 22400 Moneta Avenue
                                        courts. Skate Park is planned.
 Non-City Recreational Facilities Located in Carson:
 Victoria Park (County)                 36 acres: ball fields, basketball courts, swimming pool, gymnasium, tennis courts,
 419 E. 192nd Street                    play area, recreation building, picnic area.
 Victoria Golf Course (County)
                                        161.6 acres: public regulation golf course.
 340 East 192nd Street
 Dominguez Golf Course
                                        39.2 acres: 18-hole, par 3 golf course with two tier driving range.
 19800 South Main Street
Chapter 9                                                     P-4                                          Carson General Plan


                                                          PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                    There are 546.1 acres of public schools in the Carson with recreational
                     facilities on site. At this time, the City has a Joint Use Agreement with the
                     School District for two of the schools in Carson: Carson High School and
                     Caroldale Elementary School. This agreement provides for joint use of
                     playfields, tennis courts, and other recreational facilities by students and
                     residents during off-school hours.
             Of the 546.1 acres of public schools, 349.2 acres are within the Cal State University
             Dominguez Hills (CSUDH) campus. There are approximately 40 acres on the
             campus which are currently developed with recreational facilities, including: a large
             multi-purpose soccer field, 12 tennis courts, track and field facilitates, baseball and
             softball fields, The Toro Dome gymnasium, and an inline roller rink.
3.3     PROPOSED RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
             National Training Center at CSUDH. In June of 2001 a major expansion of
             recreational facilities, the National Training Center, was approved at CSUDH. The
             National Training Center complex consists of development in two locations -- the
             project site and the campus improvement area. The project site consists of
             approximately 85 acres of undeveloped property that will include construction of
             two adjacent stadiums (a soccer stadium with seating from 20,000 to 27,000 and a
             tennis stadium with seating from 8,000 to 13,000), along with other support facilities
             and parking.
             The campus improvement area is about 40 acres and includes upgrades to existing
             campus facilities such as soccer fields, tennis courts, track and field facilities,
             relocated baseball and softball fields, a relocated velodrome, surface parking and a
             relocated online roller hockey rink.
             A three-mile jogging trial with fitness stations will be built around the perimeter of
             the NTC. Some of the proposed facilities may be utilized by various professional or
             amateur athletes and teams. Others will be programmed for ongoing CSUDH and
             community programs.
             City-Proposed Mini Park. The City is planning a new mini park, to be located south
             of Sepulveda Blvd. within the utility transmission corridor.
3.4     BICYCLE TRAIL SYSTEM
             Bicycle trails are described in three classifications:
                    Class I bikeways (bike paths) are off-street facilities with exclusive right-of-
                     way, serving bicycles and pedestrians only.
                    Class II bikeways (bike lanes), are for preferential use by bicycles and are
                     established within the paved area of roadways.
Chapter 9                                        P-6                               Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                         Class III bikeways (bike routes) are shared facilities with motor vehicles on
                          the street, with bicycle use as a secondary use.
                 Information regarding the Bicycle Plan can be found in Chapter 4, Transportation and
                 Infrastructure Element of this General Plan.
3.5     RECREATIONAL PROGRAMS
                 In addition to the facilities discussed above, the City of Carson provides a wide
                 variety of recreation and community services, from general services and programs,
                 to children and youth services, senior services and facilities, and special interest
                 services/facilities. These are described below.
                 GENERAL SERVICES/PROGRAMS
                 Classes. The Parks and Recreation Department offers a number of classes to meet
                 the needs and interests of the community, including, but not limited to: computer
                 workshops, languages, child care, safety instruction, exercise classes, and arts and
                 crafts classes.
                 Adult Sports. The Parks and Recreation Department offers a variety of leagues and
                 tournaments for adults in various activities such as softball, flag football, and golf.
                 Boxing/Weightlifting. Many levels of boxing and weightlifting classes are offered to
                 children, youth and adults at Scott Park. The City also coordinates annual boxing
                 exhibitions to display the skill of the boxers using the program.
                 Park Activities. In addition to the facilities and equipment available at Carson’s
                 parks, a variety of special activities are also offered including: cultural celebrations
                 like Cinco de Mayo and June tenth; annual holiday parties; and camping trips.
                 CHILDREN AND YOUTH SERVICES
                 Early Childhood. The preschool curriculum for children ages three to five is
                 designed to encourage child development at all levels, and includes a variety of
                 school readiness skills, creative experiences, psychomotor skills, and social
                 interaction.
                 Kids Club. This program focuses on children with working parents, offering both
                 before- and after-school activities. Daily schedules include educational activities
                 such as homework and tutoring; group activities revolving around home safety; drug
                 and alcohol awareness; survival skills for children home alone; and recreational
                 activities.
                 Teen Activities. The City organizes monthly Teen Summits at City parks, featuring
                 “rap sessions” focusing on positive topics, group games, group sports, skits and
                 refreshments. Teen dances are held regularly, rotating among the City park
                 facilities. A Teen Conference is held annually in order to identify popular teen
Carson General Plan                                   P-7                                         Chapter 9

                                                          PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
              topics, and discuss pressures teenagers are facing and provide positive ideas to deal
              with them.
3.6     HUMAN SERVICES PROGRAMS
              SENIOR SERVICES AND FACILITIES
              The Senior Social Services Section provides services that protect and improve the
              socio economic conditions of the elderly through the provision of direct social and
              recreational services. The services include: information and referral; senior assisted
              living services that include homemaking; visiting and in-home registry, physical and
              emotional therapy for stroke victims; case management/crisis intervention; senior
              advocacy; and comprehensive educational and recreational programs. There are
              also Senior Clubs that are co-sponsored by the City, yet operate independently.
              SPECIAL INTEREST
              Special Needs Recreation. These programs are designed to meet the basic
              recreational, social and physical fitness needs of Carson’s adult disabled population
              groups, including the physically and sensory disabled and the developmentally
              disabled.
              Special Interest Classes. The City’s Community Services Section offers special
              interest classes to the residents in and around the City of Carson. The needs and
              interests of the community determine the type of classes offered. Subject areas
              include computer training, exercise, dance, personal enrichment, self-improvement,
              arts and crafts, educational classes, and workshops, among others. Classes are
              facilitated by independent contractors, and are offered at convenient locations
              throughout the City, including Carson Community Center and local parks.
              Additional information relating to recreational programs in Carson can be found in the
              Existing Conditions Report, Section 3.12, Parks and Recreation.
3.7     FINE ARTS
              There are many opportunities to enjoy or participate in fine arts and performing arts
              in the City. Through the City’s Community Services Section, the City funds many
              individuals and groups to provide art, dance and music exhibitions and
              performances to the community. For example, the Carson Dominguez Hills
              Symphony Orchestra offers professional music performances. The Carson Civic
              Light Opera performs with school children in the local schools. The Friends of the
              Art of Dance, the Apollo Players and the Asociacion Cultural de Carson work
              exclusively with children in dance, drama and the teaching of musical instruments.
              The Carson Art Association presents monthly workshops with visiting artists. The
              Carson Chorale and the Filipina Chorale have performances throughout the year.
              Annual cultural dance and music productions are held in the form of the Martin
              Luther King Celebration, the Asian Pacific Celebration and the Mariachi Festival.
Chapter 9                                       P-8                                Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                 In addition, the City coordinates excursions for residents to art museums, plays and
                 concerts to promote fine art and the performing arts.
3.8     LIBRARY FACILITIES
                 The City of Carson is served by the County of Los Angeles Public Library system.
                 Two facilities are located in Carson, the Carson and Victoria Park libraries. The
                 service areas for the two libraries have a population of more than 116,000. The
                 circulation of materials has steadily increased in the Carson Library, and remained
                 stable in the Victoria Park Library.
                 The planning standard for the Los Angeles County Library system is 3.09 persons
                 per household, 3.0 library materials items per capita, and 0.5 gross square feet per
                 capita. Currently, the community is underserved in terms of facility size and library
                 materials items. There are no plans for library expansion by the County. In
                 addition, during times of budgetary cuts, library operations funding is often reduced.
3.9     SCHOOL FACILITIES
                 The City of Carson is served by the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD)
                 and the Compton Unified School District (CUSD). LAUSD has 14 elementary
                 schools, five middle schools, and six high schools that serve the general Carson area.
                 CUSD has one elementary school, one middle school, and one high school serving
                 the northern edge of the City. The schools located within the City boundaries are
                 shown on Exhibit LU-1.
                 In addition to public schools, the City also contains two parochial schools (Peninsula
                 Christian and St. Philomena Catholic), an adult school, and the California State
                 University Dominguez Hills campus.
                 School population growth projected to 2020 would be generated by an estimated
                 2,142 new dwelling units plus natural growth. The Final Environmental Impact
                 Report prepared for this General Plan includes detailed analyses of projections,
                 school capacities, and classroom needs at the various grade levels. Generally, there
                 are three schools serving Carson with enrollment either at or over capacity, and
                 several other facilities are nearing capacity.
                 The use of school impact fees, collected under the provisions of State law, supply the
                 funding necessary to add classrooms as required, and are deemed to fully mitigate
                 impacts. In addition, LAUSD is currently planning the use of State bond funds to
                 repair aging classrooms and build new neighborhood schools.
4.0     PLANNING ISSUES, GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION
                 The acronyms listed below are used for the implementation measures:
                     RA/D:     Responsible Agency/Division
                     FS:       Funding Source
                     TF:       Time Frame
Carson General Plan                                 P-9                                        Chapter 9
                                                          PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
          ISSUE:       ADDITIONAL RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
          There is a need for additional recreational facilities in Carson. Such facilities include
          theaters, bowling alleys, batting cages, and other forms of family recreation, as well as
          cultural facilities such as a museum, art gallery, amphitheater, performing arts center,
          and similar facilities.
          Goal:        P-1:         Increase of and improvements to park, recreational and
                                    cultural facilities to meet the needs of existing and future
                                    residents and workers in the City.
          Policies: P-1.1           Acquire additional parkland in accordance with long-term
                                    planning efforts, such as this General Plan and the City’s
                                    Capital Improvement Program.
                       P-1.2        Work with local governmental and educational agencies and
                                    departments to maintain and, wherever feasible, expand the
                                    joint use of facilities within the City.
                       P-1.3        Promote greater cooperation and coordination with other
                                    City departments and public agencies, and encourage the
                                    construction of new park and human services facilities in
                                    developed areas of Carson as infill development occurs.
                       P-1.4        Develop       non-traditional      approaches     to    providing
                                    supplementary services and programs in areas where there
                                    are facility deficiencies.
                       P-1.5        Provide access to existing and future recreational facilities in
                                    accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
          Implementation Measures:
                       P-IM-1.1         Develop a Master Plan of Parks and Recreational
                                        Facilities to be periodically reviewed and updated. This
                                        Master Plan should at a minimum address facility needs,
                                        maintenance, park utilization, potential funding sources,
                                        and similar items. (Implements P-1.1)
                                        RA/D:       Parks and Recreation
                                        FS:         General Fund
                                        TF:         Within two years, to be updated every five years
                       P-IM-1.2         To facilitate the acquisition of additional parkland:
                                        determine the amount of new acreage which should be
                                        acquired for parks, the locations of future parks (to
                                        include utility transmission corridors and former
                                        landfills) and the types of facilities at those locations;
Chapter 9                                      P-10                                Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                                           develop a parks acquisition schedule and identify the
                                           appropriate sources of financing for land acquisition;
                                           and, with the acquisition of new park land, determine the
                                           needed level for operations and maintenance funding .
                                           (Implements P-1.1)
                                           RA/D:      Parks and Recreation
                                           FS:        General Fund, Development Fees, State and
                                                      Federal Funds/Grants
                                           TF:        Within two years
                           P-IM-1.3        Explore opportunities to provide funding through City
                                           park bond issues, assessment districts, incremental
                                           financing, redevelopment, development agreements, and
                                           similar techniques. (Implements P-1.1)
                                           RA/D:      Parks and Recreation
                                           FS:        General Fund until such time that other
                                                      funding sources are identified
                                           TF:        Ongoing
                           P-IM-1.4        Estimate and consider implementing user fees as
                                           appropriate at new recreational facilities in order to
                                           offset the development of such facilities. (Implements P-
                                           1.1)
                                           RA/D:      Parks and Recreation
                                           FS:        General Fund, and if deemed appropriate,
                                                      User Fees
                                           TF:        Within two years
                           P-IM-1.5        Include parkland acquisition in the City’s capital
                                           improvement program. (Implements P-1.1)
                                           RA/D:      Parks and Recreation
                                           FS:        Capital Improvement Program
                                           TF:        Ongoing
                           P-IM-1.6        Update the City’s Quimby Act implementation
                                           provisions requiring the dedication of land and/or the
                                           payment of in-lieu fees based on the City’s parks to
                                           population ratio. (Implements P-1.1)
                                           RA/D:      Parks    and    Recreation,    Planning    and
                                                      Environmental Services
                                           FS:        Development Fees
                                           TF:        Ongoing
Carson General Plan                              P-11                                       Chapter 9

                                     PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
          P-IM-1.7  Pursue State and Federal funding sources to acquire park
                    facilities in addition to those dedicated to the City. To
                    this end, monitor State and Federal legislation offering
                    funding assistance to local government in the provision of
                    parklands. (Implements P-1.1)
                    RA/D:       Parks and Recreation
                    FS:         State and Federal Funds/Grants
                    TF:         Ongoing
          P-IM-1.8  Coordinate with County Departments to maintain and,
                    wherever feasible, expand the joint use of facilities within
                    the City. (Implements P-1.2)
                    RA/D:       Parks and Recreation
                    FS:         General Fund, Regional, State and Federal
                                Funds/Grants
                    TF:         Ongoing
          P-IM-1.9  Pursue the joint use of recreational facilities at the Cal
                    State University Dominguez Hills (CSUDH) campus.
                    (Implements P-1.2)
                    RA/D:       Parks and Recreation
                    FS:         General Fund, Regional, State and Federal
                                Funds/ Grants
                    TF:         Ongoing
          P-IM-1.10 Pursue the joint use of recreational facilities at the public
                    schools in Carson. (Implements P-1.2)
                    RA/D:       Parks and Recreation
                    FS:         General Fund
                    TF:         Ongoing
          P-IM-1.11 Establish parkland requirements in the City’s Five Year
                    Redevelopment Plans. (Implements P-1.3)
                    RA/D:       Parks and Recreation, Redevelopment
                    FS:         Redevelopment
                    TF:         Ongoing
          P-IM-1.12 Include parkland requirements, on-site, off-site, or in lieu
                    monetary contributions in all development agreements.
                    (Implements P-1.3)
                    RA/D:       Planning and Environmental
                    FS:         Development Fees
                    TF:         Ongoing
Chapter 9                  P-12                               Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                              P-IM-1.13       Examine the potential to provide mobile programs,
                                              storefront operations, street events, etc. (Implements P-
                                              1.4)
                                              RA/D:       Parks and Recreation
                                              FS:         General Fund, Development Fees, State and
                                                          Federal Grants/Programs
                                              TF:         Ongoing
                              P-IM-1.14       Ensure that all new recreation facilities and alterations to
                                              existing facilities conform to the accessibility
                                              requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act
                                              (Implements P-1.5)
                                              RA/D:       Public Works, Planning and Environmental
                                                          Services
                                              FS:         General Fund, Developer, Property Owner
                                              TF:         Ongoing
                                                                                                    
                 ISSUE:       COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
                 The use of volunteers to implement certain recreational and human services programs
                 may offset increased costs in other areas. The increased participation of volunteers may
                 also serve to better educate the community regarding the cultural diversity of Carson’s
                 residents.
                 Goal:        P-2:        Active citizen involvement to establish and achieve
                                          community goals.
                 Policies: P-2.1          Continue to support the efforts of Carson’s civic and social
                                          service organizations.
                              P-2.2       Recognize the individuals, organizations, and agencies who
                                          have made a contribution to community life in Carson.
                              P-2.3       Continue to develop a program by which volunteers are
                                          solicited to assist in recreational and human services
                                          programs and then recognized.
                              P-2.4       Encourage volunteerism and create a greater sense of
                                          stewardship for parks within each neighborhood and
                                          community through active public involvement programs.
                 Implementation Measures:
                              P-IM-2.1        Provide matching services and space in City publications
                                              for charitable organization to advertise the skills and
Carson General Plan                                  P-13                                        Chapter 9

                                    PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                   services needed for volunteer activities. (Implements
                   PRC-2.1)
                   RA/D:       Public Information, Information Services
                   FS:         General Fund
                   TF:         Ongoing
          P-IM-2.2 Work with Cal State University Dominguez Hills
                   (CSUDH) and other nearby colleges and universities to
                   attract student interns to assist in appropriate programs
                   in the community. (Implements PRC-2.1 and PRC-2.3)
                   RA/D:       Public Information, Information Services
                   FS:         General Fund
                   TF:         Ongoing
          P-IM-2.3 Develop a program to honor citizen support. Such a
                   program may include: articles of appreciation in
                   newspapers; recognition on local cable television; an
                   “Appreciation” lunch or dinner; recognition by the City
                   Council at public meetings; invitations to, and
                   recognition at, special events within the community;
                   “Appreciation Month” at City Hall; utilization and/or
                   expansion of existing community recognition programs
                   (e.g., Chamber of Commerce recognition programs);
                   issuance of plaques and certificates, etc. (Implements
                   PRC-2.1, PRC-2.2 and PRC-2.3)
                   RA/D:       Public Information, Information Services
                   FS:         General Fund
                   TF:         Ongoing, with aspects of program conducted on
                               an annual basis
          P-IM-2.4 Further develop the program by which volunteers are
                   solicited to assist in recreational programs and then
                   recognized. To this end, work with private dance
                   companies/studios, athletic clubs, karate studios,
                   restaurants and caterers, music studios, and other
                   appropriate entities to expand existing course offerings
                   and/or offset costs. Also, recruit personnel through
                   seniors organizations, and local colleges and universities,
                   as appropriate. (Implements PRC-2.3, PRC-2.4)
                   RA/D:       Parks and Recreation, Public Information,
                               Information Services
                   FS:         General Fund
                   TF:         Ongoing
Chapter 9                 P-14                               Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                             P-IM-2.5          Establish an active partnership with private sector
                                               agencies and groups to encourage support for parks and
                                               recreational facilities, community service programs, and
                                               expand the number of events through joint use
                                               public/private sponsorship. (Implements PRC-2.3 and
                                               PRC-2.4)
                                               RA/D:       Parks and Recreation, Senior Services,
                                                           Community Services, Public Information,
                                                           Information Services
                                               FS:         General Fund
                                               TF:         Ongoing
                             P-IM-2.6          Explore programs such as: “Kids for Parks,” public
                                               meetings, “Adopt a Park” programs, booster clubs, and
                                               volunteer projects (i.e., community service hours for high
                                               school students, scout programs, etc.). And implement
                                               these programs as feasible and appropriate. (Implements
                                               PRC-2.4)
                                               RA/D:       Parks and Recreation, Public Information,
                                                           Information Services
                                               FS:         General Fund
                                               TF:         Ongoing
                                                                                                   
                 ISSUE:      SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE OF CARSON PARKS
                 The safety of the City’s parks is especially important within the community.
                 Goal:       P-3:          Improved safety in the City’s parks.
                 Policies: P-3.1           Continue to work with the Sheriff’s Department in designing
                                           park improvements which facilitate effective police
                                           surveillance and protection. Continue the Park Safety
                                           meetings with Park staff, Sheriff Department personnel, and
                                           City Public Safety staff that share park safety issues and
                                           solutions.
                             P-3.2         Continue to support citizen programs that fight crime and
                                           promote citizen involvement, such as “Neighborhood
                                           Watch”, DARE, “Adopt-A-Park”, and like programs.
                             P-3.3         Continue to explore, design, and implement vandalism
                                           reduction strategies at park and recreation facilities in the
                                           City.
Carson General Plan                                   P-15                                      Chapter 9

                                                 PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
          Implementation Measures:
                   P-IM-3.1     Examine the feasibility of sheriff bicycle patrols in the
                                City’s parks. (Implements P-3.1)
                                RA/D:       Parks and Recreation, Public Safety, Los
                                            Angeles County Sheriff’s Department
                                FS:         General Fund
                                TF:         Within two years
                   P-IM-3.2     Incorporate the principles of defensible space design into
                                the City’s parks to enhance public safety (e.g., security
                                lighting, visual observation of open spaces, secured areas,
                                unobtrusive landscaping, etc.). (Implements P-3.1)
                                RA/D:       Parks and Recreation, Public Safety, Los
                                            Angeles County Sheriff’s Department, Planning
                                            and Environmental
                                FS:         General Fund
                                TF:         Ongoing
                   P-IM-3.3     Develop a Park Ranger Program. (Implements P-3.3)
                                RA/D:       Parks and Recreation, Public Safety, Los
                                            Angeles County Sheriff’s Department
                                FS:         General Fund
                                TF:         Ongoing
                   P-IM-3.4     Continue implementation of the graffiti removal program
                                to eliminate all traces of graffiti.         Utilize design
                                deterrents to discourage graffiti. (Implements PRC-3.3)
                                RA/D:       Landscape and Building Maintenance
                                FS:         General Fund
                                TF:         Ongoing
                   P-IM-3.5     Schedule after-school and weekend recreational
                                programs in Carson arks in order to offer constructive
                                alternatives in place of undesirable activities. (Implements
                                PRC-3.3)
                                RA/D:       Parks and Recreation
                                FS:         General Fund
                                TF:         Ongoing
          Goal:    P-4:      Enhanced maintenance and rehabilitation of existing park
                             and recreational facilities.
Chapter 9                              P-16                               Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                 Policies: P-4.1        Inventory existing parks and recreational facilities to
                                        determine rehabilitation needs through a periodic
                                        monitoring program.
                           P-4.2        Plan fiscally responsible rehabilitation and maintenance
                                        strategies which enhance the amenity and usability of existing
                                        parks.
                           P-4.3        Require park improvements and facilities that are durable
                                        and economical to maintain.
                           See also Policies PRC-2.1 through PRC-2.4.
                 Implementation Measures:
                           P-IM-4.1         Develop a long-range plan for rehabilitation and upgrade
                                            of existing parks, and establish criteria to determine
                                            priorities for funding. Incorporate this plan into the
                                            overall Master Plan. (Implements P-4.1 and P-4.2)
                                            RA/D:       Parks and Recreation
                                            FS:         General Fund
                                            TF:         Within two years
                           P-IM-4.2         Renovate/redesign existing facilities to accommodate
                                            multi-uses, and identify what resources should be
                                            allocated to this redesign function and where needed
                                            resources will come from to redesign parks. This should
                                            include      the    provision of more           night-lighted
                                            improvements at existing parks and schools (sited so as
                                            not to intrude in residential neighborhoods) and by the
                                            management of the use of athletic facilities to ensure an
                                            equitable distribution of athletic fields to all users.
                                            (Implements P-4.2)
                                            RA/D:       Parks and Recreation
                                            FS:         General Fund
                                            TF:         Ongoing
                           P-IM-4.3         Pursue all possible methods to generate revenue for the
                                            maintenance and rehabilitation of parks, such as
                                            commercial leasing, user fees, and other available private
                                            and public funding sources. (Implements P-4.2)
                                            RA/D:       Parks and Recreation
                                            FS:         Commercial leasing, user fees, and other
                                                        available private and public funding sources
                                            TF:         Ongoing
Carson General Plan                                P-17                                         Chapter 9
                                                        PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                       P-IM-4.4         Require maintenance and rehabilitation of all private
                                        neighborhood parks by the responsible homeowners
                                        association(s) through a recorded agreement requiring
                                        the perpetual private ownership and maintenance of
                                        these parks. (Implements P-4.2)
                                        RA/D:      Parks and Recreation
                                        FS:        Homeowners Association(s)
                                        TF:        Ongoing
                       P-IM-4.5         Emphasize low maintenance and resource conservation
                                        in the design and construction of all new and
                                        rehabilitated facilities. (Implements P-4.2 and P-4.3)
                                        RA/D:      Parks and Recreation
                                        FS:        General Fund, Development Fees
                                        TF:        Ongoing
                                                                                               
          ISSUE:       AFFORDABILITY OF RECREATIONAL AND CULTURAL PROGRAMS
          It is important that recreational and cultural programs are affordable and that the City is
          proactive in developing more affordable recreational opportunities.
          Goal:        P-5:         Recreational programs affordable to all income segments of
                                    the Carson population.
          Policies: P-5.1           Pursue innovative methods, such as the use of volunteers
                                    (see Issue 4.2 of this Element) grants, and private
                                    sponsorship, to improve the affordability of recreational
                                    programs for residents of the City.
          Implementation Measures:
                       P-IM-5.1         Pursue all potential methods of generating revenues for
                                        recreational and cultural programs, such as user fees
                                        (based on ability to pay), program underwriters, state and
                                        federal grants, and other available private and public
                                        funding sources. (Implements P-5.1)
                                        RA/D:      Parks and Recreation, Community Services
                                        FS:        General      Fund,    User     Fees,    Program
                                                   Underwriters, State and Federal Grants, and
                                                   other available private and public funding
                                                   sources
                                        TF:        Ongoing
                                                                                               
Chapter 9                                     P-18                                Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                 ISSUE:      OPPORTUNITIES FOR CARSON’S COMMUNITY CHILD CARE FACILITIES
                 Child care facilities are necessary to meet the needs of working families.
                 Goal:       P-6:          Quality public and private child care facilities throughout the
                                           community.
                 Policies: P-6.1           Expand the supply of quality child care in Carson.
                             P-6.2         Explore opportunities for the provision of child care for
                                           children of low income families and those with special needs.
                             P-6.3         Provide information to the Carson community on the family
                                           care resources offered to City residents.
                 Implementation Measures:
                             P-IM-6.1          Institute procedures to facilitate permits or entitlements
                                               for child care centers and/or projects which include
                                               childcare facilities. Also, encourage the provision of
                                               daycare centers by major employers in the City and in
                                               areas of large concentrations of businesses. (Implements
                                               PRC-6.1)
                                               RA/D:       Business Licenses, Planning and Environmental
                                                           Services
                                               FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                               TF:         Ongoing
                             P-IM-6.2          Develop incentive programs to promote the inclusion of
                                               childcare facilities within development projects. Incentive
                                               programs may include, but are not limited to: fee waivers,
                                               density bonuses, and floor-to-area ratio (FAR) bonuses.
                                               (Implements PRC-6.1)
                                               RA/D:       Planning and Environmental Services
                                               FS:         General Fund, Development Fees
                                               TF:         Ongoing
                             P-IM-6.3          Explore the feasibility of converting City owned buildings
                                               that are underutilized or vacant into privately managed,
                                               not-for-profit, childcare facilities. (Implements PRC-6.1)
                                               RA/D:       Planning and Environmental Services
                                               FS:         General Fund
                                               TF:         Ongoing
Carson General Plan                                   P-19                                         Chapter 9

                                   PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
          P-IM-6.4 Support public and private organizations in the provision
                   of after school care programs. To this end:
                      Encourage the School District to expand its after
                       school care program by offering before and after
                       school programs in both elementary and junior high
                       schools.
                      Outreach to family daycare centers to expand child
                       care services for elementary and junior high school
                       children.
                      Explore options for transporting children between
                       home, school, and child care centers. (Implements
                       PRC-6.1)
                   RA/D:      Parks    and     Recreation,      Planning     and
                              Environmental Services
                   FS:        General Fund, Development Fees
                   TF:        Ongoing
          P-IM-6.5 Schedule educational programs for child care providers
                   on local cable TV channels, with program taping,
                   coordination and presentations provided by the local
                   network as partial fulfillment of its community service
                   obligation. (Implements PRC-6.1)
                   RA/D:      Parks and Recreation, Public Information,
                              Information Services, Local Cable Channel
                   FS:        General Fund, Development Fees
                   TF:        Ongoing
          P-IM-6.6 Encourage the School District and the City’s childcare
                   providers to expand tutoring programs to benefit the
                   youth of Carson. (Implements PRC-6.1)
                   RA/D:      Parks and Recreation, School District
                   FS:        School District, Childcare Providers
                   TF:        Ongoing
          P-IM-6.7 Examine the feasibility of allocating funds for the
                   construction of child care facilities in or near areas of low
                   income housing. (Implements PRC-6.2)
                   RA/D:      Parks    and     Recreation,      Planning     and
                              Environmental Services
                   FS:        Development Fees, Community Development
                              Block Grant Funds, Bonds, or Other Funding
                              Sources
                   TF:        Ongoing
Chapter 9                P-20                                 Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                            P-IM-6.8        Support childcare programs (e.g., volunteer at child care
                                            centers, “Adopt a Grandparent” programs, etc.). Work
                                            with senior citizen groups to generate senior citizen
                                            participation in these programs. (Implements PRC-6.2
                                            and PRC-6.3)
                                            RA/D:       Parks and Recreation, Public Information,
                                                        Information Services
                                            FS:         General Fund
                                            TF:         Ongoing
                            P-IM-6.9        Support programs such as Head Start and examine the
                                            potential to expand these facilities. (Implements PRC-6.2
                                            and PRC-6.3)
                                            RA/D:       Parks and Recreation
                                            FS:         Federal Funds/Grants
                                            TF:         Ongoing
                            P-IM-6.10       Prepare a pamphlet, updated annually, which identifies
                                            family care resources within the City of Carson.
                                            Information in the pamphlet may include: types of
                                            programs available, accreditation information, location,
                                            hours of operation, etc. Include the information on the
                                            City’s website. (Implements PRC-6.3)
                                            RA/D:       Public Information, Information Services
                                            FS:         General Fund, State and Federal Funds/Grants
                                            TF:         Within one year, and then updated annually
                                                                                                  
                 ISSUE:     HUMAN RELATIONS
                 The cultural and socio-economic diversity of Carson’s citizens should be promoted to
                 maintain harmony, promote collaborative understanding, and enhance the richness of the
                 community.
                 Goal:      P-7:        Promotion of relationships and understanding between all
                                        racial, ethnic, social, and other groups within the community.
                 Policies: P-7.1        Encourage and promote a citywide Unity Day.
                            P-7.2       In conjunction with the schools, support and expand
                                        activities representative of City residents’ diversity.
                            P-7.3       Support and enhance the Sister City relationships.
Carson General Plan                                P-21                                         Chapter 9

                                                PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                   P-7.4     Utilize appropriate City recreational and cultural programs
                             to increase cross-cultural experiences among residents.
          Implementation Measures:
                   P-IM-7.1      Work with the School District to further the goals of
                                 Unity Day, and examine methods by which to enhance
                                 and/or expand this important program, such as inclusion
                                 of civic organizations, churches and private businesses.
                                 (Implements P-7.1 and P-7.2)
                                 RA/D:     Parks and Recreation, Public Information,
                                           Information services, School District
                                 FS:       General Fund, School District, and/or Other
                                           Private Funding Sources
                                 TF:       Ongoing/Annual Event
                   P-IM-7.2      Offer multi-cultural programs, integrating games,
                                 theater, music and other activities representative of City
                                 residents’ ethnicity. (Implements P-7.3 and P-7.4)
                                 RA/D:     Parks and Recreation, Community Services,
                                           Public Information, Information Services,
                                           Chambers of Commerce
                                 FS:       General Fund, Chambers of Commerce, and/or
                                           Other Private Funding Sources
                                 TF:       Ongoing
                   P-IM-7.3      Support community festivals, parades, fairs, and other
                                 events to celebrate the presence of various ethnic groups
                                 within the City. Events could include such activities as
                                 displays of homeland costumes, dancing, food, games,
                                 and music. (Implements P-7.3 and P-7.4)
                                 RA/D:     Parks and Recreation, Community Services,
                                           Public Information, Information Services,
                                           Chambers of Commerce
                                 FS:       General Fund, Chambers of Commerce, and/or
                                           Other Private Funding Sources
                                 TF:       Ongoing
                   P-IM-7.4      Publicize Sister City events, visits and activities.
                                 (Implements P-7.3)
                                 RA/D:     Parks and Recreation, Public Information,
                                           Information Services
                                 FS:       General Fund
                                 TF:       Ongoing
                                                                                       
Chapter 9                              P-22                               Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                 ISSUE: PROMOTION OF CULTURAL ACTIVITIES
                 There is a desire for theaters, museums, galleries, and similar uses in the City. Emphasis
                 should be placed on the diversity of the community by involving its citizens in a broad
                 spectrum of cultural programs. In addition, the City should promote historic landmarks,
                 resources and activities related to the history of Carson.
                 Goal:       P-8:          Support of fine, performing and cultural arts programs in the
                                           City.
                 Policies: P-8.1           Expand the fine and cultural arts in the City’s K-12 schools.
                             P-8.2         Develop a formal relationship between the City and Cal
                                           State University Dominguez Hills to improve relationships,
                                           provide enrichment to area residents and businesses, and
                                           enhance the identity of the Carson community.
                             P-8.3         Promote local and regional participation in the City’s cultural
                                           and social activities such as art exhibitions, and musical and
                                           theatrical productions.
                 Implementation Measures:
                             P-IM-8.1          Expand fine arts programs. (Implements P-8.1)
                                               RA/D:       Community Services, City Managers’ Office,
                                                           Public Information, Information Services,
                                                           School District
                                               FS:         General Fund
                                               TF:         Ongoing
                             P-IM-8.2          The Fine Arts and Historical Commission should:
                                                   Prepare an annual report for the City Council on the
                                                    arts in Carson,
                                                   Recommend priorities in funding for local cultural
                                                    arts organizations to City Council, forwarding these
                                                    recommendations to other service organizations,
                                                   Diversify cultural programs to include the arts of
                                                    other lands represented within Carson’s population,
                                                    and
                                                   Investigate funding and promotional opportunities
                                                    for cultural arts in Carson. (Implements P-8.1)
Carson General Plan                                   P-23                                          Chapter 9

                                                        PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                                        RA/D:     Fine Arts and Historical               Commission,
                                                  Community Services, Public             Information,
                                                  Information Services
                                        FS:       General Fund
                                        TF:       Ongoing
                       P-IM-8.2         Enhance the community’s relationship with the Music
                                        and Theater and Arts Departments at Cal State
                                        University Dominguez Hills to enrich, and provide
                                        mutual benefit to, both the educational community and
                                        the Carson community in general. (Implements P-8.2 and
                                        8.3)
                                        RA/D:     Community Services, Parks and Recreation,
                                                  Public Information, Information Services
                                        FS:       General Fund
                                        TF:       Ongoing
                                                                                                 
          ISSUE:       PROTECTION OF HISTORICAL RESOURCES
          It is important to protect and preserve historical resources in the City.
          Goal:        P-9:         Protection of historic resources within the City.
          Policies: P-9.1           Promote the preservation of historic resources in the City
                                    through the Fine Arts and Historical Commission.
                       P-9.2        Coordinate with the Departments of History and
                                    Anthropology at Cal State University Dominguez Hills in
                                    order to mutually enrich both the educational and general
                                    communities.
                       P-9.3        Create an oral history program that would archive the City’s
                                    history from long time Carson residents.
          Implementation Measures:
                       P-IM-9.1         Encourage the Fine Arts and Historical Commission to
                                        work with local historic societies and CSUDH to preserve
                                        important historic resources. To this end, work with the
                                        City’s Public Information Office to promote local and
                                        regional historic resources. (Implements P-9.1, P-9.2 and
                                        P-9.3)
                                        RA/D:     Fine Arts and Historical Commission,
                                                  Community Services, CSUDH Departments of
Chapter 9                                     P-24                                  Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                                                        History and Anthropology, Public Information,
                                                        Information Services
                                              FS:       General Fund, CSUDH
                                              TF:       Ongoing
                             P-IM-9.2         Encourage all development or redevelopment occurring
                                              in areas identified as a potential historic archaeological
                                              site to be surveyed for historic archaeological resources
                                              prior to initiation of site preparation for development.
                                              (Implements P-9.1)
                                              RA/D:     Planning and Environmental Services
                                              FS:       Developers
                                              TF:       Ongoing
                             P-IM-9.3         Ensure that documentation of all historic archaeological
                                              surveys conducted in the City of Carson be provided to
                                              the Planning and Environmental Services Division.
                                              (Implements P-9.1)
                                              RA/D:     Planning and Environmental Services
                                              FS:       Developers
                                              TF:       Ongoing
                                                                                                    
                 ISSUE: SERVICES FOR SENIOR CITIZENS
                 The number of persons over the age of 50 is increasing significantly in the City. It is
                 important to consider this growing segment of the population in future planning.
                 Goal:       P-10:       Enhance services available to the senior citizens of Carson.
                 Policies: P-10.1        Administer and, wherever feasible, expand programs
                                         designed to meet the recreational, social, physical and
                                         economic needs of the City’s senior citizens.
                             P-10.2      Review the City’s hiring policies to ensure against age
                                         discrimination bias.
                             P-10.3      Advocate for more senior housing and better transportation
                                         options.
                 Implementation Measures:
                             P-IM-10.1        Complete current assessment and periodically conduct
                                              needs assessments for senior citizens and explore
                                              opportunities to provide services, such as a mobile library
                                              and arts and crafts, at retirement homes, mobile home
Carson General Plan                                 P-25                                          Chapter 9

                                                      PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                                      parks, and/or seniors housing complexes. (Implements P-
                                      10.1)
                                      RA/D:     Senior Social Services, Public Information,
                                                Information Services
                                      FS:       General Fund
                                      TF:       Annually
                      P-IM-10.2       Support public programs such as Meals on Wheels,
                                      Shared Housing, and other such services. (Implements P-
                                      10.1 and P-10.3)
                                      RA/D:     Senior Social Services, Public Information,
                                                Information Services
                                      FS:       General Fund
                                      TF:       Ongoing
                      P-IM-10.3       Assist the private sector in providing professional
                                      counseling services to senior citizens seeking advice on
                                      Social Security, health care, insurance, housing,
                                      annuities, pensions, and other private and public
                                      programs providing benefits and/or services to seniors.
                                      (Implements P-10.1)
                                      RA/D:     Senior Social Services, Public Information,
                                                Information Services
                                      FS:       General Fund, private sector funds
                                      TF:       Ongoing
                      P-IM-10.4       Review the City’s hiring policies to ensure against age
                                      discrimination bias. (Implements P-10.2)
                                      RA/D:     Employment Services, City Attorney, Senior
                                                Social Services
                                      FS:       General Fund
                                      TF:       Annually
                                                                                               
          ISSUE: LIBRARY FACILITIES
          The City of Carson is underserved with library facilities and services.
          Goal:       P-11:       Improve library facilities and services for the citizens of
                                  Carson.
          Policies: P-11.1        Determine the projected need for library facilities and
                                  services.
Chapter 9                                   P-26                                  Carson General Plan

PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
                             P-11.2      Investigate the most effective way to provide for the needs of
                                         the City.
                             P-11.3      Implement plans for improved library service.
                 Implementation Measures:
                             P-IM-11.1       Work with Los Angeles County or separately to prepare
                                             a needs assessment for Carson library use. (Implements
                                             P-11.1)
                                             RA/D:        City Manager, Los Angeles County Librarian
                                             FS:          General Fund
                                             TF:          2004-05
                             P-IM-11.2       Prepare a feasibility study of alternative solutions to
                                             providing additional library facilities and services.
                                             (Implements P-11.2)
                                             RA/D:        City Manager, Los Angeles County Librarian
                                                          (if appropriate)
                                             FS:          General Fund
                                             TF:          2005-06
                             P-IM-11.3       Determine and implement the appropriate solution.
                                             (Implements P-11.3)
                                             RA/D:        City Council
                                             FS:          Bonds, Grants
                                             TF:          2006-07
                                                                                                      
                 ISSUE: SCHOOL FACILITIES
                 There will be some growth of school populations in the City that need appropriate facilities
                 and current boundaries require adjustment to provide the optimum geographic proximity.
                 Goal:       P-12:       Encourage the school districts to provide enhanced school
                                         facilities to serve the youth of Carson.
                 Policies: P-12.1        Work with the school districts to determine the projected
                                         need for school facilities and services.
                             P-12.2      Work with the school districts to appropriately alter
                                         boundaries as necessary to provide good school facilities in
                                         close proximity to the residential population served.
Carson General Plan                                  P-27                                         Chapter 9

                                              PARKS, RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES ELEMENT
          Implementation Measures:
                   P-IM-12.1    Provide staff support and encourage the residents of
                                Carson to be involved in school district planning.
                                (Implements P-12.1 and P-12.2)
                                RA/D:    Planning, Public Information Officer
                                FS:      General Fund
                                TF:      Ongoing
                                                                                    
Chapter 9                            P-28                              Carson General Plan

